
                               1 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           DAISY M. De BURGH, Appellant, v. ALBERT RAYMOND De BURGH,
                                   Respondent

                                L. A. No. 21986

                          Supreme Court of California

               39 Cal. 2d 858; 250 P.2d 598; 1952 Cal. LEXIS 314


                               November 25, 1952

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County and from an order denying a new trial.  Julius V. Patrosso, Judge.

   Action and cross-action for divorce.

COUNSEL: Max Fink, Jerry Rolston, Cyrus Levinthal and Leon E. Kent for
Appellant.

Donald Armstrong for Respondent.

JUDGES: In Bank. Traynor, J.  Gibson, C. J., Carter, J., and Schauer, J.,
concurred.  Edmonds, J., concurs.  Spence, J., concurred.  Shenk, J., concurring
and dissenting.

OPINION BY: TRAYNOR

OPINION

     Plaintiff Daisy M. De Burgh and defendant Albert Raymond De Burgh were
married in California in October, 1946.  They separated in February, 1949, and
in the same year plaintiff brought this action for divorce on the ground of
extreme cruelty. Defendant filed a cross-complaint for divorce, also on the
ground of extreme cruelty. The allegations of cruelty were denied in the answers
filed by each party.  The trial court found "that each of the parties to this
action has been guilty of acts of cruelty towards the other, and that such acts
of cruelty by each toward the other, were provoked by the acts of the other."
The court decided that "each party has been guilty of recrimination and neither
is entitled to a divorce from the other." The court entered judgment that
plaintiff take nothing by her complaint and that defendant take nothing by his
crosscomplaint.  Plaintiff appeals "from the judgment signed and entered by the
court" and from the order denying her motion for a new trial.  Since the latter
order is nonappealable, the appeal therefrom must be dismissed.

   The evidence regarding cruelty is in conflict; it supports the finding that
each party has been cruel to the other.  Plaintiff's evidence tended to show
that defendant was frequently intoxicated to excess, that he inflicted physical
injury upon plaintiff on several occasions, that he boasted of his relations
with other women, that he unreasonably criticized plaintiff's daughter, that he
unjustly berated plaintiff concerning a former suitor, and that, although he was
a lavish spender in other ways, he was penurious with plaintiff.  Defendant's
evidence indicated that plaintiff had unjustly accused him of dishonesty and
homosexuality and had communicated to his business associate similar false and
malicious statements.

    Since the trial court found that defendant was guilty of acts of cruelty
towards plaintiff, it is clear that the judgment denying plaintiff a divorce is
not on the ground that plaintiff failed to prove the allegations of cruelty in
her complaint.  The judgment thus must be based either on the  finding that
defendant's cruelty was provoked by plaintiff or on the ground that defendant
established the defense of recrimination.

   The finding that the cruelty of each party was provoked by the other party is
inconsistent with the conclusion that recrimination was established.   Cruelty
that is provoked does not give rise to a cause of action. ( Truax v. Truax, 62
Cal.App.2d 441, 444 [145 P.2d 88]; Popescu v. Popescu, 46 Cal.App.2d 44, 49 [115
P.2d 208].)   To establish recrimination, however, a cause of divorce must be
shown.  ( Civ. Code, § 122; Mayo v. Mayo, 3 Cal.2d 51, 56 [43 P.2d 535]; Smith
v. Smith, 119 Cal. 183, 189-190 [48 P. 730, 51 P. 183]; Haskill v. Haskill, 56
Cal.App.2d 204, 208 [132 P.2d 294].)   Provocation and recrimination, therefore,
are not complementary, but mutually exclusive, defenses.   To justify extreme
cruelty by one spouse under the doctrine of provocation, the misconduct of the
other spouse must itself be a serious violation of marital obligations.  (See
Eidenmuller v. Eidenmuller, 37 Cal. 364, 364-365; Popescu v. Popescu, supra, 46
Cal.App.2d 44, 50.)   The record in the present case fails to disclose any such
violation on plaintiff's part that would justify the physical brutality and
other misconduct of defendant.  Defendant's acts of cruelty, as set forth in
plaintiff's evidence, took place from the date of marriage until the separation
of the parties, whereas defendant freely conceded at the trial that his
allegations of plaintiff's cruelty were based solely upon plaintiff's
accusations that he was dishonest and a homosexual, charges that were made no
earlier than two or three days before the separation.  Thus, although the
evidence would support the finding that defendant's cruelty provoked the false
accusations made by plaintiff, there is no evidence of any earlier misconduct by
plaintiff that would justify defendant's cruelty. Under these circumstances, the
decision of the trial court cannot be supported upon the theory of provocation
rather than recrimination.

   The determinative question on this appeal, therefore, is whether the findings
and conclusions in this case warrant application of the doctrine of
recrimination. It is apparent from the remarks of the trial judge at the close
of the trial that he believed that the transgressions of each party necessarily
precluded the granting of a divorce to either.  On the other hand, the language
of section 122 of the Civil Code indicates that the trial court may have abused
its discretion  in disregarding the requirement therein that the cause of
divorce of which one party is found guilty must be "in bar" of that party's
ground of divorce against the other party.  To resolve this conflict, we have
studied the history of the doctrine of recrimination, its objectives, and the
wording and legislative background of the applicable statutes.

     It has sometimes been assumed that any cause of divorce constitutes a
recriminatory defense.  The legislative language, however, is ill-adapted to
such a broad purpose.  Read together, sections 111 and 122 of the Civil Code
provide: "Divorces must be denied upon . . . a showing by the defendant of any
cause of divorce against the plaintiff, in bar of the plaintiff's cause of
divorce." Had the Legislature meant to make every cause of divorce an absolute
defense, it could easily have provided that: "Divorces must be denied upon . . .
a showing by the defendant of any cause of divorce against the plaintiff." We
are bound to consider the additional requirement that such a cause of divorce
must be "in bar" of the plaintiff's cause of divorce.

   Much of the confusion concerning recrimination in California has proceeded
from the erroneous discussion of the subject in Conant v. Conant, 10 Cal. 249
[70 Am.Dec. 717], which was decided before recrimination became a part of the
statutory law.  It was stated in that case that this defense is based on the
doctrine that one who violates a contract containing mutual and dependent
covenants cannot complain of its breach by the other party.  Logically, such a
theory would permit the party against whom the first marital  offense was
committed to ignore thereafter the duties imposed by the marriage "contract,"
for in contract law a material breach excuses further performance by the
innocent party.  (Restatement of Contracts, § 274; Cal. Civ. Code, § 1689(2).)
In fact, however, the defense may be asserted without regard to whether the
plaintiff or the defendant was the first at fault. ( Pullen v. Pullen & Holding,
123 L.T.R. 203, 36 T.L.R. 506.)

     The deceptive analogy to contract law ignores the basic fact that marriage
is a great deal more than a contract.  It can be terminated only with the
consent of the state.   In a divorce proceeding the court must consider not
merely the rights and wrongs of the parties as in contract litigation, but the
public interest in the institution of marriage. The family is the basic unit of
our society, the center of the  personal affections that ennoble and enrich
human life.  It channels biological drives that might otherwise become socially
destructive; it ensures the care and education of children in a stable
environment; it establishes continuity from one generation to another; it
nurtures and develops the individual initiative that distinguishes a free
people.  Since the family is the core of our society, the law seeks to foster
and preserve marriage. But when a marriage has failed and the family has ceased
to be a unit, the purposes of family life are no longer served and divorce will
be permitted.   "[Public] policy does not discourage divorce where the relations
between husband and wife are such that the legitimate objects of matrimony have
been utterly destroyed." ( Hill v. Hill, 23 Cal.2d 82, 93 [142 P.2d 417]; Weil
v. Weil, 37 Cal.2d 770, 783-784 [236 P.2d 159]; see, also, Saltzgaver v.
Saltzgaver, 182 Md. 624, 636-637 [35 A.2d 810]; opinion of Bickley, J., in
Chavez v. Chavez, 39 N.M. 480, 489 [50 P.2d 264, 101 A.L.R. 635].)

   The chief vice of the rule enunciated in the Conant case is its failure to
recognize that the considerations of policy that prompt the state to consent to
a divorce when one spouse has been guilty of misconduct are often doubly present
when both spouses have been guilty.  The disruption of family relationships, the
clandestine associations with third parties, and the oppressive effect upon
children and the community are intensified.  It is a degradation of marriage and
a frustration of its purposes when the courts use it as a device for punishment.

   Moreover, the historical discussion of the doctrine of recrimination in the
Conant case is inaccurate.  The court relied mainly on the decisions of the
eminent English ecclesiastical jurist, Lord Stowell.  It is significant that in
his later utterances Lord Stowell viewed with regret the illogical and
pernicious consequences of a mechanical application of the doctrine.  1 Even the
medieval canon law, upon which Lord  Stowell relied, did not carry recrimination
to the extreme of the Conant case; although permitted as a bar when the
plaintiff sought a divorce for adultery, this defense was not accepted against a
cause of divorce based on cruelty, for the church lawyers realized that public
policy was not served by forcing a wife, even if guilty, to return to a home
where her life was in danger.  (Sanchez, De Sancto Matrimonii Sacramento, Lib.
X, Disp. 18, No. 5, cited by Neuner, Modern Divorce Law, 28 Iowa L.Rev. 272,
279, n. 21. See, also, opinion of Lord Stowell in Chambers v. Chambers, 1
Hag.Con. 439, 452, 161 Eng.Rep. 610, 614.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   "I cannot
blind myself to the fact, that the modern course of life and manners does not
furnish those corrections of the mischiefs that may follow, which the Canon Law
had anticipated in connection with its rule.  There is no return to
cohabitation, nor are there any means to be resorted to for the purpose of
compelling it.  In the state of separation, whether authorized or merely
conventional, which usually takes place, there is certainly the increased danger
of a spurious offspring; and as the regulation of property exists among us, the
danger of separate debts, to the great eventual injury of the husband and his
legitimate family." (Proctor v. Proctor, 2 Hag.Con. 292, 302, 161 Eng.Rep. 747,
751.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    In any event ecclesiastical authorities are not relevant in view of the fact
that ecclesiastical courts could not grant absolute divorce. They could decree
only limited divorce, equivalent to a judicially recognized separation.  Such a
court's action was  usually limited to a determination of certain property
rights of the parties or the husband's duty of support.  2 It is not surprising,
therefore, that ecclesiastical lawyers placed more emphasis upon the comparative
guilt of the parties than Parliament did in cases of absolute divorce.
Parliament appears to have tempered the doctrine of recrimination with
discretion.  On the question of recrimination in cases of absolute divorce, the
Conant opinion, necessarily looking for its authority to parliamentary practice,
relied exclusively upon Simmons' Case, 12 C. & F. 339, 8 Eng.Rep. 1438, in which
Parliament denied a divorce, 3 overlooking other cases involving recrimination
where Parliament allowed divorce. (See, for example, Major Campbell's Case, 42
H. of L. Jour. 141, reprinted in MacQueen, A Practical Treatise on the Appellate
Jurisdiction of the House of Lords [1842], p. 590.)  Only a year before the
Conant decision, in fact, Parliament had created jurisdiction in the English
courts to grant absolute divorce and in so doing expressly provided for judicial
discretion on the issue of recrimination. (Divorce and Matrimonial Causes Act of
1857, 20 & 21 Vict., c. 85, § 31.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Even in
this area, the ecclesiastical law and common law were not in agreement.  For a
collection of cases, see Beamer, The Doctrine of Recrimination in Divorce
Proceedings, 10 Univ. of Kansas City L. Rev. 213, 222-236.
3   Strictly speaking, Simmons' Case did not turn upon recrimination. Adultery
on the part of the plaintiff husband was alleged, but the House of Lords refused
to decide whether or not that recriminatory defense had been proved.  Instead,
the divorce was denied on the ground that the husband had driven his wife and
daughter into the streets and, in spite of ample means, had refused to support
them; this conduct on his part directly led to the wife's becoming a
street-walker and prostitute.  In reality, therefore, Simmons' Case is to be
viewed as an example of the doctrine of provocation. (Cf.  Johnson v. Johnson,
14 Cal. 459, 460; Truax v. Truax, 62 Cal.App.2d 441, 444 [145 P.2d 88]; Popescu
v. Popescu, 46 Cal.App.2d 44, 49 [115 P.2d 208]; Annen v. Annen, 79 Cal.App.
626, 627-628 [250 P. 580].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The California Legislature, in enacting the Civil Code in 1872, did not
follow the principles of the Conant case.  The code provisions on recrimination
made two important departures from the existing law.

     First, the code requires that the defendant prove a cause of divorce
against the plaintiff to establish this defense.  The requirement of the Conant
case that plaintiff be "without reproach" no longer prevails.  ( Mayo v. Mayo, 3
Cal.2d 51, 56 [43 P.2d 535]; Smith v. Smith, 119 Cal. 183, 189-190 [48 P. 730,
51 P. 183]; White v. White, 82 Cal. 427, 452 [23 P. 276, 7 L.R.A. 799]; Haskill
v. Haskill, 56 Cal.App.2d 204, 208 [132 P.2d 294]; Popescu v. Popescu, 46
Cal.App.2d 44, 49 [115 P.2d 208]; Hilton v. Hilton, 54 Cal.App. 142, 149 [201 P.
337]; Klemmer v. Klemmer, 42 Cal.App. 618, 622 [187 P. 85].) The dictum to the
contrary in Shapiro v. Shapiro, 127 Cal.App. 20, 24 [14 P.2d 1058], is without
support even in the textbook authority cited and is clearly opposed to the
statute.

   Second, as shown by the notes of the commissioners who drafted the code, the
Legislature rejected the strict rule of recrimination of the ecclesiastical
courts.  Significantly, neither the Conant case nor any other divorce cases
appear among the precedents listed by the commissioners as the basis of the
statute.  It is apparent from the decisions that were listed that the
Legislature intended that divorce cases involving recrimination be governed by
the same principles that apply generally throughout our jurisprudence.  Although
the plaintiff's fault has always been regarded as an important element in the
decision of any case, our courts have traditionally refused to exalt that
element above the public interest. Thus, in Freeman v. Sedwick, 6 Gill. (Md.)
28, 40 [46 Am.Dec. 650], a fraudulent conveyance case cited by the
commissioners, Mr. Justice Story's Equity Jurisprudence is quoted as follows:
"Relief is not granted, where both parties are truly in pari delicto, unless in
cases where public policy would thereby be promoted." (Vol. I, p. 317, § 298;
see, also, 14th ed. [1918], vol. I, pp. 395-398, § 421.)   This respect for the
public interest has formed the basis of a recognized exception to the equitable
doctrine of unclean hands,  with which the defense of recrimination has   become
increasingly identified since the enactment of the code.   It is clear that the
Legislature, in relying upon judicial principles of general application,
intended that in divorce litigation the fault of the plaintiff should have no
more significance than elsewhere in the law.  Apparently with this purpose in
mind it worded the statute to require that a cause of divorce shown by defendant
must be "in bar" of the plaintiff's cause of divorce. It would have defeated its
own purpose had it closed the avenues to divorce when the legitimate objects of
matrimony have been destroyed.  The perpetuation of an unwholesome relationship
would be a mockery of marriage.

   The California cases decided since the enactment of the Civil Code contain
little analysis or discussion of the principles governing the defense of
recrimination. In Brenot v. Brenot, 102 Cal. 294, 296 [36 P. 672], this court
correctly stated the rule to be that "a court of equity is authorized to enter a
judgment dismissing an action of divorce, where both parties are seeking a
decree, and the evidence discloses them to be equally guilty of the misconduct
alleged." (Italics added.) Again, in Glass v. Glass , 4 Cal.App. 604, 607 [88 P.
734], the appellate court, in affirming the judgment with regard to property
issues, observed without objection that the trial court had found both parties
guilty of extreme cruelty but nevertheless had granted the plaintiff a divorce.
In some cases, however, it has been assumed, apparently with the acquiescence of
the parties themselves, that the mere showing of a cause of divorce against the
plaintiff is sufficient.  (See Sweasey v. Sweasey, 126 Cal. 123, 129-130 [58 P.
456]; Mattson v. Mattson, 181 Cal. 44, 47 [183 P. 443]; Helpling v. Helpling, 50
Cal.App. 676, 680-681 [195 P. 715]; Gough v. Gough, 101 Cal.App.2d 262, 268-269
[225 P.2d 668].) This failure to exercise the discretion authorized by the
statute has enabled the thinking engendered by the Conant case to survive by
default.  Important developments of the past several decades have made it
increasingly clear that the courts can no longer decline to exercise the
discretion inherent in the clean hands doctrine.

   The rising divorce rate in the United States has compelled a growing
recognition of marriage failure as a social problem and correspondingly less
preoccupation with technical marital fault. This trend is strikingly exemplified
by the recent amendment of section 92 of the Civil Code designating incurable
insanity as a ground for divorce. Formerly, no matter how vicious the conduct of
an insane spouse, he could not be divorced, for the law refused to find in him
the guilt essential to a marital offense.  (See Cohn v. Cohn, 85 Cal. 108, 109
[24 P. 659]; Wray v. Wray, 19 Ala. 522, 525; 4 A.L.R. 1333; 42 A.L.R. 1531.) The
Legislature has come to realize, however, that when a union is dominated by
insanity, fulfillment of the normal purposes of marriage is hopeless.  What was
once a bar to divorce is now recognized as a justification for divorce. Still
more striking in recognition of this trend has been the enactment of legislation
in many states authorizing divorce when the spouses have lived apart for a
required number of years.  Marriage failure, rather than the fault of the
parties, is the basis upon which such divorces are granted.  (See George v.
George, 56 Nev. 12, 17-18 [41 P.2d 1059, 97 A.L.R. 983]; Lemp v. Lemp, 62 Nev.
91, 101-102 [141 P.2d 212, 148 A.L.R. 1104]; 51 A.L.R.  763; 97 A.L.R. 985; 111
A.L.R. 867; 152 A.L.R. 336; 166 A.L.R. 498. Cf.  Pavletich v. Pavletich, 50 N.M.
224, 229-234 [174 P.2d 826].)

   It would be froward indeed for the court, when it is called upon to evaluate
an alleged recriminatory defense, to ignore the growing awareness that a
marriage in name only is not a marriage in any real sense.  In other fields,
equity does not deny relief on the ground of plaintiff's unclean hands when to
do so would be harmful to the public interest. (See Johnson v. Yellow Cab
Transit Co., 321 U.S. 383, 387 [64 S.Ct. 622, 88 L.Ed. 814]; Leo Feist, Inc. v.
Young, 138 F.2d 972, 974-976; Cleveland, C., C. & St. L. Ry. Co. v. Hirsch, 204
F. 849, 857-858 [123 C.C.A. 145];  Menzel v. Niles Co., 86 Colo. 320, 325-326
[281 P. 364, 65 A.L.R. 995]; Saylor v. Crooker, 97 Kan. 624, 627-628 [156 P. 737
, Ann.Cas. 1918D 473]; Deutschmann v. Board of Appeals of Canton, 325 Mass. 297,
299 [90 N.E.2d 313]; Cameron v. International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Emp.,
118 N.J.Eq. 11, 20-21 [176 A. 692, 97 A.L.R. 594]; Cosden Oil & Gas Co. v.
Hendrickson, 96 Okla. 206, 210 [221 P. 86]; cf.  Hobbs v. Boatright, 195 Mo.
693, 715, 720-724 [93 S.W. 934, 113 Am.St.Rep. 709, 5 L.R.A.N.S. 906]. See,
also, 1 Story on Equity [14th ed. 1918], § 421, pp. 396-398; Pomeroy on Equity
[5th ed. 1941], § 941, pp. 733 et seq.; Chafee, Some Problems of Equity [1950],
p. 95; 48 L.R.A. 842; 120 A.L.R. 1461; 13 C.J., Contracts, § 441, p. 497; 30
C.J.S., Equity, §§ 98a, 98b, pp. 487-491; 12 Am.Jur., Contracts, § 214, pp.
729-731.)   Such a rule is even more appropriate in marital litigation, where
the social consequences of the  court's decree are of the utmost importance.
(See Sullivan v. Sullivan, 219 Cal. 734, 736 [28 P.2d 914] [annulment]; Loughran
v. Loughran, 292 U.S. 216, 228-230 [54 S.Ct. 684, 78 L.Ed. 1219] [marital
property rights].)

   It bears noting how frequently divorces are uncontested.  In many cases
neither spouse is "innocent," and yet, by agreement, one of them defaults to
ensure a divorce. Thus a strict recrimination rule fails in its purpose of
denying relief to the guilty.  Moreover, it exerts a corrupting influence on the
negotiations that precede the entry of such a default.  The spouse who more
desperately seeks an end to a hopeless union is penalized by the ability of the
other spouse to prevent a divorce through the assertion of a recriminatory
defense, and the more unscrupulous partner may obtain substantial financial
concessions as the price of remaining silent.  Were the clean hands doctrine
properly applied, it would encourage estranged couples to bring their
differences before the chancellor, where the interests of society as a whole can
be given proper recognition and where settlement negotiations can be supervised
and unfair advantage prevented.

   A mechanical application of the doctrine of recrimination is by no means
universal.  In some states, the defense has been limited by requiring that the
plaintiff's offense be of the same type as the defendant's or that it involve
equal guilt. (See Bast v. Bast, 82 Ill. 584, 585; Appeltofft v. Appeltofft, 147
Md. 603, 605 [128 A. 273]; Hokamp v. Hokamp, 32 Wn.2d 593, 596 [203 P.2d 357].)
Such limitations are not entirely satisfactory, however; even when misconduct is
identical the court should be permitted to exercise a sound discretion in the
public interest. Several states expressly recognize judicial discretion
concerning recrimination. ( Vanderhuff v. Vanderhuff, 79 U.S.App.D.C. 153 [144
F.2d 509-510]; Stewart v. Stewart, 158 Fla. 326, 327-328 [29 So.2d 247, 170
A.L.R. 1073]; Roberts v. Roberts, 103 Kan. 65, 72 [173 P. 537]; Panther v.
Panther, 147 Okla. 131, 134 [295 P. 219]. See, also, Flagg v. Flagg, 192 Wash.
679, 686 [74 P.2d 189].)

   In view of the reliance of the Conant case on what was thought to be the
English rule, perhaps the most illuminating of the modern cases on the subject
is Blunt v. Blunt, [1943] A.C. 517, 169 L.T.R. 33, decided in the House of Lords
in 1943.  Significantly, the judges in England were for many years reluctant to
exercise the discretion given them by the Act of 1857.  Eventually, however, the
courts fully accepted their responsibility ( Wickens v. Wickens [1918], P.  265,
119 L.T.R. 268; Wilson v. Wilson [1920], P. 20, 122 L.T.R. 223), and, in Blunt
v. Blunt, Lord Chancellor Simon reviews the factors that should govern the
decision in a given case.  Among these are the prospect of reconciliation and
the interests of the children of the marriage. In keeping with the traditional
view of the law toward both marriage and divorce, the Lord Chancellor states
that the consideration of "primary importance" is the interest of the community
at large.  This interest is "to be judged by maintaining a true balance between
respect for the binding sanctity of marriage and the social considerations which
make it contrary to public policy to insist on the maintenance of a union which
has utterly broken down." ([1943] A.C. at 525, 169 L.T.R. at 34; cf.  Hill v.
Hill, 23 Cal.2d 82, 93  [142 P.2d 417]; Weil v. Weil, 37 Cal.2d 770, 783-784
[236 P.2d 159].)

   In examining the doctrine of recrimination, we have given the most serious
consideration not only to judicial precedent but also to the work of leading
scholars and practitioners.  Few rules of law have been more widely condemned by
the legal profession.  In 1948, a committee of experts of the American Bar
Association joined with the representatives of other interested groups in the
work of the National Conference on Family Life.  The bar association's
representatives, acting as the legal section of the conference, strongly
recommended the elimination of the defense of recrimination. (Report of Legal
Section of National Conference on Family Life [1948], pp. 1, 3, 7.  See, also,
Chafee, Some Problems of Equity [1950], p. 73 et seq.) In view of the statutory
provisions on the subject, we are not free to go so far.  Moreover, we do not
believe that the comparative guilt of the parties will be without significance
in every case.   We do believe, however, that some of the evils pointed out by
the bar association committee can be avoided within the framework of the
existing statute if it is kept in mind that the doctrine of recrimination, like
the doctrine of unclean hands of which it is a part, is neither puristic nor
mechanical, but an equitable principle to be applied according to the
circumstances of each case and with a proper respect for the paramount interests
of the community at large.

   Defendant relies upon Comfort v. Comfort, 17 Cal.2d 736, 745-752 [112 P.2d
259]. The discussion of recrimination in that case, however, was directed
entirely to the question whether or not the recriminatory defense there involved
had become inoperative owing to lapse of time.  The court did not  consider the
language of section 122 of the Civil Code in the light of the clean hands
doctrine, nor was that issue raised in the briefs of the parties.  The Comfort
case therefore does not support the proposition that the doctrine of
recrimination precludes the exercise of equitable discretion.

   To the extent that the following cases support a mechanical application of
the doctrine of recrimination, they are disapproved: Sweasey v. Sweasey, 126
Cal. 123, 129-130 [58 P. 456]; Mattson v. Mattson, 181 Cal. 44, 47 [183 P. 443];
Helpling v. Helpling, 50 Cal.App. 676, 680-681 [195 P. 715]; Brazell v. Brazell,
54 Cal.App.2d 458, 459 [129 P.2d 117]; Gough v. Gough, 101 Cal.App.2d 262,
268-269 [225 P.2d 668].

     We have concluded that section 122 of the Civil Code imposes upon the trial
judge the duty to determine whether or not the fault of the plaintiff in a
divorce action is to be regarded as "in bar" of the plaintiff's cause of divorce
based upon the fault of the defendant.  Tested by the considerations discussed
above, the evidence in the present case would have been ample to support a
finding that the parties' misconduct should not bar a divorce. Reconciliation
appears impossible.  The trial judge himself observed that "the marriage here
was a failure from the start" and that "there is nothing really to keep them
together." There was evidence that defendant more than once inflicted bodily
injury upon plaintiff; that after one severe beating plaintiff attempted to
commit suicide by an overdose of sleeping pills; that defendant often boasted in
the presence of plaintiff and guests of intimate relations with other women and
discussed their physical attributes in detail; that defendant was often
intoxicated; that defendant frequently told plaintiff that her daughter by a
previous marriage had loose morals; that defendant was insanely jealous of a
former suitor of plaintiff and on one occasion seized an alarm clock given
plaintiff by the suitor and threw it into the toilet; and that defendant
lavishly tipped waiters and spent his money freely in public, but in private
life refused to give plaintiff sufficient funds to purchase clothes suitable for
her station in life.  On the other hand, defendant's evidence was to the effect
that plaintiff had invented false accusations against him; that plaintiff had
deliberately attempted to ruin his business life by writing a letter to his
partner falsely accusing defendant of dishonesty and homosexuality; and that
plaintiff had announced  her intention of writing similar letters to other
business associates of defendant.  If  the foregoing facts are true, it is
apparent that there has been a total and irremedial breakdown of the marriage.
Technical marital fault can play but little part in the face of the unhappy
spectacle indicated by this evidence, with its inevitable effect upon the
family, friends, neighbors, and business interests of the parties.

     Moreover, it is significant that the application of a strict rule of
recrimination in the present action does not operate with equal justice.  As the
spouse entrusted by law with the management and control of the community
property (see Civ. Code, §§ 161a, 172, 172a), defendant is in a position to use
that property for his personal benefit.  Although he has an obligation to
support plaintiff, a large discretion is customarily vested in the husband
concerning the manner of performing that obligation; in the present case,
disagreement and repeated legal actions to obtain support money are almost
certain to ensue.

     There can be no precise formula for determining when a cause of divorce
shown against a plaintiff is to be considered a bar to his suit for divorce, for
the divorce court, as a court of equity ( Sharon v. Sharon, 67 Cal. 185 [7 P.
456, 635, 8 P. 709]), is clothed with a broad discretion to advance the
requirements of justice in each particular case.   In general, however, certain
major considerations will govern the court's decision:

   1.  The prospect of reconciliation.  The court should determine whether the
legitimate objects of matrimony have been destroyed or whether there is a
reasonable likelihood that the marriage can be saved.  It should consider the
ages and temperaments of the parties, the length of their marriage, the
seriousness and frequency of their marital misconduct proved at the trial and
the likelihood of its recurrence, the duration and apparent finality of the
separation, and the sincerity of their efforts to overcome differences and live
together harmoniously.

   2.  The effect of the marital conflict upon the parties.  If a continuation
of the marriage would constitute a serious hazard to the health of either party,
as in the case of physical brutality, the court should be reluctant to deny
divorce. Although financial considerations can play only a minor role in
determining the propriety of divorce, even these may not be entirely ignored if
the evidence indicates that marital conflicts are destroying the livelihood of
the parties.

    3.  The effect of the marital conflict upon third parties.  In every divorce
case in which children are involved, their interests are of the utmost concern
to the court.  The disruptive effect of divorce upon children is to be deplored,
but in a given case it may be preferable to violence, hatred, or immorality when
these are present in the home.  The community as a whole also has an interest.
Adultery, desertion, or cruelty, for example, can only discredit marriage; their
perpetuation is not lightly to be decreed.

   4.  Comparative guilt.  In many ways the guilt of the parties may be unequal
-- in the gravity of the misconduct involved, in the frequency of its
occurrence, or in its effect upon children and others.  Moreover, one spouse may
demonstrate substantially greater repentance and reform.  Marital offenders,
therefore, are not necessarily in pari delicto before the chancellor.  Their
comparative guilt may have an important bearing upon whether or not either one
or both should be granted relief.

   We have concluded that in light of the foregoing discussion the findings and
conclusions in the present case are not sufficient to support the determination
that recrimination was established.   It is essential that findings be made on
every material issue raised by the pleadings.  ( Kusel v. Kusel, 147 Cal. 52, 57
[81 P. 297]; Fairchild v. Raines, 24 Cal.2d 818, 830 [151 P.2d 260]; Parker v.
Shell Oil Co., 29 Cal.2d 503, 512 [175 P.2d 838]; cf.  LaMar v. LaMar, 30 Cal.2d
898, 902 [186 P.2d 678].) As we have seen, whether or not the cause of action
proved against each spouse is to be regarded as in bar of the cause of action
proved against the other spouse is a material issue and must be expressly
decided by the trial court before it may be said that recrimination has been
decided.   To decide the issue raised by a plea of recrimination, the court must
consider the prospects of reconciliation, the comparative fault of the plaintiff
and the defendant, and the effect of the marital strife upon the parties, their
children, and the community.

    Upon remand of the case for application of the clean hands doctrine as
herein indicated, the trial court may decide that one of the parties should be
granted a divorce.  In that event, alimony and more than half of the community
property may be awarded to the prevailing spouse as in any other case.  It is
also possible, however, that a divorce will be granted to both parties (see
Flagg v. Flagg, 192 Wash. 679, 686  [74 P.2d 189]; Blunt v. Blunt, [1943] A.C.
517, 531 [H.L.]), and it seems advisable to indicate here the rules that should
govern the granting of alimony and the apportionment of community property under
such circumstances.   When a divorce is granted to both, alimony may be awarded
to either, for the basis of liability for alimony is the granting of a divorce
against the person required to pay it.  (See Civ. Code, § 139.)   Section 146 of
the Civil Code provides that if the divorce is granted for extreme cruelty, the
court may apportion community property as it deems just, but that statute has
been interpreted to permit an award of more than half of the community property
only to an innocent spouse. ( Eslinger v. Eslinger, 47 Cal.  62, 64.) When a
divorce is granted to both parties, neither is innocent within the meaning of
this rule, and the community property must be equally divided.

   The judgment is reversed.  The appeal from the order denying the motion for a
new trial is dismissed.  Defendant is to bear the costs of this appeal.

CONCUR BY: EDMONDS; SHENK (In Part)

CONCUR

   EDMONDS, J.  Solely upon the ground that there are contradictory,
irreconcilable findings about matters material to a proper disposition of the
case, I concur in the reversal of the judgment.  ( Canfield v. Security-First
Nat. Bank, 13 Cal.2d 1, 20 [87 P.2d 830]; Hollywood Cleaning & P. Co. v.
Hollywood L. Service, Inc., 217 Cal. 131, 137 [17 P.2d 712]; Los Angeles etc.
Land Co. v. Marr, 187 Cal. 126, 132 [200 P. 1051]; Estep v. Armstrong, 91 Cal.
659, 663-665 [27 P. 1091]; Learned v. Castle, 78 Cal. 454, 460 [18 P. 872, 21 P.
11].) In view of the conflicting evidence, it would be inappropriate for this
court to determine which finding is supported by the greater weight of the
evidence and to order judgment accordingly.  ( Spaulding v. Cameron, 38 Cal.2d
265, 270 [239 P.2d 625]; Tupman  v. Haberkern, 208 Cal. 256, 269-270 [280 P.
970].)

   In my opinion, these conclusions are determinative of the appeal.  If, upon
retrial, the evidence should disclose that each party has a cause of divorce
against the other, as I read the Civil Code, the trial court will have no
alternative but to deny each of them a divorce. ( Civ. Code, § 111[4].)
Likewise, if it should be proved that the conduct of each was provoked by the
other, a divorce must be denied either party  because neither one will have
shown a cause of divorce. Cruelty which is provoked by the party seeking a
divorce is not actionable.  ( Harp v. Harp, 204 Cal. 193, 194 [267 P. 101];
Popescu v. Popescu, 46 Cal.App.2d 44, 49 [115 P.2d 208].) However, it may be
that, although the evidence disclose cruelty on the part of each party,
provocation for the acts of one upon the part of the other may be proved.  In
that event, the trial court properly might award a divorce to the party whose
actions were provoked by the other.

   This court cannot anticipate what the evidence upon another trial may
disclose. The conclusion that the findings are in irreconcilable conflict
disposes of the issue before us and the lengthy discourse upon the doctrine of
recrimination is unnecessary and unwarranted dictum.  However, because of my
disagreement with the interpretation placed upon the statutory law of this
state, I am compelled to state my views upon that question.

   "The legislature has seen fit to make the doctrine [of recrimination] an
integral part  of the law of this state.  It is not for the courts to determine
the rightness or wrongness of the doctrine so declared.  That is a legislative
and not a judicial function." ( Comfort v. Comfort, 17 Cal.2d 736, 752 [112 P.2d
259].)

   In effect, the court now repeals sections 111(4) and 122 of the Civil Code.
Section 111 provides: "Divorces must be denied upon showing: . . .  4.
Recrimination; . . ." (Emphasis added.) Section 122 defines recrimination as "a
showing by the defendant of any cause of divorce against the plaintiff, in bar
of the plaintiff's cause of divorce."

   Ignoring the mandatory "must" of section 111, the majority hold that the
trial court may exercise its "discretion" in determining whether to grant a
divorce where each party has shown a cause of divorce against the other.  Using
the language of Brenot v. Brenot, 102 Cal. 294, 296 [36 P. 672], it is said that
"a court of equity is authorized to enter a judgment dismissing an action of
divorce, where both parties are seeking a decree, and the evidence discloses
them to be equally guilty of the misconduct alleged." But in the Brenot case no
authority was cited for this conclusion, and the court did not consider the
statute.  Furthermore, the quoted statement is erroneous in implying that the
parties must be equally guilty of the same misconduct. Under section 122, "any
cause of divorce" is a sufficient basis for the defense of recrimination. The
cause need not be the same as that relied upon by the  other party.  (See White
v. White, 82 Cal. 427, 452 [23 P. 276, 7 L.R.A. 799]; Klemmer v. Klemmer, 42
Cal.App. 618, 622 [187 P. 85].)

   Reliance also is placed upon Glass v. Glass, 4 Cal.App. 604, 607 [88 P. 734].
There the trial court found both parties guilty of extreme cruelty, but granted
the plaintiff a divorce. The doctrine of recrimination was not relied upon by
either of the parties, nor considered by the court, and the decision is not
authority for the proposition that the mandatory language of section 111 may be
disregarded.

   In the present opinion "recrimination" is not defined.  However, the
inevitable implication of the analysis of the problem is that there is no such
thing.  It is acknowledged that a cause of divorce must be proved before the
doctrine of recrimination may be applied.  The conclusion is then reached that,
after the defendant's cause is established, the trial court must determine
whether it is "in bar" of the relief sought by the plaintiff.

   The fallacy of such circuitous reasoning lies in the misinterpretation of the
plain language of the statute.  It is assumed that the phrase "in bar of the
plaintiff's cause of divorce" refers back to the words "any cause of divorce."
However, the structure of the sentence precludes any such interpretation.  The
phrase beginning with "in bar" is a modifying one deliberately separated from
the preceding modifying language by a comma.  As diagrammed in Klemmer v.
Klemmer, supra, the sentence reads: "Recrimination is a showing by the defendant
of any cause of divorce against the plaintiff, in bar of the plaintiff's cause
of divorce." (See De Haley v. Haley , 74 Cal. 489, 492 [16 P. 248, 5 Am.St.Rep.
460].) The word "showing" is modified by two separate, and equal, phrases.  The
first, "by the defendant of any cause of divorce against the plaintiff,"
explains the kind of "showing" which must be made.  Such showing, if made, is
"in bar of the plaintiff's cause of divorce."

   The majority say: "Had the Legislature meant to make every cause of divorce
an absolute defense, it could easily have provided that: 'Divorces must be
denied upon . . . a showing by the defendant of any cause of divorce against the
plaintiff.'" They ignore the fact that section 122 is a definition of
"recrimination" as used in section 111.  In defining "recrimination" as a
showing "in bar of the plaintiff's cause of divorce," the code commissioners
simply adopted the accepted judicial definition of that term as stated in Conant
v. Conant, 10 Cal. 249, 256 [70 Am.Dec. 717], and the English cases there cited.

   According to the majority opinion, "The California Legislature, in enacting
the Civil Code in 1872, did not follow the principles of the Conant case.  The
code provisions on recrimination made two important  departures from the
existing law." These, it says, were the requirement that the defendant prove a
cause of divorce against the plaintiff and the rejection of the strict rule of
the ecclesiastical courts.

   But the code did not change the law as stated and applied in the Conant case.
By that decision the court did not establish a doctrine that the plaintiff be
"without reproach" to secure a divorce. It held that "where the matter pleaded
is such as would entitle the defendant to a decree, had it been presented in a
bill brought by himself, the relief should be denied." (P. 256.) In using the
words "without reproach," it specifically limited them to "similar guilt, or an
offence to which the law attaches similar consequences." (P. 258.) Because the
now abandoned doctrine of two types of divorce then existed, the court did
provide that a lesser guilt would bar a divorce a vinculo matrimonii.  However,
it is important to note that a divorce would be granted a mensa et thoro where
the guilt of the plaintiff was not sufficient to have established a cause of
divorce in the defendant.

   In the Conant case the court also rejected the strict rule of the
ecclesiastical courts.  They had allowed only adultery as a bar to a suit for
divorce. Under the Conant decision any offense stated by the statute could be
pleaded in bar to the same or any other offense.  This departure from the
ecclesiastical rule was adopted by the code commissioners.  It is
understandable, therefore, that they should have relied upon the general
principles upon which the Conant case was decided, rather than upon earlier
divorce cases.

   The note of the code commissioners states: "This section [sec. 122] rests
upon the principle that he who is himself in the wrong cannot be heard to
complain in a Court of justice of another's wrong pertaining to the same
matter." The analogy which they used is strikingly similar to that stated in the
Conant case where it was said: "It is a general principle of the common law that
whoever seeks redress for the violation of a contract resting upon mutual and
dependent covenants, to obtain success, must himself have performed the
obligations on his part." That the code commissioners had  a related principle
in mind is clear from their citations of authority.  Of the decisions to which
they referred, five denied relief to a plaintiff relying upon an illegal or
fraudulent contract.  In each case, the basis of the holding was the doctrine of
in pari delicto.  ( Collins v. Blantern, 2 Wils. K. B. 341 [Eng.]; Gregg v.
Wyman, 4 Cush. (58 Mass.) 322; Roby v. West, 4 N.H. 285 [17 Am.Dec. 423];
Freeman v. Sedwick, 6 Gill (Md.) 28, 29, 39-40 [46 Am.Dec. 650]; Gregory v.
Haworth, 25 Cal. 653, 657.) Bush v. Brainard, 1 Cow. (N.Y.) 78 [13 Am.Dec. 513],
stated the doctrine of contributory negligence as a defense to an action for
gross negligence.  Hyatt v. Wood, 4 Johns. (N.Y.) 150 [4 Am.Dec. 258], held that
a person having only the naked possession of land cannot maintain an action in
trespass against a person having possessory title who has entered by force and
evicted the possessor.

   None of the decisions cited by the commissioners considered the public policy
argument now presented.  The full quotation from Freeman v. Sedwick, supra, the
only one of those cases here relied upon, is as follows: "After a careful
examination of the authorities, we are brought to the conclusion that Courts of
equity have held, and uniformly decided, that it was both the wisdom and policy
of the law to withhold all aid or relief from parties in controversies between
themselves, who stood strictly in pari delicto, which might or could tend to the
consummation of agreements entered into in fraud of the law, or the rights of
any person.  Mr. Justice Story, in his Commentary on Equity Jurisprudence, vol.
1, p. 317, sec. 298, says: 'The suppression of illegal contracts is far more
likely, in general, to be accomplished by leaving the parties without remedy
against each other, and by thus introducing a preventive check, naturally
connected with a want of confidence, and a sole reliance upon personal honor.
And so, accordingly, the modern doctrine is established.  Relief is not granted,
where both parties are truly in pari delicto, unless in cases where public
policy would thereby be promoted.'"

    The notes of the code commissioners, annotated by two of them, were first
published by H. S. Crocker and Company in an 1872 edition of the Civil Code.  In
the preface to the annotated edition, those commissioners stated: "In some
places the Code modifies or alters what has heretofore been the law.  Wherever
this occurs the reason for the change is given -- the hardships which existed
under the former law, and how the  present enactment applies to prevent their
future occurrence." (P. vi.)

   Following out this purpose the commissioners noted every instance in which it
was their intention to depart from the preexisting law.  Illustrative of their
comments are the following: "Sections 170 and 171 modify the common law in two
respects." (§ 170, p. 58.) "This was the rule of the common law. The Commission
deemed it advisable to modify it." (§ 710, p. 215.) "The words 'or for' are
intended to supersede the doctrine of Sieman v. Austin, . . ." (§ 853, p. 249.)
"This section is a departure from the rule laid down in . . . (the cited) case."
(§ 908, p. 260.) "The three preceding sections change the rule of our statutes .
. ." (§ 1286, p. 359.) "This is an innovation upon the common law. . . ." (§
1496, p. 443.) "This is contrary to the former law upon this subject.  . . ." (§
1500, p. 444.) "This Chapter undoubtedly modifies the rule heretofore existing
in this State as to mistake of law." (§ 1576, p. 467.) "This section modifies
the law heretofore existing." (§ 1714, p. 519.) "This section, and some of the
ensuing ones, differ materially from the common law . . ." (§ 1864, p. 573.)
Further examples of this careful attention to alterations in the prior law
appear in the annotations to sections 245, 296, 400, 954, 1383, 1384, 1488,
1624, 1658, and 1941.

   Had the code commissioners intended to modify the doctrine of recrimination,
as stated in the Conant case, so drastically as it is now said that they did,
certainly they would have been as explicit in the annotation to section 122 as
they were in their notes to other sections.  It is clear that the commissioners
made every effort to leave nothing to implication and to stress each alteration
or clarification which was intended by their work.  If it was their intention to
adopt, as a limitation upon the defense of recrimination, the dictum exception
to the doctrine of in pari delicto mentioned in the quotation from Mr. Justice
Story by the Maryland court in the Freeman case, it would have been a simple
matter to word the statute accordingly.  Instead, the commissioners provided
that "any cause of divorce against the plaintiff" is a sufficient showing in bar
of the plaintiff's cause and requires a denial of relief.  Rather than stating
any modification or alteration of what was theretofore the law, they bolstered
the unequivocal language of the statute by explaining that "he who is himself in
the wrong cannot be heard  to complain." The authorities which they cited denied
relief in each instance.  Certainly if they had intended any such exception as
is now added to the code section, they would have modified the language of the
statute, mentioned that purpose in their annotation, or at least have cited
authorities applying the exception to the general rule.

   By now saying that "the considerations of policy that prompt the state to
consent to a divorce when one spouse has been guilty of misconduct are often
doubly present when both spouses have been guilty," in effect, this court
repeals the statutory rule of recrimination. Thus, in any case where, by the
terms of the statute, recrimination is a bar, it should not be applied because
of public policy. Only the embalmed corpse of the doctrine is preserved,
impotent in the shroud of standards established "for determining when a cause of
divorce shown against a plaintiff is to be considered a bar to his suit for
divorce."

   Among other standards which the trial court must now use to determine whether
the cause proved is "in bar" of the plaintiff's cause of divorce is one called
"comparative guilt." No authority is given for this invention, startling as
applied to the grounds for divorce, and indeed, none can be found for it.
Section 92 of the Civil Code provides that divorces may be granted for any one
of seven enumerated  causes.  No distinction is made between them, nor are there
varying degrees of any cause.  All stand on an equal footing insofar as the
granting of a divorce is concerned.  "In this State, the statute has specified
certain acts or conduct which shall constitute grounds of divorce and so far as
the matrimonial contract is concerned, the Courts cannot distinguish between
them, whatever difference there may be in a moral point of view." ( Conant v.
Conant, supra, p. 256.)

   Whether a cause of divorce is established is simply a matter of proof.  If
the evidence is sufficient to sustain a decree upon any one of the statutory
grounds, a cause of divorce is proved and cumulative evidence does not give it
greater sanctity.  Either a cause of divorce is established or it is not.  Once
established, it is neither more nor less effective than any other cause as the
basis for a divorce or a bar to the other spouse's cause of divorce. And yet, it
is now held, these causes, equal under the law, must in some metaphysical
fashion be measured or weighed by the trial judge.  By comparing the equal,
inequality may be discovered.  Beyond the superlative of "extreme" or "utmost"
cruelty the court may find an indescribable  infinity which is more than utmost,
an unimaginable degree of cruelty which is greater than the greatest.

   That the doctrine of recrimination has been repealed is made crystal clear by
the suggestion "that a divorce will be granted to both parties." The code makes
no provision for such a decree and the result is contrary to the requirement
that a divorce "must be denied" when recrimination is proved.  "Certain
consequences are attached to the decree, independent of the dissolution of the
marriage contract, and they are generally more favorable to the party obtaining
the relief than to the contestant; but a decree cannot be granted in favor of
one, and afterwards in favor of the other, as the first would dissolve the
marriage, and then no marriage would subsist, upon which the second decree could
act; and a decree granting a divorce in favor of each, would be an anomalous
proceeding." ( Conant v. Conant, supra.)

   The Civil Code contemplates that a divorce can be awarded to only one party.
Section 131 provides in part: "If it determines that the divorce ought to be
granted, an interlocutory judgment must be entered, declaring that the party in
whose favor the court decides is entitled to a divorce; . . ." (Emphasis added.)

   It is noteworthy than the only American authority cited for the proposition
that both parties may be awarded a decree is Flagg v. Flagg, 192 Wash. 679, 686
[74 P.2d 189], decided in a jurisdiction which has no statute relating to
recrimination. Even there, no authority was cited for the holding, nor has the
decision since been followed.

   The anomaly of awarding a divorce to both parties is further stressed by the
discussion of alimony and property rights.  The majority say: "When a divorce is
granted to both, alimony may be awarded to either, for the basis of liability
for alimony is the granting of a divorce against the person required to pay it.
(See Civ. Code, § 139.)" But section 139, as amended in 1951, contemplates, in
the singular,  only "the party against whom the decree or judgment is granted."
No provision is made for the situation where a decree is granted against both
parties.  That such an eventuality was not anticipated by the Legislature is
obvious from section 142, which provides: "When the prevailing party in the
action has either a separate estate, or is earning his or her own livelihood, .
. . the court in its discretion, may withhold any allowance to the prevailing
party out of the separate property of the other party." (Emphasis added.)
Clearly, the Legislature did not  foresee a prevailing party against whom the
decree might be granted.

   By statute, 32 American jurisdictions allow the defense of recrimination. In
only three of these may the court, in its discretion, grant a divorce after
proof of recrimination. Except for these three, recrimination is, by statute, an
absolute defense in the majority of states.  (2 Vernier, American Family Laws,
p. 87.) The decisions from other states and England, here  cited as recognizing
judicial discretion, all rely upon different statutes or declare judicial policy
in the absence of statute.  The policy which underlies these exceptions to the
general rule may be commendable.  But this court should not usurp the
legislative prerogative by the device of interpreting a statute which needs no
interpretation, and which has been accepted without question for 80 years.  If
public policy no longer approves the doctrine of recrimination, then it is for
the Legislature, and not for the court, to repeal the statute.

DISSENT BY: SHENK (In Part)

DISSENT

   SHENK, J., Concurring and Dissenting.  I concur in the judgment of reversal
on the ground that the findings are contradictory and irreconcilable.  I
disagree with the meaning given to the phrase "in bar of the plaintiff's cause
of divorce" which appears in section 122 of the Civil Code.  It seems to me that
those words were inserted in the statute for a purpose foreign to that now
ascribed to them.

    Section 111 of the Civil Code reads: "Divorces must be denied upon showing .
. . 4. Recrimination." The limitation of that defense in an action for divorce
is continued in section 122.  That section defines "Recrimination" as "a showing
by the defendant of any cause of divorce against the plaintiff, in bar of the
plaintiff's cause of divorce." Separate maintenance is an available remedy where
a cause of divorce exists ( Civ. Code, § 137), but because of a showing of
recrimination a divorce may not be granted (§ 111).

   There is thus no warrant for disapproving or overruling prior cases.  When,
as in this case, the court is faced with a showing of recrimination (any cause
of divorce) on the part of each spouse in resisting a divorce sought by the
other, there is no choice except to deny the divorce to both.  On a record which
undeniably supports a finding of recrimination on the part of each spouse, the
trial court must be assumed to have exercised all of the discretion that it had
if the denial of the divorce was based on that finding.


                               2 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              ZOLA V. HILL, Appellant, v. JACK C. HILL, Respondent

                                L. A. No. 18144

                          Supreme Court of California

                23 Cal. 2d 82; 142 P.2d 417; 1943 Cal. LEXIS 235


                                October 15, 1943

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Riverside
County.  George R. Freeman, Judge.

   Action for balance due under a property settlement.

COUNSEL: Haas & Home and John D. Home for Appellant.

Sarau & Thompson, H. L. Thompson and Roy W. Colegate for Respondent.

JUDGES: In Bank. Gibson, C. J.  Shenk, J., Curtis, J., Edmonds, J., Carter, J.,
Traynor, J., and Schauer, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: GIBSON

OPINION

     This action was brought by a divorced wife to recover payments under a
property settlement agreement executed on August 14, 1928, while the parties
thereto were still husband and wife, but living separate and apart.  The trial
court found and concluded that the execution and delivery of the agreement "was
at the time and date conditioned upon and in contemplation of, and for the
purpose of promoting an immediate and forthwith dissolution of the marriage,"
and that the agreement was therefore void as against public policy and good
morals.  Judgment was entered for defendant from which plaintiff appeals.

   Plaintiff and defendant were married in 1906 and separated in 1926 and it
appears from the evidence that they had no intention or expectation of ever
living together again.  In 1926, defendant husband commenced  an action for
divorce in which plaintiff wife filed a cross-complaint for separate
maintenance. It was stipulated here "that the judge who tried the case decided
the case in favor of Mrs. Hill, but before signing the findings and judgment the
judge passed away." Negotiations leading to the execution of the agreement in
controversy were commenced two years later when plaintiff called upon Mr.
Horton, defendant's attorney, at his request.  In response to questions by Mr.
Horton plaintiff stated she had grounds for divorce but she did not want to
commence an action therefor; that she would however think the matter over and if
she decided to get one it would have to be on her terms.  On the same day
defendant informed plaintiff that if she did not give him a divorce he would
quit the practice of medicine, in which event he would not have enough to pay
her anything.  A few weeks later a second interview took place between plaintiff
and Mr. Horton in which questions relating to support of plaintiff and the minor
children of the  parties,  in the event of a divorce, were discussed, but no
agreement was reached.  At the time of these conversations plaintiff was not
represented by counsel, but shortly thereafter plaintiff notified Mr. Horton
that she had employed Mr. Haas to represent her in future negotiations. After
some discussion between the attorneys, Mr. Horton prepared and forwarded to Mr.
Haas a property settlement agreement which recited that "in the event the party
of the second part [plaintiff] does obtain an interlocutory decree of divorce,
and thereafter obtains a final decree of divorce, that the following agreement
is made as a full and complete property settlement between said parties, and
full and complete settlement for the support and maintenance of the said party
of the second part and the said two minor children" and "this agreement shall
not become effective . . . until or unless the party of the second part may have
obtained . . . a divorce." Mr. Haas returned the contract unsigned together with
a draft prepared by him which omitted the provision just quoted.  Following
further discussions between the attorneys, the agreement prepared by Mr. Haas
was signed by the defendant and mailed to Mr. Haas together with a letter from
Mr. Horton reading as follows: "I am sending you these contracts . . . the same
to be held by you and not delivered or used except in the event of an action
being filed by Mrs. Hill for divorce against Dr. Hill and the obtaining of the
decree of divorce by one or the other of the parties.  I will appreciate your
getting the complaint prepared, signed, filed and served as soon as possible,
and I will then put in an appearance and advise you." A complaint charging
defendant with desertion and seeking court approval of the property settlement
agreement was filed on August 17, 1928, and within a few days thereafter the
defendant filed an answer in which he also requested the court to approve the
agreement.  On September 7, 1928, an interlocutory decree was entered for
plaintiff which provided that "it appearing that a full and complete property
settlement has been entered into . . . said property settlement is hereby
approved." Mr. Horton was present at the hearing of the case but it does not
appear that he took any part in the proceedings.  A final decree of divorce was
entered on September 17, 1929, which contained the following provision: "The
disposition of property and the payment of alimony is covered by the property
settlement agreement heretofore entered into . . . the said agreement having
been approved at the time of the trial of this cause."

    The evidence clearly shows that the agreement was made in contemplation of
divorce and conditioned thereon to the extent that it was not to become
effective except upon "the obtaining of a decree of divorce by one or the other
of the parties." In support of the findings it also may be inferred that
plaintiff was unwilling to proceed with an action for the dissolution of the
marriage unless a satisfactory agreement was entered into providing for a
settlement of her property rights and for the support of herself and the minor
children of the parties.  Defendant was unwilling that the property settlement
agreement should become effective until and unless a divorce was obtained by one
of the parties, and his answer in the divorce action shows that he was desirous
that all of the property rights of the parties including his obligations to
support plaintiff be finally disposed of by the approval of such agreement in
the judgment of divorce. It appears, however, that the parties had been
separated for more than two years when this agreement was entered into and that
they had no intention of ever living together as husband and wife again.
Although plaintiff had a meritorious cause of divorce she did not tell defendant
that she would get one, and there is no evidence whatsoever of collusion.  No
evidence was offered tending to show that defendant agreed not to defend an
action or to do anything to facilitate the granting of a divorce.  Defendant
contends, however, that since the agreement was to become effective only in the
event of divorce (a condition which he himself imposed), it is void as against
public policy and he should not be bound thereby.  Under the agreement plaintiff
relinquished her right of inheritance and agreed to a division of property and
the amount to be contributed by defendant for the support of herself and the
minor children. Defendant asked the court to approve the agreement and limit his
obligations according to its terms after plaintiff, in reliance thereon,
refrained from asking the court for alimony and for a division of the community
property.  Certainly, as between the parties, every principle of justice and
equity demands that defendant be compelled to stand by his contract and we do
not believe in the circumstances here presented, that any rule of public policy
requires that he be relieved of his obligations under this agreement.

   Because preservation of the marriage relationship is considered essential to
the maintenance of organized society, it has been stated generally that the law
will not countenance any contract having for its object the dissolution of a
marriage.  ( Howard v. Adams, 16 Cal.2d 253 [105 P.2d 971, 130 A.L.R. 1003];
Pereira v. Pereira, 156 Cal. 1 [103 P. 488, 134 Am.St.Rep. 107, 23 L.R.A.N.S.
880]; Newman v. Freitas, 129 Cal. 283 [61 P. 907, 50 L.R.A. 548]; Loveren v.
Loveren, 106 Cal. 509 [39 P. 801]; see Restatement, Contracts § 586; 6
Williston, Contracts (rev.ed. 1938) § 1743; 9 Cal.Jur. 636; Bishop, Marriage,
Divorce, and Separation, § 169; notes, 14 So.Cal.L.Rev. 373; 130 A.L.R. 1008.)
Agreements not to defend or to abandon a defense in a divorce action, to destroy
or conceal evidence in proceedings for divorce, and to procure or furnish
testimony of certain facts which will successfully support or defeat a divorce
action,  or which provide that payment to the party procuring evidence to be
used in such an action is contingent upon the result of the action have been
held void as parts of collusive arrangements to facilitate divorce. ( Lanktree
v. Lanktree, 42 Cal.App. 648 [183 P. 954]; Miller v. Miller, 284 Pa. 414 [131 A.
236]; Beard v. Beard, 65 Cal. 354 [4 P. 229]; Senter v. Senter, 70 Cal. 619 [11
P. 782]; Roberts v. Roberts, 83 Cal.App. 345 [256 P. 826]; Loveren v. Loveren,
supra; Hare v. McGue, 178 Cal. 740 [174 P. 663, L.R.A. 1918F 1099]; Harris v.
Moore, 102 Cal.App. 413 [283 P. 76]; note 130 A.L.R. 1008.) Even in the absence
of such a collusive arrangement certain agreements have been held void as contra
bonos mores upon the theory they had a direct tendency to promote dissolution of
the marriage relationship. Thus, the courts have refused to enforce an agreement
by a husband to pay his wife a fixed sum in full satisfaction of her claims for
alimony if he should thereafter give the wife cause for divorce. ( Pereira v.
Pereira, supra; Whiting v. Whiting, 62 Cal.App. 157 [216 P. 92]; Lane v. Lane ,
78 Cal.App. 326 [248 P. 686].) An agreement by the husband to pay the wife's
counsel fees in the event of a divorce, and an agreement between a plaintiff in
a divorce action and her attorney for a contingent fee have also been held void.
( McCahan v. McCahan, 47 Cal.App. 173 [190 P. 458]; Newman v. Freitas, supra;
Parsons v. Segno, 187 Cal. 260 [201 P. 580]; Wiley v. Silsbee, 1 Cal.App.2d 520
[36 P.2d 854], noted in 21 Va.L.Rev. 446; Theisen v. Keough, 115 Cal.App. 353 [1
P.2d 1015]; Ayres v. Lipschutz, 68 Cal.App. 134 [228 P. 720], Restatement,
Contracts, § 542(2).)

   Property settlement agreements between husband and wife have in like manner
been held invalid when regarded as inseparable parts of agreements for divorce
which are contrary  to the public policy favoring preservation of marriage.
Under the early common law, this policy was so inflexible as to be considered a
barrier to agreements for separation and for the adjustment of property rights
upon separation.  (See Gallemore v. Gallemore, 94 Fla. 516 [114 So. 371, 372];
Madden, Persons and Domestic Relations, p. 333; 7 Minn.L.Rev. 592.)   It is now
well settled, however, that a husband and wife may agree to an immediate
separation, and having so agreed or having actually separated, may enter into
contracts adjusting their property rights. (Civ. Code § 159; Hogarty v. Hogarty,
188 Cal. 625 [206 P. 79]; Hensley v. Hensley, 179 Cal. 284 [183 P. 445];
Huntsberger v. Huntsberger, 2 Cal.2d 655 [43 P.2d 258]; Brown v. Brown, 83
Cal.App. 74 [256 P. 595]; Boland v. Boland, 7 Cal.App.2d 401 [46 P.2d 238];
Robertson v. Robertson, 34 Cal.App.2d 113 [93 P.2d 175]; 3 C.J. 245; 9 R.C.L.
524; 7 Minn.L.Rev. 592.) As said in Brown v. Brown, 83 Cal.App. 74, at 82 [256
P. 595], "The  whole theory of the law has been to prevent . . . agreements
which have for their purpose the severance of the marriage relation in the
future and not to invalidate agreements where the separation has already taken
place or is an instant fact." (See, also, Boland v. Boland, 7 Cal.App.2d 401,
405 [46 P.2d 238].)

     Accordingly, by the great weight of modern authority, property settlement
agreements are upheld even though made in contemplation of divorce. ( Rhinehart
v. Rhinehart , 52 Wyo. 363 [75 P.2d 390]; Gallemore v. Gallemore, 94 Fla. 516
[114 So. 371]; Pryor v. Pryor, 88 Ark. 302 [114 S.W. 700, 129 Am.St.Rep. 102];
Welsh v. Welsh, 230 Mo.App. 1006 [93 S.W.2d 264]; Miller v. Miller, supra;
Herrin v. Herrin, 103 Mont. 469 [63 P.2d 137]; Dennison v. Dennison, 98 N.J. Eq.
230 [130 A. 463]; Shankland v. Shankland, 301 Ill. 524 [134 N.E. 67]; Henderson
v. Henderson, 37 Ore. 141 [60 P. 597, 82 Am.St.Rep. 741, 48 L.R.A. 766];
Frothingham v. Anthony, 69 F.2d 506; see Giddings v. Giddings, 167 Ore. 504 [119
P.2d 280]; Nelson v. Vassenden, 115 Minn. 1 [131 N.W. 794, 795, 35 L.R.A.N.S.
1167]; Stokes v. Anderson, 118 Ind. 533, 552 [21 N.E. 331, 4 L.R.A. 313];
Bishop, op. cit., supra, § 702; note 109 A.L.R. 844.) The rule is stated in 17
Am.Jur., section 499, as follows: "The validity of such agreements depends on
whether there is an attempt to obtain a divorce not justified by the real facts
and thus to practice a fraud upon the court.  . . .  Under this rule, where a
separation has been induced by the vicious conduct or disability  of one of the
parties, without inducement or fault of the other, a contract looking to a
settlement of property rights and the proper maintenance of the one not in fault
is in no sense repugnant to public policy." The California decisions are in
accord with this view ( Cookinham v. Cookinham, 219 Cal. 723 [28 P.2d 1045];
Huntsberger v. Huntsberger, supra; Ex parte Weiler, 106 Cal.App. 485 [289 P.
645]; Robertson v. Robertson, supra; Queen v. Queen, 44 Cal.App.2d 475 [112 P.2d
755]; Baxter v. Baxter, 3 Cal.App.2d 676 [40 P.2d 536]; see Hare v. McGue, supra
; Boland v. Boland, supra; Tripp v. Superior Court, 61 Cal.App. 64 [214 P. 252];
cf.  Howard v. Adams, supra.) It has also been said in this state that property
settlements are "highly favored in the law." ( Hensley v. Hensley, supra, at p.
287; Makzoume v. Makzoume, 50 Cal.App.2d 229, 230 [123 P. 2d 72]; see, also,
Lindey, Separation Agreements, Antenuptial Contracts, and Marriage Settlements,
p. 385.)

     Such contracts made in contemplation of divorce are entered into upon the
assumption that divorce will follow.  (See Bishop v. Bishop,    Mo.App.    [162
S.W.2d 332, 335].) It would therefore seem proper for the parties to provide for
any possible failure of this assumption in their contract.  And it has
accordingly been held that agreements conditioned upon divorce, in the sense
that they are to become effective upon dissolution of the marriage, do not
contravene public policy. ( Miller v. Miller, supra; Bishop v. Bishop, supra;
Frothingham v. Anthony, 69 F.2d 506; Phillips v. Phillips, 39 R.I. 92 [97 A.
593]; Lubbell v. Stolls, 202 N.Y.S. 229; cf.  Darling v. Darling, 241 App.Div.
57 [270 N.Y.S. 557]; Maisch v. Maisch, 87 Conn. 377 [87 A. 729]; Clarke v.
Clarke, 42 Times L. R. [Engl.] 132; note 109 A.L.R. 844; see Stokes v. Anderson,
118 Ind. 533, 552 [21 N.E. 331, 4 L.R.A. 313], 2 Bishop, op. cit. supra, § 702.)

   Recent California cases have upheld property settlement agreements thus
conditioned upon divorce. In Cookinham v. Cookinham, 219 Cal. 723 [28 P.2d 1045]
, this court approved a property settlement agreement under which a husband
agreed to pay his wife $ 200 per month for the support of herself and minor
child during the pendency of the wife's action for divorce, and thereafter, if
the court determined that the wife was entitled to a divorce, the sum of $ 150
per month for her support until her death or remarriage and $ 50 per month for
the support of the minor child until the latter attained her majority.  In
rejecting the contention that the  agreement was contra bonos mores the court
remarked: ". . . it is to be observed that the parties were living separate and
apart and the agreement conclusively establishes their intent to amicably settle
and adjust all of their property rights. This they were competent to do and were
authorized by law to do." In Ettlinger v. Ettlinger, 3 Cal.2d 172 [44 P.2d 540],
during the pendency of the wife's action for separate maintenance, the parties
entered into a property settlement agreement under which the husband agreed to
pay the wife $ 250 per month "in the event of a divorce between the parties."
Subsequently, and, as the wife contended, in consideration  of the execution of
the agreement, she changed the form of her action from one for separate
maintenance to one for absolute divorce. The validity of the agreement was in
issue in the divorce proceedings where the agreement was approved and adopted in
interlocutory and final decrees.  On appeal from an order reducing the amount of
payments, this court held the agreement was immune from judicial modification.
The validity of the same agreement was again challenged in Ettlinger v.
Ettlinger, 46 Cal.App.2d 628 [116 P.2d 482]. It was there held the previous
decision of the Supreme Court was res judicata upon the issue of the legality of
the agreement, and that in the state of the record, a finding that the agreement
was contra bonos mores would have been entirely wanting in evidentiary support.
The court pointed out that it was not claimed that the divorce was obtained by
collusion or that the wife did not have a meritorious cause of action for
divorce. In Howard v. Adams, 16 Cal.2d 253 [105 P.2d 971, 130 A.L.R. 1003], this
court held an agreement by which defendant undertook to support her niece, if
the niece would procure the divorce she contemplated in another state in order
to avoid publicity damaging to defendant's social and business connections, was
not against public policy. The fact that the husband admitted his marital
relations were discordant and that the wife had a good cause of action for
divorce was, in the opinion of the court, a complete answer to any contention
that the contract was invalid because it might have a tendency to induce, or did
in fact, induce, the wife to proceed to obtain a divorce and the husband to
permit her to prosecute the action without opposition.  In Queen v. Queen, 44
Cal.App.2d 475 [112 P.2d 755], a property settlement agreement presented to the
court for enforcement contained the following provision: "This agreement shall
be and become effective if, as, and when within a period of six (6)  months from
the date hereof a decree of divorce is entered granting to the party of the
second part a divorce from the party of the first part.  . . .  If a divorce
shall not be so granted . . . then this agreement shall be and become forthwith
null and void and of no effect.  . . ." In holding the agreement was
enforceable, the court answered the contention that the wife was persuaded to
obtain a divorce as a result of the execution of the agreement by pointing to
the recitals therein that the parties had separated, that the wife was about to
institute an action for divorce, and that the parties were desirous of arriving
at an agreement respecting the settlement of their property rights and providing
for the support of the wife in the event a divorce was obtained.  In Morrow v.
Morrow, 40 Cal.App.2d 474 [105 P.2d 129], the signing of a stipulation by the
wife in a divorce action to the effect that she should be awarded $ 75 a month
as alimony was not against public policy, the court stating that the stipulation
did not tend to interfere with the real and substantial status of the marriage
contract as the parties were already separated.  (Cf.  Hochstein v. Berghauser,
123 Cal. 681 [56 P. 547]; Baxter v. Baxter, 3 Cal.App.2d 676 [40 P.2d 536].)

   Respondent relies upon certain decisions in this state to support his
contention that a property settlement agreement conditioned upon divorce is
invalid, but, with one exception hereafter noted, we find nothing in those
decisions inconsistent with the principles expressed in the foregoing cases.  In
the leading case of Pereira v. Pereira, 156 Cal. 1 [103 P. 488, 134 Am.St.Rep.
107, 23 L.R.A.N.S. 880], the parties had separated and the wife commenced an
action for divorce.  During its pendency the parties became reconciled and the
action was dismissed.  The parties then executed an agreement providing among
other things that if the husband should thereafter give the wife cause for
divorce and if she should establish a right thereto in an action against him,
the husband would pay the wife $ 10,000 in full settlement of alimony and
property rights. After concluding that the agreement therein "could not but
encourage him [the husband] to yield to his baser inclinations, and inflict the
injury" which would compel the wife to obtain a divorce, the court stated: "It
shows by its terms that it is not an agreement to settle property rights
accruing by reason of a marital offense already perpetrated and complete as a
cause of action for divorce. There is therefore no force in the claim, as
applied to this case, that it is . . . valid as a settlement of such rights,
even  if it were conceded that such an agreement might under some circumstances
be permitted to stand." Whiting v. Whiting, 62 Cal.App. 157 [216 P. 92],
involved an antenuptial contract similar to the contract in the Pereira case.
Newman v. Freitas, 129 Cal. 283 [61 P. 907, 50 L.R.A. 548], involved a
contingent fee contract between the wife and an attorney which the court
considered tended directly  to bring about alienation of husband and wife by
offering a stranger a premium to advise dissolution of the marriage ties.  The
court pointed out, moreover, that the power of the court to compel the husband
to pay his wife's counsel fees in a divorce action removed the necessity and
reason for the rule permitting contingent fee contracts.  (See 21 Va.L.Rev.
446.) In Moss v. Moss, 20 Cal.2d 640 [128 P.2d 526, 141 A.L.R. 1422], the
plaintiff husband sought a declaration of his obligations under a property
settlement, the sole consideration for which, he alleged, was a promise by the
defendant wife to procure a divorce. The trial court sustained a demurrer to the
complaint and this court affirmed the judgment.  Since it was admitted by
demurrer that the sole consideration for the agreement was the promise of the
wife to procure a divorce, we assumed for the purposes of the decision that the
agreement was invalid and held that the trial court had discretion in a
declaratory action to refuse relief where it appeared the plaintiff was a party
of equal fault to the illegal transaction.  We expressly refrained, however,
from passing upon the validity of the agreement.

   Respondent also cites Brown v. Brown, 8 Cal.App.2d 364 [47 P.2d 352] as
holding that if it is the essence of the agreement that one of the parties
obtain a divorce and if the promises made in contemplation thereof are
conditioned upon a dissolution of the marriage, the contract is unenforceable.
Although it does not appear in the Brown case that the parties had separated at
the time the agreement was entered into, and for that reason the case may be
factually distinguishable from the situation here presented, the language of
that opinion is hereby disapproved insofar as it is inconsistent with anything
said by us here.

   It thus appears that with the one exception none of the foregoing cases
relied upon by defendant is authority for his position that a property
settlement agreement entered into after separation, without collusion, is
invalid solely because it is not to become effective unless a divorce is
obtained by one of the parties.   Defendant contends, however, that the
judgment declaring the agreement invalid must be affirmed because the trial
court determined not only that the agreement in question was "conditioned upon
and in contemplation of" divorce, but also that it was "for the purpose of
promoting an immediate and forthwith dissolution of the marriage." While it is
true that contracts condemned by the courts usually have been termed "promotive
of divorce" as distinguished from those "incidental to divorce" or "conditioned
upon divorce," this terminology is not always accurate or descriptive.  The
validity of such contracts must be determined in the light of the factual
background of each case and considerations of public policy appropriate thereto.
Most property settlement agreements are incidental to or conditioned upon
divorce, since they are means employed in the disposition of property upon
divorce, and they are also promotive of divorce in the sense that an amicable
adjustment of property rights facilitates the completion of contemplated divorce
proceedings.

     Public policy seeks to foster and protect marriage, to encourage parties to
live together, and to prevent separation.  ( Deyoe v. Superior Court, 140 Cal.
476, 482 [74 P. 28, 98 Am.St.Rep. 73]; 17 Am.Jur. 154; notes 15 So.Cal.L.Rev.
376; 130 A.L.R. 1008.) But public policy does not discourage divorce where the
relations between husband and wife are such that the legitimate objects of
matrimony have been utterly destroyed.  (Cf.  Brewthauer v. Brewthauer, 45
Cal.App. 759, 761 [188 P. 296].)   In the absence of fraud, collusion or
imposition upon the court, public policy does not prevent parties who have
separated from entering into a contract disposing of their property rights which
shall become effective only in the event one of the parties obtains a divorce,
even though such a contract may be a factor in persuading a party who has a good
cause for divorce to proceed to establish it.

     Applying these principles to the facts of the present case we conclude that
the agreement is valid and enforceable.  Prior to the execution of the contract
the parties were living separate and apart as a result of a marital offense
committed by the husband which constituted good grounds for divorce. They had no
intention or expectation of resuming marital relations.  At the time of the
commencement of the negotiations which led to the execution of this agreement
the domestic status of the parties was unsettled and their relations
unsatisfactory.  The husband had sued for divorce and the wife had  countered
with a suit for separate maintenance and the case had been tried.  As appears
from the stipulation, the court announced its intention to deny the husband a
divorce and to  award the wife separate maintenance. The wife did not at any
time agree to obtain a divorce and the husband did not agree to aid her in
procuring a divorce by refraining from defending against an action or concealing
evidence from the court.  There is no intimation that the subsequent divorce was
collusive. In language of the court in Morrow v. Morrow, 40 Cal.App.2d 474,
482-483 [105 P.2d 129], the agreement "did not tend to interfere with the real
substantial status of their marriage contract as the parties were already
separated.  They occupied the position of husband and wife in name only.  It did
not facilitate the divorce any more than the numerous valid property settlements
which the courts of this state have recognized and approved."

   The judgment is reversed and the cause remanded with directions to enter
judgment in accordance with the views expressed herein.


                               3 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           WILLIAM O. BURT, Appellant, v. GLADYS L. BURT, Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 6365

            Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District

          187 Cal. App. 2d 36; 9 Cal. Rptr. 440; 1960 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      1352


                                December 1, 1960

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court
was Denied January 25, 1961.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Riverside
County.  Hilton H. McCabe, Judge.

   Action for divorce.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Custody of Children--Jurisdiction.  --Where the custody of children
was awarded the wife in an interlocutory divorce decree obtained by her in this
state and they were later domiciled with her in another state, the trial court,
under service of process obtained on the wife in the other state pursuant to
Code Civ. Proc., § 413, lacked jurisdiction, on her failure to appear in the
husband's subsequent action to clarify his marital status, to modify the
interlocutory decree and award partial custody of the children to him.

(2) Id.--Custody of Children--Modification of Award.  --An interlocutory divorce
decree is subject to amendment in reference to any change in custody of
children.

(3) Id.--Judgment--Denial of Divorce.  --Denial of a divorce sought by the
husband was authorized where, though it was not pleaded as a defense, he
produced undisputed evidence in reference to a former interlocutory divorce
decree obtained by the wife, that such decree was still in effect, that he
recognized it and had unsuccessfully, on several occasions, sought to obtain a
final divorce decree but was refused this demand because he had not complied
with its provisions.

(4) Id.--Judgment--Denial of Divorce.  --Where a husband's divorce complaint
merely alleged that since the marriage of the parties and since the wife's prior
interlocutory divorce decree she had treated him with extreme cruelty and
wrongfully and maliciously inflicted on him grievous mental suffering, and that
more than one year prior to the filing of his complaint she wilfully deserted
and abandoned him and continued to live separate and apart from him, but his
only testimony was that everything he "alleged in the complaint" in this respect
was true, and his corroborating witness, his present claimed wife, testified
that she had known plaintiff and was "familiar with some of the facts of cruelty
alleged in the complaint," the court was authorized to deny a divorce on this
evidence alone, since the facts stated were mere conclusions.

(5) Id.--Pleading.  --Where the husband in his divorce complaint fully set forth
the facts respecting the wife's prior divorce action and asked that his rights
be declared thereunder, he could not claim that the wife should have pleaded
this divorce action and the interlocutory decree entered therein by answer or
demurrer before the court was authorized to consider it, particularly where the
complaint showed on its face that he would be estopped from obtaining another
divorce decree by such prior proceedings.

(6) Pleading--Conclusiveness.  --A pleader is bound by the allegations contained
in his complaint.

(7) Estoppel--Pleading: Equity--Laches--Pleading.  --The rule that one who
relies on estoppel or laches as a defense must plead facts constituting such
estoppel or laches if there is an opportunity to do so, does not apply where the
facts appear on the face of the adversary's pleading.

(8) Divorce--Judgment--Interlocutory Decree--Effect.  --Although an
interlocutory divorce decree does not end the marriage relationship, and one of
the purposes of postponement of entry of final judgment is to provide
opportunity for reconciliation and resumption of marital relations,
nevertheless, after entry of the interlocutory decree and until some change is
effected either by legal act or reconciliation, the law contemplates termination
of personal relations between the parties. The law permits a separation and
recognizes it as rightful in substance.

(9) Id.--Desertion.  --To constitute a cause of action for divorce on the ground
of desertion, absence must continue for one year without the consent of the
spouse seeking the divorce.

(10) Id.--Foreign Decrees.  --The public policy of California may not permit
recognition of a foreign divorce decree when the foreign jurisdiction has no
legitimate interest in the marital status of the parties, when the sole purpose
of seeking the divorce in a foreign court is to evade the laws of this state, or
when the divorce is ex parte without reasonable notice to defendant.

(11) Id.--Foreign Decrees.  --The trial court in a divorce action properly
refused to determine the effect of a so-called divorce decree plaintiff claimed
he obtained in Mexico where he did not produce any evidence of a final Mexican
divorce decree, it did not affirmatively appear from his brief that he appeared
in person in securing the divorce or that the wife in that action was served in
any manner, neither the decree nor the applicable Mexican divorce law was
revealed in this action, and plaintiff himself testified that the Mexican
divorce decree was "of possibly some doubtful legal implications" and that there
was no final divorce decree.

(12) Marriage--Without License.  --An attempted marriage under Civ. Code, § 79,
contemplates that the marriage must be of unmarried persons living together as
husband and wife before they are entitled to the benefits of that section.

COUNSEL: William O. Burt, in pro. per., for Appellant.

No appearance for Respondent.

JUDGES: Griffin, P. J.  Shepard, J., and Coughlin, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: GRIFFIN

OPINION

     On April 20, 1959, plaintiff-appellant brought this action against his
defendant-respondent wife for divorce on the grounds of desertion, extreme
mental cruelty and for declaratory relief, and sought part-time custody of minor
children, alleging that the parties hereto were married on September 19, 1947;
that plaintiff resides in Riverside County and his wife resides in Texas; that
they separated on February 2, 1954, and there are two children the issue of said
marriage; that there was no community property, it having been divided by a
property settlement agreement and by an interlocutory decree of divorce obtained
by Mrs. Burt in Los Angeles County on May 14, 1956; and that no final decree of
divorce therein was entered.  It appears that Mr.  Burt applied for a final
decree of divorce in that action on several occasions, but it was denied due to
his being in default under the terms of the interlocutory decree.

   Plaintiff then alleges that on December 5, 1957, he obtained a divorce in
Chihuahua, Mexico, and in reliance thereon, about January 4, 1958, he was
remarried in Riverside County by a clergyman in Palm Springs.  The clergyman's
affidavit shows that plaintiff's present wife came to him and stated the legal
transactions connected with plaintiff's divorce proceedings and that after due
consideration he concluded this was a Christian marriage and should  be
solemnized without the benefit of a marriage license under Civil Code, section
79, and that such a ceremony was performed and a certificate of marriage
delivered to the parties.

   Plaintiff brought this action to clarify his marital status, either by way of
divorce or by declaratory relief. An order for publication of summons was
obtained under Code of Civil Procedure, section 413, and summons was published
and personal  service was had on defendant wife in Waco, Texas, on May 29, 1958.
She failed to appear, and the court entered her default.  After hearing some
evidence and considering the argument and points and authorities presented by
plaintiff, it found, generally, that it had jurisdiction over the parties but
not of the subject matter. It denied an interlocutory decree of divorce and
plaintiff's request for custody of the children.  Judgment was entered
accordingly.  Although it is not specifically stated, the court apparently
refused to declare plaintiff's marital status.

   Defendant failed to appear at the hearing or to file a brief on appeal.  Her
whereabouts are not indicated by the record.  The case was submitted on
appellant's opening brief and the record before us.  Plaintiff now argues on his
appeal that in the absence of a demurrer, the complaint on file would support a
default judgment in his favor; that the cause of the action for divorce here
indicated states facts arising after the interlocutory decree was entered in the
Los Angeles County case, and that he is entitled to a judgment thereunder; that
since the former adjudication was not pleaded by defendant, the court could not
recognize it, citing such authority as Stitt v. Stitt, 8 Cal.2d 450 [65 P.2d
1297]; Spitzer v. Superior Court , 74 Cal.App. 494 [241 P. 270]. It is then
claimed that where plaintiff and his former wife have separated for more than
five years and he has remarried, public policy should be to settle the matter in
this form of proceeding, citing Kirsch v. Kirsch, 119 Cal.App.2d 271 [259 P.2d
444].

     As to the finding of the trial court that it lacked jurisdiction over the
subject matter, it might well be concluded from the record that the custody of
the children was awarded to the mother in the interlocutory decree of divorce in
Los Angeles County, and they are now domiciled with the mother in Texas.  It is
apparent, under the service of process obtained, that the trial court lacked
jurisdiction to modify the interlocutory decree by this proceeding and award
partial custody of the children to plaintiff.  ( De La Montanya v. De La
Montanya, 112 Cal. 101 [44 P. 345, 53 Am.St.Rep. 165, 32 A.L.R. 82]; Dorman v.
Friendly, 146 Fla. 732 [1 So.2d 734]; In re Vanderwarker's Estate, 81 Minn. 197
[83 N.W. 538, 50 L.R.A. 663]; 16 Cal.Jur.2d 545, § 257; Code Civ. Proc., § 417.)

     The interlocutory decree in Los Angeles was subject to amendment in
reference to any change in custody. ( Marts v. Marts, 15 Cal.App.2d 224 [59 P.2d
170]; Davis v. Davis,  177 Cal.App.2d 75 [1 Cal.Rptr. 923]; 16 Cal.Jur.2d 557, §
266; Sampsell v. Superior Court, 32 Cal.2d 763 [197 P.2d 739].)

     The denial of the divorce was authorized under the facts indicated.  Even
though it was not pleaded as a defense, plaintiff produced the undisputed
evidence in reference to the former interlocutory decree of divorce in Los
Angeles County; that said decree was still in effect; that he recognized it and
had unsuccessfully, on several occasions, attempted to obtain a final decree of
divorce therein but was refused this demand because he had not complied with its
provisions.

     The evidence as to subsequent conduct of defendant bearing upon plaintiff's
claim of defendant's desertion and extreme mental cruelty was not too
convincing.  The complaint merely alleged that since the marriage of the
parties, and since  the aforesaid interlocutory divorce decree, defendant has
treated plaintiff with extreme cruelty and has wrongfully and maliciously
inflicted upon him grievous mental suffering; and that more than one year prior
to the filing of his complaint, Gladys L. Burt, in violation of her marriage
vows and without just cause or provocation, wilfully deserted and abandoned
plaintiff and has continued to live separate and apart from him.

   The only testimony of plaintiff was that everything he "alleged in the
complaint" in this respect was true.  His corroborating witness, his present
claimed wife, testified she had known plaintiff since 1956 and that plaintiff
had resided in California, to her knowledge, for three years, and that she was
"familiar with some of the facts of cruelty alleged in the complaint."

   The court was authorized to deny a divorce on this evidence alone, since the
facts stated were nothing but conclusions.  In Negley v. Negley, 82 Cal.App.2d
355 [186 P.2d 151], this court held that where the wrong complained of by the
injured spouse is grievous mental suffering with no claim of bodily injury, the
grievous mental suffering is the ultimate fact which alone will entitle a party
to a divorce and unless such mental suffering is established as a result of the
acts of the other party, a judgment awarding a divorce cannot be sustained.

   No specific acts of claimed extreme mental cruelty were alleged or proved.
Accordingly, there was no new cause of action established in this respect and
the same rule applies.

     As to the prior pending divorce action and the interlocutory decree entered
therein, plaintiff here brought this action for declaratory relief and divorce.
In his complaint,  he fully set forth the facts respecting the prior action and
asked that his rights be declared thereunder. His claim, under the decision of
Ungemach v. Ungemach, 61 Cal.App.2d 29 [142 P.2d 99], that defendant should have
pleaded this divorce action and the interlocutory decree entered therein by
answer or demurrer before the court was authorized to consider it is not
meritorious, particularly where the complaint shows on its face that plaintiff
would be estopped from obtaining another decree of divorce by such prior
proceedings.   It is the general rule that a pleader is bound by the allegations
contained in his complaint.  ( Melikian v. Truck Ins. Exchange, 133 Cal.App.2d
113 [283 P.2d 269]; 39 Cal.Jur.2d 23, sec. 14.)   In Phoenix Mutual Life Ins.
Co. v. Birkelund, 29 Cal.2d 352, 363 [175 P.2d 5], it is said the general rule
is that one who relies upon estoppel or laches as a defense must plead facts
constituting such estoppel or laches, but such rule does not apply where the
facts appear on the face of the adversary's pleading.  Plainitff concedes in his
points and authorities, "that the prior Interlocutory Judgment would be a valid
bar and estoppel as far as it goes, if it were pleaded affirmatively in this
action."

   The court was authorized to find, under the facts pleaded and proved by
plaintiff, that he was not entitled to a divorce or custody of the children in
view of the prior pending action.  ( Simmons v. Superior Court, 96 Cal.App.2d
119 [214 P.2d 844, 19 A.L.R.2d 288]; Borg v. Borg, 25 Cal.App.2d 25 [76 P.2d
218]; 18 Cal.Jur.2d, § 13, p. 412.)

   Plaintiff claims in his brief that this second action for divorce on the
grounds of desertion and extreme mental cruelty was predicated on facts arising
after entry of the interlocutory decree in Los Angeles County, and is therefore
a new matter for all intents and purposes, citing such authority as Greer v.
Greer, 135 Cal. 121 [67 P. 20]; and Greer v. Greer, 142 Cal. 519 [77 P. 1106],
which do not appear to be applicable, and Lane v.  Superior Court, 104 Cal.App.
340 [285 P. 860], where a reconciliation was involved.  Here there is no
evidence of any reconciliation.

     In 16 California Jurisprudence 2d 412-413, section 123, it is stated that:

   "Although the interlocutory decree does not end the marriage relationship,
and one of the purposes of postponement of entry of final judgment is to provide
an opportunity for reconciliation and resumption of marital relations,
nevertheless, after entry of the interlocutory decree and until some  change is
effected either by legal act or reconciliation, the law contemplates the
termination of personal relations between the parties.  The law permits a
separation and recognizes it as rightful in substance."

   See also Hirschfeld v. Hirschfeld, 165 Cal.App.2d 474 [332 P.2d 397]; Brooks
v. Brooks, 53 Cal.App.2d 95 [127 P.2d 296]; Barker v. Barker, 139 Cal.App.2d
206, 214 [293 P.2d 85].)

     In Ewing v. Ewing, 16 Cal.2d 208 [105 P.2d 586], it was said that to
constitute a cause of action for divorce, on the ground of desertion, absence
must continue for one year without the consent of the spouse seeking the divorce
. Here,  no such showing was made and under the circumstances related could not
reasonably be made.  That case further held that the wife, by her original
charge in her cross-complaint for cruelty and prayer for an absolute divorce, in
effect assented to the separation and expressed her desire to terminate the
marriage as of that date, and from the time of the amendments neither party
could justly claim that the necessary elements for desertion were present.  No
desertion was here shown as a new cause of action.

   It is true the trial court did not directly determine the effect of the
so-called Mexican decree of divorce. Suffice to say at the trial plaintiff did
not produce any evidence of a final decree of divorce in Mexico.  The only
decree in this respect was lodged with this court on June 13, 1960, as a part of
plaintiff's brief on appeal.  It recites generally:

   "The Honorable Efrain Baca Garcia, Clerk of the Third Civil Court of the
District of Bravos, State of Chihuahua, Republic of Mexico, certifies: That in
the suit for necessary divorce filed by Attorney Javier Alvarez M., as special
attorney for Mr. William Otis Burt, against Mrs. Gladys Louise Fergeson Burt, an
order -- was issued reading as follows: -- Order: 'Ciudad Juarez, Chihuahua,
august twenty-three, nineteen-hundred and fifty eight.  -- To be recorded the
writ presented by Attorney Javier Alvarez M., as special attorney for the
plaintiff in this case and as prayed, due to the fact that no appeal was
presented against the judgment issued in this action, in accordance with
provisions of Articles 38 and 39 of the Divorce Law in force, it is declared
that said judgment has become final.  Notify it.  -- Thus ordered and signed --
by the Hon. Third Civil Judge of the District of Bravos. -- attest: Samuel
Maynez.  -- E. Baca G. -- Signed.'"

   This is certified on the twenty-third day of August, 1958 to be a true and
correct copy taken from its original.

    It will be noted that it does not affirmatively appear therefrom that the
plaintiff appeared in person in securing the divorce or that defendant in that
action was ever served in any manner.  Neither the decree nor the provisions of
the Mexican divorce law applicable were revealed in the trial of this action,
and the surrounding facts in reference to the divorce proceedings are not
indicated.  Plaintiff himself testified that the Mexican decree of divorce was
"of possibly some doubtful legal implications" and that there was no final
decree of divorce between himself and Gladys L. Burt.  In Halvorsen v. Halvorsen
, 44 Cal.App.2d 211 [112 P.2d 28], this court had before it the question of the
validity of a Mexican divorce decree obtained in Tijuana, Mexico, and it was
held that a decision on the merits required not only the taking of evidence as
to the pertinent laws of Mexico but also requires the taking of considerable
evidence  as to the existing facts.   In Witkin, Summary of California Law,
volume 3, page 2607, section 58, the late cases are analyzed in comparison with
former cases which held: "A divorce obtained by the signing of documents
purporting to submit the cause to the jurisdiction of a Mexican court, where
neither party is domiciled there, is void, even though both parties sign the
consent to the decree," and said, after the decision in Scott v. Scott, 51
Cal.2d 249, 256 [331 P.2d 641]:

   "The valid judgments of courts of other countries should therefore be
respected unless they run counter to local policy.  The public policy of
California may not permit the recognition of a foreign divorce decree when the
foreign jurisdiction has no legitimate interest in the marital status of the
parties, when the sole purpose of seeking the divorce in a foreign court is to
evade the laws of this state [citation], or when the divorce is ex parte without
reasonable notice to the defendant." (Citing authorities.)

     Under the evidence here presented, the court was authorized in refusing to
give relief to plaintiff in the declaratory relief action.

     The attempted marriage under Civil Code, section 79, contemplates that the
marriage must be of unmarried persons living together as husband and wife before
they are entitled to the benefits of that section.  Under the record before us,
there is no showing that both parties were unmarried at the time.  ( Encinas v.
Lowthian Freight Lines, 69 Cal.App.2d 156, 163 [158 P.2d 575].)

    It does not appear from the facts related and the conclusions reached that
public policy demands that it should be here held that the legal status of the
plaintiff and his wife should be here determined.

   Judgment affirmed.


                               4 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              OLIVE HUDSON, Respondent, v. JAMES HUDSON, Appellant

                                S. F. No. 19886

                          Supreme Court of California

               52 Cal. 2d 735; 344 P.2d 295; 1959 Cal. LEXIS 243


                                October 5, 1959

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from an order of the Superior Court of Santa Clara
County granting temporary alimony, attorney's fees, court costs and other
relief.  M. G. Del Mutolo, Judge.

COUNSEL: George Porter Tobin for Appellant.

Haskell M. Goodman for Respondent.

JUDGES: In Bank. Traynor, J.  Gibson, C. J., Schauer, J., Spence, J., Peters,
J., and White, J., concurred.  McComb, J., concurs.

OPINION BY: TRAYNOR

OPINION

     Defendant appeals from an order granting plaintiff temporary alimony,
attorney's fees, court costs, and other relief in her action for divorce and
permanent alimony.

   The parties were married in Reno, Nevada, on May 3, 1947.  They moved to
California in 1950, and plaintiff is still domiciled in this state.  Defendant
left their home on April 6, 1957, announcing his intention to go to Reno, obtain
a divorce, and return in about six weeks.  Plaintiff filed her action on April
22, 1957, and defendant was personally served in Idaho on May 16, 1957.
Defendant filed his action for divorce in Idaho on May 21, 1957, and plaintiff
was personally served in California.  Plaintiff did not appear in the Idaho
proceeding.  On June 14, 1957, she obtained an order to show cause why she
should not be granted relief pendente lite in the California action.  On the
same day, defendant appeared by his attorney in the California action and
demurred to plaintiff's complaint.  The Idaho court granted defendant a final
decree of divorce on June 19, 1957.  Defendant introduced this decree in the
California proceeding and resisted the order to show cause on the ground that
the decree had dissolved the marriage. Plaintiff introduced evidence tending to
attack the validity of the Idaho decree. The court held that plaintiff had made
a prima facie showing that a marriage existed and granted the requested relief.

   Defendant contends that the Idaho divorce decree must be given full faith and
credit (U.S. Const., art. IV, § 1); that the trial court had no jurisdiction to
grant alimony unless the parties were married; that even though on a proper
showing a wife may obtain temporary alimony, costs, and fees to enable her to
attack an ex parte decree, plaintiff cannot, on the ground that her attack upon
the decree is weak and inconclusive; and that even if the Idaho decree did not
automatically terminate plaintiff's right to support, the order must still be
reversed on the ground that the court abused its discretion in determining the
amount of the award.

     Neither alimony, temporary or permanent, nor costs and fees can be awarded
if no valid marriage between the parties ever existed.  ( Dietrich v. Dietrich,
41 Cal.2d 497, 502-504 [261 P.2d 269]; Hite v. Hite, 124 Cal. 389, 391-395 [57
P. 227, 71 Am.St.Rep. 82, 45 L.R.A. 793]; In re Cook, 42 Cal.App.2d 1, 3 [108
P.2d 46].)   When a valid marriage is admitted, however, and the issue before
the court is the validity of an ex parte divorce, the trial court may  grant the
wife temporary alimony, costs, and fees to enable her to attack the ex parte
divorce if she demonstrates her need for the award and her husband's ability to
pay it.  ( Kopasz v. Kopasz, 34 Cal.2d 423, 424-425 [210 P.2d 846]; Baldwin v.
Baldwin, 28 Cal.2d 406, 417 [170 P.2d 670]; Gromeeko v. Gromeeko, 110 Cal.App.2d
117, 127 [242 P.2d 41].) Recent District Court of Appeal decisions would add
another condition: the wife must prove that her attack on the ex parte divorce
is made in good faith and with a reasonable probability of success.  ( Knox v.
Knox, 88 Cal.App.2d 666, 676-677 [199 P.2d 766]; Kalmus v. Kalmus, 103
Cal.App.2d 405, 420-423 [230 P.2d 57]; cf.  Ottinger v. Ottinger, 141 Cal.App.2d
220, 225 [296 P.2d 347].) The addition of this condition  is based on the theory
that the entry of a valid ex parte divorce automatically terminates the marriage
and a fortiori marital obligations and rights, including support rights.  ( Knox
v. Knox, supra, at 676.) To avoid this effect of the ex parte divorce, the wife
must demonstrate that the divorce court was without jurisdiction; only if she
can show that she is likely to succeed can her husband be required to furnish
the necessary funds.  We need not determine whether plaintiff has met this
condition, for the theory upon which it is based is inconsistent with the recent
decision of the United States Supreme Court in Vanderbilt v. Vanderbilt, 354
U.S. 416 [77 S.Ct. 1360, 1 L.Ed.2d 1456].

   Following the Williams cases ( Williams v. North Carolina I, 317 U.S. 287 [63
S.Ct. 207, 87 L.Ed. 279, 143 A.L.R. 1273] and Williams v. North Carolina II, 325
U.S. 226 [65 S.Ct. 1092, 89 L.Ed. 1577, 157 A.L.R. 1366]), the question arose
whether a valid ex parte divorce entered at the domicile of only one party to
the marriage automatically terminated the wife's right to support. This question
was settled by the theory of divisible divorce, foreshadowed in Esenwein v.
Commonwealth, 325 U.S. 279, 281-283 [65 S.Ct. 1118, 89 L.Ed. 1608, 157 A.L.R.
1396] (concurring opinion) and set forth in Estin v. Estin, 334 U.S. 541 [68
S.Ct. 1213, 92 L.Ed. 1561, 1 A.L.R.2d 1412], where the court held that an ex
parte Nevada divorce procured by the husband did not terminate the wife's prior
adjudicated right to separate maintenance: "The result in this situation is to
make the divorce divisible -- to give effect to the Nevada decree insofar as it
affects marital status and to make it ineffective on the issue of alimony. It
accommodates the interests of both Nevada and New York in this broken marriage
by restricting each State to the  matters of her dominant concern." ( Id., at
549.) Finally, in Vanderbilt v. Vanderbilt, supra, the court perfected the
divisible divorce theory by its holding that even when the wife's right to
support had not been reduced to judgment before the ex parte divorce, that
divorce could not affect her support rights.  The court rested its holding on
the due process clause: since the foreign state had no personal jurisdiction
over the absent spouse, its decree ". . . to the extent it purported to affect
the wife's right to support, was void and the Full Faith and Credit Clause did
not obligate New York to give it recognition." (Id., at 419.)  Since the due
process clause forbids the divorce court to adjudicate the absent wife's right
to support, it follows that she cannot be deprived by that court of whatever
rights of support she had under the law of her domicile at the time of the
divorce. ( Lewis v. Lewis, 49 Cal.2d 389, 394 [317 P.2d 987].)

   The crucial question in this case, therefore, is whether the law of
California permits plaintiff to obtain support following the entry of an ex
parte divorce. Of the 33 jurisdictions that have passed on this question, 23
states and the District of Columbia have held that a wife may obtain support or
alimony following the entry of an ex parte divorce. ( White v. White, 83 Ariz.
305, 307-309 [320 P.2d 702]; Wagster v. Wagster, 193 Ark. 902, 906 [103 S.W.2d
638]; Davis v. Davis , 70 Colo. 37, 41 [197 P. 241]; Hopson v. Hopson, 221 F.2d
839, 847 [App.D.C.]; Pawley v. Pawley, (Fla.) 46 So.2d 464, 471-473 [28 A.L.R.2d
1358], cert. den.  340 U.S. 866 [71 S.Ct. 90, 95 L.Ed. 632]; Durden v. Durden,
191 Ga. 404, 408 [12 S.E.2d 305] [only if wife's suit for divorce and alimony
was filed before the entry of husband's ex parte divorce]; Pope v. Pope, 2
Ill.2d 152, 156-157 [117 N.E.2d 65]; Bennett v. Tomlinson, 206 Iowa 1075, 1079
[221 N.W. 837]; Willoughby v. Willoughby, 178 Kan. 62, 65-67 [283 P.2d 428] [by
statute]; Davis v. Davis, (Ky.) 303 S.W.2d 256, 257; Parker v. Parker, 211 Mass.
139, 144 [97 N.E. 988]; Malcom v. Malcom, 345 Mich. 720, 725-727 [76 N.W.2d 831]
; Sheridan v. Sheridan, 213 Minn. 24, 27-28 [4 N.W.2d 785]; Bodie v. Bates, 95
Neb. 757, 764-770 [146 N.W. 1002, L.R.A.N.S. 1915E 421], second appeal, 99 Neb.
253 [156 N.W. 8], reversed on other grounds, 245 U.S. 520 [38 S.Ct. 182, 62
L.Ed. 444]; Woodhouse v. Woodhouse, 17 N.J. 409, 411-412 [111 A.2d 631] [by
statute];  Vanderbilt v. Vanderbilt, 1 N.Y.2d 342,  349-351 [135 N.E.2d 553] [by
statute], affirmed, 354 U.S. 416 [77 S.Ct. 1360, 1 L.Ed.2d 1456]; Armstrong v.
Armstrong, 162 Ohio St. 406, 410-411 [123 N.E.2d 267], affirmed, 350 U.S. 568
[76 S.Ct. 629, 100 L.Ed. 705]; Spradling v. Spradling, 74 Okla. 276, 277-279
[181 P. 148]; Wilford v. Wilford, 38 R.I. 55, 56-58 [94 A. 685] [contested
divorce]; Nelson v. Nelson, 71 S.D. 342, 345-346 [24 N.W.2d 327]; Toncray v.
Toncray, 123 Tenn. 476, 491-492 [131 S.W. 977, Ann.Cas. 1912C 284, 34 L.R.A.N.S.
1106]; Hutton v. Dodge, 58 Utah 228, 237 [198 P. 165]; Hicks v. Hicks, 69 Wash.
627, 630-631 [125 P. 945]; Ische v. Ische, 252 Wis. 250, 260-263 [31 N.W.2d 607,
32 N.W.2d 70].) Several of these cases rest upon familiar theories of
jurisdiction: either that the divorce court had not decided the issue of alimony
(e.g., Ische v. Ische, supra, at 260-263; Hicks v. Hicks, supra, at 630; Malcom
v. Malcom, supra, at 726), or that the divorce court, having no jurisdiction
over the wife, could not cut off her right to alimony (e.g., Armstrong v.
Armstrong, supra, at 410). The more recent cases accept the divisible divorce
theory, emphasizing the dominant concern of the wife's domiciliary state in
protecting her right to support from a husband who seeks to avoid his duties by
obtaining an ex parte divorce in a foreign state (e.g., White v. White, supra,
at 307-310; Hopson v. Hopson, supra, at 844; Pawley v. Pawley, supra, at 472;
Willoughby v. Willoughby, supra, at 66-67; Davis v. Davis, Ky., supra, at 257;
Vanderbilt v. Vanderbilt, supra, at 350-351; see also Morris, Divisible Divorce,
64 Harv.L.Rev. 1287).

   Although this precise question has not been settled in this state, certain
rules have been established in related cases.  We have held that an Illinios
wife could enforce an Illinois support order entered subsequent to her husband's
ex parte Nevada divorce ( Lewis v. Lewis, 49 Cal.2d 389, 394 [317 P.2d 987].)
Although we invoked the Vanderbilt holding in the Lewis case, we there applied
Illinois law and were not called upon to determine the force of the Vanderbilt
case upon our own law.  Similarly, in Worthley v. Worthley, 44 Cal.2d 465 [283
P.2d 19], we held that a New Jersey wife could enforce a New Jersey separate
maintenance decree entered before the husband's ex parte Nevada divorce. Again,
New Jersey law provided the rule of decision and we followed the Supreme Court's
similar holding in the Estin case.  The Estin rule was applied under California
law in a case holding that an ex parte Nevada decree did not terminate a wife's
right to receive permanent alimony awarded in a prior California interlocutory
divorce decree. ( Campbell v. Campbell, 107 Cal.App.2d 732, 734-736 [238 P.2d
81].) We have also held that a wife cannot recover separate maintenance, as
distinguished from alimony, following the entry of a valid ex parte divorce
procured by the husband.  ( DeYoung v. DeYoung, 27 Cal.2d 521, 523 [165 P.2d
457]; Kalmus v. Kalmus, 103 Cal.App.2d 405, 423 [230 P.2d 57]; Knox v. Knox, 88
Cal.App.2d 666, 676 [199 P.2d 766]; Patterson v. Patterson, 82 Cal.App.2d 838,
842-843 [187 P.2d 113]; Calhoun v. Calhoun, 70 Cal.App.2d 233, 236-237 [160 P.2d
923]. [In a second action between the same parties, the wife asked for permanent
alimony. The court held that the prior separate maintenance action was an
estoppel against the prosecution of another action for support and refused to
decide whether the wife could have originally sued for alimony. Calhoun v.
Calhoun, 81 Cal.App.2d 297, 304-305 [183 P.2d 922];] cf.  Colbert v. Colbert, 28
Cal.2d 276, 279 [169 P.2d 633].) The distinction between separate maintenance,
which depends upon an existing marriage ( Monroe v. Superior Court, 28 Cal.2d
427, 429-430 [170 P.2d 473]), and alimony, which follows the dissolution of the
marriage by divorce, is also made by several other states that permit alimony
but not separate maintenance following an ex parte divorce. ( Pawley v. Pawley,
supra,  at 474-475; compare Willoughby v. Willoughby, supra, with Lowry v. Lowry
, 174 Kan. 526, 529 [256 P.2d 869]; compare Parker v. Parker, supra, with
Chittick v. Chittick, 332 Mass. 554, 555 [126 N.E.2d 495].) In this respect,
however, a distinction must be drawn between the enforcement of a preexisting
decree of separate maintenance and the securing of a decree of separate
maintenance after a foreign ex parte divorce. Although the court cannot grant
separate maintenance to a party who is not married, it does not follow that an
existing support right formalized in such a decree automatically terminates on
the dissolution of the marriage.   "In a divorce action in a foreign state upon
constructive service the court there has authority to adjudicate status (in rem)
of a person residing in that state but has not jurisdiction to adjudicate away
(in personam) any of the then vested property rights of the absent spouse who
does not reside in such state, who is not personally served with process in that
state and who does not appear in the action.  The personal rights of the spouses
in property not within the jurisdiction of the acting court remain subject to
litigation in the proper forum. It seems to me that the right of a wife, or in a
proper case the husband,  to support from the other spouse as of the date of the
divorce is a property right which can be adjudicated only by a court having
jurisdiction in personam." (Schauer, J., concurring in DeYoung v. DeYoung, 27
Cal.2d 521, 527 [165 P.2d 457].)   If, as we have concluded, a foreign ex parte
divorce does not terminate the right to support arising out of the marriage, a
fortiori it does not terminate the right to support formally established and
defined by a valid separate maintenance decree, and that right therefore
continues until modified or terminated in appropriate proceedings.  Cardinale v.
Cardinale, 8 Cal.2d 762 [68 P.2d 351], is to the contrary, but that case was
decided before the theory of divisible divorce was established in Estin v.
Estin, supra, 334 U.S. 541, and is overruled.

   Defendant contends, however, that section 137.2 of the Civil Code requires an
existing marriage as a jurisdictional prerequisite for the granting of alimony
pendente lite.   Section 137.2, together with the other sections of the Civil
Code concerning alimony and support (§§ 136, 139) specifically authorize courts
to award alimony and support during actions for divorce or separate maintenance.
These sections, however, govern the case of a domestic divorce in which the
court has jurisdiction of both parties.  They are not concerned with a case,
such as this one, involving foreign elements.  In the normal divorce case, the
parties are of course married: if they are not married, there can be no divorce.
If defendant's Idaho decree is valid, we must give it the full faith and credit
required by the Constitution of the United States: that is, we must recognize
that the parties are no longer married and that no divorce can be granted to
plaintiff.  Once this fact is established the sections of the Civil Code invoked
by defendant become irrelevant, for they deal solely with the award of alimony
or support in divorce cases.   A wife's right to support arises from the
marriage and is recognized by statute.  ( Civ. Code, §§ 155, 174.) It is not
created by a divorce decree; the decree is simply one means of enforcing the
right.  We do not imply that plaintiff has mistaken her remedy.   At the time
her action was filed there was an existing marriage; but if the Idaho decree
dissolved the marriage, her prayer for divorce is moot and only her prayer for
permanent alimony remains to be adjudicated. The Idaho decree, even if valid,
did not and could not under the Vanderbilt decision, terminate plaintiff's right
to alimony under the law of this state.

     Defendant contends that our courts can grant alimony only in an action for
divorce, on the ground that it is only in such an action that the statutes
provide for alimony. This contention was answered adversely to defendant as
early as 1869.  In Galland v. Galland, 38 Cal. 265, a wife sued her husband for
alimony without  asking for a divorce. The statutes contained no provision for
alimony save in an action for divorce. The husband contended that the statutes
were exclusive and that the court lacked power to grant alimony in any other
case.  The court held that it had general equity powers to grant alimony in
cases aside from those specifically provided for by statute and answered the
husband's contention in these words: "The Legislature was not dealing with the
general subject of alimony, as an independent subject-matter of legislation; but
only, as one of the incidents of an application for divorce. It saw fit to
define the power of the Court over the allowance of alimony on an application
for divorce; but was not considering the subject of alimony in any other class
of cases.  If it had provided that a writ of ne exeat or distringas might issue
against a defendant in an action for divorce, it would scarcely be claimed by
any one that this was equivalent to a declaration that such writs should not
issue in any other class of actions.  For the same reason, a provision for
alimony in a suit for divorce is not to be considered as a declaration that
alimony shall not be allowed in other actions." ( Id., at 267-268. See also
Paxton v. Paxton, 150 Cal. 667, 670-672 [89 P. 1083]; Livingston v. Superior
Court, 117 Cal. 633, 634-636 [49 P. 836, 38 L.R.A. 175]; and Dunphy v. Dunphy,
161 Cal. 87, 92 [118 P. 445], allowing temporary alimony pending suit for
annulment despite the absence of express statutory authorization; cf.  Bernard
v. Bernard, 79 Cal.App.2d 353, 356-357 [179 P.2d 625].)

     In Dimon v. Dimon, 40 Cal.2d 516 [254 P.2d 528], however, a majority of
this court held that a wife's right to recover alimony or support for herself is
limited to the period when the parties are husband and wife.  The Dimon case was
decided before the Vanderbilt case and must be reexamined in the light of that
case.

   The broad proposition of the Dimon case that alimony cannot be granted if the
marriage has been dissolved cannot be denied, if the marriage was dissolved in
this state and the court had jurisdiction over both spouses. (See Long v. Long,
17 Cal.2d 409, 410 [110 P.2d 383]; Tolle v. Superior Court, 10 Cal.2d 95, 97-98
[73 P.2d 607].) But the Dimon case extended  this proposition to cover a case
where the marriage had been dissolved by an ex parte Connecticut decree procured
by the wife.  The wife's right to support from her husband had not been
adjudicated prior to the divorce decree as in the Estin case.  After Estin, but
before Vanderbilt, the argument could have been made that by terminating the
marriage the ex parte divorce automatically terminated all rights, including the
nonadjudicated right to support that grew out of that marriage. But after the
Vanderbilt case, such a proposition cannot be maintained, for it is now clear
that the ex parte proceeding does not affect the wife's support rights.  By
treating the Connecticut decree as terminating any possibility that the
plaintiff in Dimon could secure a support award in this state, we gave that
decree more weight in this state than it is now constitutionally entitled to
receive.  To follow Dimon after Vanderbilt in a case involving a foreign ex
parte divorce is to permit the court of another state to preclude the courts of
this state from deciding a question of California law that the foreign court had
no jurisdiction to determine.  Under Vanderbilt the conclusion is inescapable
that the issue of alimony which could not be decided by the divorce court,
remains open for determination in a proper forum. The Dimon case is therefore
overruled.

   The doctrine of divisible divorce set forth in Estin and Vanderbilt provides
a sensible solution to the problems engendered by ex parte divorces. Its
repudiation in this case would compel collateral attacks upon such divorces to
protect rights to support, with resulting confusion as to marital status,
property rights, rights of innocent third persons who may have relied upon the
decree, and the legitimacy of children.  (See Powell, And Repent At Leisure, 58
Harv.L.Rev. 930.) California has a dominant interest in the well-being of her
domiciliaries, and the courts of this state are open to adjudicate  their
support rights following an ex parte divorce.

     Since plaintiff may maintain her action for permanent alimony without
attacking defendant's Idaho decree, it follows that she may receive temporary
alimony, costs, and fees to enable her to continue the suit when she has shown
that she needs such relief and that defendant has the ability to provide such
assistance.  ( Sweeley v. Sweeley, 28 Cal.2d 389, 390 [170 P.2d 469].)   This
court will not upset a trial court's award of temporary alimony unless the
circumstances show as a matter of law that the court has abused  its discretion.
(Baldwin v.  Baldwin, 28 Cal.2d 406, 413, 417-418 [170 P.2d 670]; Sweeley v.
Sweeley, supra, at 393-394.)   Defendant contends that the combined income of
plaintiff and her minor son by a former marriage exceeded his own earnings by $
1,600 per year.  Defendant fails to consider, as the trial court evidently did,
that plaintiff's son was about to enter college and was unable to contribute to
his mother's support.  The evidence showed that plaintiff's expenses exceeded
her earnings by $ 63 per month; that she was making the payments on the parties'
California home; that her take-home pay was $ 70 per week, although her
husband's take-home pay had been $ 89 per week during the time the parties lived
in California and he received a pension of $ 33 per month; and that she
anticipated increased expenses in maintaining the present action.  Defendant
does not contend that he is unable to pay the modest amount of the award ($ 65
per month) ordered by the trial court.  On this record, we cannot say as a
matter of law that the trial court abused its discretion.

     Finally, defendant objects to that part of the order that restrained him
from conveying the California property.  The evidence showed that defendant had
threatened to prevent plaintiff's enjoying any of the property in the event of a
divorce and that he had prayed to have sole title to the California property
vested in him in the Idaho proceedings.  The trial court properly sought to
preserve the property until such time as the parties' rights therein could be
adjudicated; its order was not an abuse of discretion.

   The order appealed from is affirmed.

CONCUR BY: McCOMB

CONCUR

   McCOMB, J.  I concur in the order for the sole reason that, in my opinion,
the facts are analogous to those in Baldwin v.  Baldwin, 28 Cal.2d 406 [170 P.2d
670], where the controlling rule of law is stated at page 416 et seq.


                               5 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            HELEN M. GREEN, Appellant, v. HIRAM L. GREEN, Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 7067

            Court of Appeal of California, Third Appellate District

          66 Cal. App. 2d 50; 151 P.2d 679; 1944 Cal. App. LEXIS 1156


                               September 26, 1944

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of San Joaquin
County.  C. W. Miller, Judge.

   Action for possession of personal property, and for damages for its
detention.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Judgment--Res Judicata--Property Rights.  --An interlocutory
divorce decree which was awarded the wife on her uncontested cross-complaint,
and which did not refer to or determine the property rights of the spouses, was
not res judicata or a bar to her subsequent action for possession of an
automobile pursuant to the terms of a valid written agreement settling their
property rights, where her cross-complaint alleged that there was community
property and the interlocutory decree found that all allegations of said
pleading were true and sustained by the evidence, as in view of that finding it
must be assumed that there was community property subject to distribution.

(2a) (2b) Id.--Public Policy--Contracts.  --A written property settlement
agreement between husband and wife was not abandoned and the wife did not waive
her right to an automobile, set forth in said agreement, in consideration of his
oral agreement not to contest her suit for divorce, as said consideration was
against public policy and void, and hence could not be made the basis of a
summary judgment dismissing the wife's subsequent action for the possession of
the automobile.

(3) Husband and Wife--Transactions Inter Se--Property Settlement Agreements--
Effect--Enforcement.  --A valid contract settling property rights between
married persons does not require the approval of a divorce court to render it
effective. It is binding on the parties and enforceable by either of them
against the other even though the court fails or refuses to adopt or approve the
agreement by its decree.

(4) Divorce--Judgment--Interlocutory Decree--Effect on Marriage Relation.  --An
interlocutory divorce decree does not dissolve the marriage. The marriage is
dissolved only on entry of the final decree.

(5) Id.--Judgment--Interlocutory Decree--Scope of Issues--Finality of Decree.
--Where issues are properly tendered in a divorce suit with respect to the
assignment to the spouses of their respective interests in community property,
the court may determine such rights by the interlocutory decree, which, in the
absence of fraud, when so determined, becomes conclusive after the lapse of
statutory time for appeal or modification thereof.

(6) Id.--Judgment--Res Judicata--Property Rights.  --When the community
interests are not determined in an interlocutory divorce decree, the spouses are
not precluded from thereafter proving in a separate action the property to which
they are entitled by either a deed or contract or otherwise.

(7) Id.--Judgment--Res Judicata.  --An interlocutory decree in a divorce case is
conclusive and res judicata with respect to all proper or necessary issues
determined thereby.

COUNSEL: Robert Phillip Sullivan for Appellant.

John J. O'Reilly for Respondent.

JUDGES: Thompson, J.  Adams, P. J., and Peek, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: THOMPSON

OPINION

     The plaintiff, Helen M. Green, brought suit against her husband for
possession of an automobile, together with damages for detention thereof,
claiming title and the right to possession of the property under a valid written
agreement between the spouses settling their property rights. In a former suit
for divorce Helen M. Green was granted an interlocutory decree of divorce on her
cross-complaint on the ground of cruelty and she was awarded custody of their
minor child with an allowance of $ 25 per month as maintenance for the child.
The interlocutory decree failed to mention the subject of the property rights of
the parties.  No further order was made in the divorce proceeding. The final
decree of  divorce has not been rendered.  Nearly six months after the entry of
the interlocutory decree this suit for possession of the automobile was
commenced.  Defendant's motion to dismiss this action under section 437c of the
Code of Civil Procedure, on the ground that it was without merit, was granted
for the determined reason that "said Interlocutory Decree of Divorce and the
proceedings had thereunder is a bar to the complaint on file in the above
entitled action." From that judgment of dismissal this appeal was perfected.

   Mr. and Mrs. Green were married in June, 1937.  One child was born as the
issue of that marriage. The spouses were possessed of personal property of small
value, including one automobile.  Dissensions arose between them which led to
their separation.  August 22, 1941, they signed a written agreement settling
their property rights which provides that the wife "is to have the automobile
owned by them, being a Pontiac, 1939 model," in full satisfaction of all her
claims against their community property. They continued to live separate and
apart from each other.  The automobile was not delivered to her, but remains in
the possession of Mr. Green.  August 29, 1941, he commenced suit for divorce
against his  wife on the ground of desertion.  In his complaint he alleged that:

   "Since their separation they have entered into a written agreement and
mutually agreed to divide their community property, and have divided same out of
court."

   Answering that complaint, Mrs. Green denied the material allegations thereof
and alleged that her husband had breached the terms of the written agreement
settling property rights by retaining possession of and refusing to deliver to
her the automobile.  She also alleged that he deceived and defrauded her by
failing to disclose his possession of other community property, the nature and
character of which she had no knowledge.  Mrs. Green also filed a
cross-complaint for divorce on the ground of extreme cruelty.  She asked for
custody of their minor child, together with an allowance for its support.  She
also alleged "that there is community property belonging to the spouses" and
prayed for a divorce, custody of the child, an allowance for its support, and
"such disposition of the community property herein as may appear just and proper
to said Court."

   Mr. Green failed to answer the cross-complaint and his default was duly
entered.  The divorce case was tried on January 11, 1943.  Mr. Green did not
appear at the trial or contest the divorce suit of his wife.  The court
specifically found that "all and singular the allegations and matters set forth
in the cross-complaint on file herein are true and sustained by the evidence."
The court rendered an interlocutory decree on the last mentioned date granting
Helen M. Green a divorce on her cross-complaint upon the ground of extreme
cruelty and awarding to her the custody of the minor child with an allowance of
$ 25 per month for its support.  That decree provides that:

   "Plaintiff and cross-defendant take nothing by reason of his complaint
herein, and judgment herein is rendered in favor of defendant and
cross-complainant in cognizance with the above order."

   The amended complaint in this action for possession of the automobile and
damages for its detention was filed August 4, 1943.  It alleges the proceedings
previously mentioned in the former divorce case and the entry of the
interlocutory decree, together with the execution of the written agreement
settling  property rights as stated in exhibit "A" attached thereto, and a
subsequent demand upon Mr. Green and his refusal to deliver to the plaintiff the
automobile in question, which was valued at $ 900, together with damages of $ 30
per month for its detention.  The prayer asks for judgment accordingly.  Hiram
L. Green answered the complaint in this suit denying the material allegations
thereof, except that the making of the written agreement settling property
rights was admitted, but he asserts that agreement was abandoned by the terms of
a subsequent oral contract made prior to the trial of the divorce case in which
he alleges Helen M. Green "did waive any claim or right to the automobile set
forth in said property settlement agreement, provided, however, that defendant
would make no appearance or contest said cross-complaint and thereby allow
plaintiff to proceed and secure a divorce without contest; that defendant did
not appear or answer said cross-complaint as agreed."

   The plaintiff in this case thereupon gave notice and on October 18, 1943,
moved to strike out the foregoing quoted portions of the answer, under section
453 of the  Code of Civil Procedure on the grounds that they were sham,
irrelevant and redundant.  The record fails to show that that motion was
determined by the court.  The affidavit of plaintiff,  which was filed in
support of her motion to strike out said matter, avers that the parties did make
an oral agreement that this plaintiff would waive her right to the automobile
upon condition that she might select any other community property which she
desired and that, relying on said promise she refrained from asking the court to
award to her the automobile in the divorce proceeding but that upon subsequent
demand for delivery of other designated community property, Mr. Green repudiated
the last-mentioned oral agreement and refused to deliver to her any personal
property whatever.  The defendant failed to file counteraffidavits on said
motion to strike out portions of his answer, thereby admitting those alleged
facts.

   The defendant, Hiram L. Green, at the same time gave notice and moved the
court, under section 437c of the Code of Civil Procedure, to dismiss the
complaint in this action on the ground that the suit was without merit and
barred, since the title to community property was an issue in the divorce case
and the failure to distribute the community property  in the interlocutory
decree must be deemed to constitute a determination that there was no community
property subject to distribution, and that said interlocutory decree therefore
became res judicata and a bar to the maintenance of this action.  In support of
defendant's said motion to dismiss the complaint, he filed an affidavit in which
it is averred only that the written settlement of property rights was abandoned
by Helen M. Green by the terms of a subsequent oral contract in which she agreed
to "forego all of her right, title and interest in and to the community
property, . . . provided, however, that Hiram L. Green would not file an answer
or contest her action for divorce" which condition he fulfilled by refraining
from contesting her cross-complaint, or appearing at the trial.  No other ground
for dismissal of the possessory action was averred or proved.  Both motions were
heard at the same time.  The court held that "said Interlocutory Decree of
Divorce and the proceedings had thereunder is a bar to the complaint on file in
the above entitled action." Judgment was thereupon rendered dismissing this
action on the theory that the interlocutory decree is res judicata and a bar to
the maintenance of this suit.

     We are of the opinion the trial court erred in holding that the
interlocutory decree of divorce, which failed to determine the property rights
of the spouses or to refer to that subject, is res judicata or a bar to the
maintenance of this subsequent action for possession of the automobile pursuant
to the terms of the formal valid written agreement settling property rights.
This suit was therefore erroneously dismissed.

   The pleadings and proceedings of the divorce case, which were received in
evidence on this motion to dismiss the possessory action, show without conflict
that the written agreement settling property rights and vesting in Mrs. Green
title to the automobile in question was duly signed by the parties.  That fact
is conceded.  The automobile is still in the possession of the defendant.  It
may not be assumed, in support of the judgment dismissing this action, that the
interlocutory decree, which utterly fails to mention the written agreement, or
the subject of community property and which does not determine that issue, is
res judicata or a bar to this suit on respondent's theory that the omission of
said decree in that regard must be construed as an implied finding that there is
no community  property subject to distribution.  The interlocutory decree
specifically refutes that theory.  The cross-complaint, upon which Mrs. Green
was awarded a divorce on the ground of cruelty, alleged that "There is community
property belonging to said spouses." The divorce court specifically found that
"All and singular the allegations and matters set forth in the cross-complaint
on file herein are true and sustained by the evidence." In view of that finding
it may not be held there is an inference that there is no community property
subject to distribution.  For the purpose of this appeal we must assume there is
community property subject to distribution, and that the automobile was given to
the wife by the terms of the written agreement, unless it was subsequently
waived.  The only showing on defendant's motion to dismiss this action affecting
the alleged abandonment of that written agreement by the appellant is the
averment in respondent's affidavit that his wife waived her title to that
automobile in  consideration of his agreement not to contest her suit for
divorce on the ground of cruelty.  That alleged consideration for abandoning the
written agreement and for waiving her right to the automobile was clearly
against public policy and void.  In appellant's affidavit in support of her
motion to strike from defendant's answer that alleged oral agreement, she
refutes his statement in that regard.  There is therefore no competent evidence
that the written agreement was abrogated or that the appellant waived her right
to the automobile.

     A valid contract settling property rights between married persons does not
require the approval of a divorce court to render it effective.  It is binding
on the parties and enforceable by either of them against the other even though
the court fails or refuses to adopt or approve the agreement by its decree in a
divorce proceeding. ( Sanborn v. Sanborn, 3 Cal.App.2d 437, 442 [39 P.2d 830];
Roberts v. Roberts, 83 Cal.App. 345, 351 [256 P. 826]; Schnerr v. Schnerr, 128
Cal.App. 363, 368 [17 P.2d 749]; Civ. Code, §§ 158, 159; 14 So.Cal.L.Rev. 376.)

     Assuming, as the respondent alleges in his answer and as it is averred in
the affidavit on motion to dismiss this action, that the appellant orally agreed
to waive her right to the automobile as consideration of respondent's promise
not to contest her suit for divorce, that oral contract was contrary to public
policy and void.  It is uniformly held that such  an agreement to refrain from
contesting a divorce suit is absolutely void.  The latest declaration of our
Supreme Court in that regard is found in the case of Hill v. Hill, 23 Cal.2d 82,
at page 87 [142 P.2d 417], where it is said:

   "Agreements not to defend . . . a divorce action . . . have been held void as
parts of collusive arrangements to facilitate divorce."

   That concrete statement of the law is supported by numerous cited California
cases.  It is the uniform rule, founded on public policy and recognized public
interest in protecting marital relations and discouraging divorce proceedings.
That invalid consideration may not be made the basis of a summary judgment
dismissing an action for the possession of community property vested in a spouse
by the terms of a valid written agreement settling property rights.

     It is true that  section 146 of the Civil Code provides that "In case of
the dissolution of the marriage by decree of a court of competent jurisdiction,
the community property, and the homestead, shall be assigned" in the manner
therein stated.  (Italics ours.) But the interlocutory decree does not dissolve
the marriage. The marriage is dissolved only upon entry of the final decree. (
Estate of Dargie, 162 Cal. 51 [121 P. 320]; 27 Cal.L.Rev. 463.)   When issues
are properly tendered in a divorce suit with respect to the assignment to the
spouses of their interests in community property, the court may determine such
rights by the interlocutory decree, which, in the absence of fraud, when so
determined, becomes conclusive after the lapse of statutory time for appeal or
modification thereof.  ( Leupe v. Leupe, 21 Cal.2d 145, 149 [130 P.2d 697].)
When the community interests are not determined in the interlocutory decree the
spouses are not precluded from thereafter proving in a separate action the
property to which they are entitled by either a deed or contract or otherwise.
( Paduveris v. Paris, 213 Cal. 169, 172 [1 P.2d 986].) In the case last cited
the wife brought suit for divorce against her husband, incidentally alleging
that designated lots in Oakland were community property and asking that they be
assigned to her.  The defendant failed to answer the complaint and his default
was duly entered.  A decree of divorce was rendered in favor of plaintiff, but
the issue as to the character of the property in question was not  determined in
the divorce case. An interlocutory decree was accordingly entered and the final
decree was subsequently rendered.  The wife thereafter brought suit to quiet
title to the lots.  The husband answered that complaint claiming title to the
lots as his separate property. Judgment was rendered in favor of the wife.  From
that judgment the husband appealed.  The Supreme Court said:

   "The default of the defendant in the divorce action constituted an admission
of the truth of plaintiff's allegation that the property was community.  (2
Freeman on Judgments, pp. 1392, 1398.) Had the decree found in accordance with
said admission, the defendant would have been precluded from proving in a
subsequent action . . . that the property was his separate property on the date
to which the adjudication made in the divorce decree related.  [Citing cases.]
This result would  follow from an application of the general rules governing the
conclusiveness of judgments.  But an admission made by failure to answer is not
the equivalent of an adjudication.  Where the divorce decree fails   to
determine the property rights of the parties the husband is not precluded from
thereafter showing that the wife had relinquished her community interest pending
the divorce action." (Italics added.)

   The foregoing case appears to be decisive of the issue of the effect of the
interlocutory decree in the present case with relation to Helen M. Green's right
to maintain this action for title to the automobile under the written agreement
settling property rights. The Paduveris case, supra, holds that notwithstanding
the fact that the issue of the character of property and the title therefor
which were tendered in the divorce case, and regardless of the default of the
defendant, when neither the interlocutory nor final decree determines that
issue, a spouse may maintain a subsequent action to decide those questions.  In
other words, the case last cited holds that neither the interlocutory nor the
final decree of divorce becomes res judicata or a bar to a subsequent action to
recover property when the right and title thereto have not been determined by
those decrees.

   That principle is stated in Callnon v. Callnon, 7 Cal.App.2d 676 [46 P.2d
988], as follows:

   "In an action for divorce the parties may seek a determination of their
property rights; but, if they elect not to do so, such rights are not deemed
adjudicated and are subject to  determination in another proceeding.  (Brown v.
Brown, supra [170 Cal. 1 (147 P. 1168)]; De Godey v. Godey, 39 Cal. 157, 163;
Metropolitan Life Ins. Co. v. Welch, 202 Cal. 312, 315 [260 P. 545]; Tarien v.
Katz, 216 Cal. 554, 558 [15 P.2d 493, 85 A.L.R. 334]; Taylor v. Taylor, 192 Cal.
71, 75 [218 P. 756, 51 A.L.R. 1074].)"

   To the same effect are the cases of Robertson v. Robertson, 34 Cal.App.2d 113
[93 P.2d 175], and Babcock v. Babcock, 63 Cal.App.2d 94 [146 P.2d 279]. In the
case last cited it is said, quoting with approval in part from section 68 of
Restatement of the Law of Judgments, as follows:

   "Where the subsequent action is based upon a different cause of action from
that upon which the prior action was based, the effect of the judgment is more
limited.  The judgment is conclusive between the parties in such a case as to
questions actually litigated and determined by the judgment.  It is not
conclusive as to questions which might   have been but were not litigated in the
original action.  This is the doctrine of collateral estoppel.'

   "The litigation of community property rights is not essential to a divorce
action, and if they are not covered by it an adjudication may be had in an
independent action.  ( Callnon v. Callnon (1935), 7 Cal.App.2d 676, 680 [46 P.2d
988].)" (Italics added.)

   In the case of Tabler v. Peverill, 4 Cal.App. 671 [88 P. 994], which was a
suit to quiet title to real property, the decree and records of a divorce
proceeding previously determined between Mr. and Mrs. Peverill, were received in
evidence.  Mrs. Peverill brought the divorce suit without mentioning in her
complaint the real property in question.  The defendant filed a cross-complaint,
designating that land as community property. She answered the cross-complaint,
claiming the land as her separate property. Plaintiff was granted a divorce but
the real property was not assigned to either party or mentioned in the decree.
The reviewing court says in that regard: "No disposition was made [of the real
estate] in the decree." The court held that, in the absence of a disposition of
the real property by the decree of divorce, notwithstanding the fact that it was
made an issue by the pleadings, "she became a tenant in common with him and that
relation continued to the day of his death." In that suit  to quiet title it was
claimed "the property rights of the parties to the divorce action were fully and
finally determined," by the decree of divorce. In effect it was contended that
divorce decree became res judicata and a bar to the suit to quiet title to the
real property, although it was not mentioned in the decree. The appellate court
determined otherwise and answered that contention by saying:

   "It seems clear to us that the decree left the real estate undisposed of.  In
the present action we are not seeking to set aside or disturb the decree, but
only to give it effect so far as we may do so.  If it be true, as we think it
is, that the real property remained undisposed of by that decree, the parties
remained tenants in common of the real property as was pointed out."

    Upon that theory it was held, in the suit to quiet title, that the decree of
divorce was not conclusive of the title to the real property although its
character and title were tendered as issues by the pleadings.

   In reviewing the last mentioned case, in its application to the question of
res judicata, it is said in 1 Southern California Law Review at page 166:

   "There can be no doubt that, as to the specific property put before the court
for its decision, the court's judgment is res judicata. (Citing Allen v. Allen,
159 Cal. 197 [113 P. 160].) On the other hand, where the question has been
placed before the court by the pleadings and a division of the property has been
asked for but the judgment has been silent as to the status of property rights
put in issue by the pleadings, the decree merely awarding a divorce, it has been
held that the decree is not res judicata as to the property rights of the
parties." (Italics added.)

   We conclude that since the determination of property rights is not essential
to the granting of a divorce, when the issue of property rights is not urged or
proof thereof offered at the trial, even though the pleadings may contain
allegations in that regard, and the decree fails to mention that subject, the
decree is not res judicata or a bar to a subsequent suit involving that issue,
at least when it appears the prevailing party was persuaded by fraud or deceit
of her adversary, to abandon that issue at the trial.

   In the present case the appellant alleged that the reason  she did not urge
the trial court to determine her right to the automobile under the written
property settlement agreement was that Mr. Green orally promised to permit her
to select any other community property which she desired in lieu of that
automobile, and that he repudiated that agreement and refused to permit her to
do so after the interlocutory decree had been rendered.  If that be true, his
fraud prevented her from offering evidence of the validity of the written
agreement and of her right to an assignment of the machine in the divorce
proceeding.

     It is true that an interlocutory decree in a divorce case is conclusive and
res judicata with respect to all proper or necessary issues determined thereby.
When so determined the interlocutory decree has been said to be in the nature of
a contract between the parties, and upon the entry of the final decree the
rights of the parties to community property becomes final and conclusive,
subject only to attack on appeal or other statutory remedy.  ( Lopes v. Bruns,
92 Cal.App.  691 [268 P. 928].)

   In the case of Allen v. Allen, 159 Cal. 197 [113 P. 160], relied upon by the
respondent in this case, the divorce court actually found and determined by its
decree that the husband by a good and sufficient deed conveyed the land in
question to his wife and that she "was the owner of it in fee simple and
entitled to possession." Of course that was a determination of the title to that
land in the divorce decree which rendered it res judicata in a subsequent action
in which it was sought to retry that very issue.  That case is not in point.

   The same principle was determined in the case of John v. Superior Court, 5
Cal.App. 262 [90 P. 53], upon which the respondent in this case also relies.
The court said in that regard:

   "The default of the defendant was duly entered, followed on January 31, 1905,
by an interlocutory judgment, whereby it was adjudged that plaintiff was
entitled to a divorce, and that the homestead set out in the complaint was the
separate property of the plaintiff and should be set aside and awarded to him. .
. .

   "There had been a decision of all the issues of fact at the time of entering
the interlocutory judgment."

   Likewise in the case of Pereira v. Pereira, 156 Cal. 1 [103  P. 488, 134
Am.St.Rep. 107, 23 L.R.A.N.S. 880], the Supreme Court approved the findings and
decision of a divorce court assigning to the plaintiff a designated portion of
the community property to become effective "when the divorce became final." On
appeal from that interlocutory decree the Supreme Court said:

   "In the present case the court determined all the issues in one trial and
rendered an interlocutory judgment declaring the rights of the parties upon all
the issues, and providing that the same should in all respects become final only
at the time when the decree of divorce became final." (Italics added.)

   The question of res judicata was not involved in that case.  The Supreme
Court did hold that the trial judge was authorized to determine in the
interlocutory decree that the assignment of community property  would not become
effective until the final decree was rendered.  That question is not involved in
this case.  Incidentally, the refusal of the trial court in that case to
consider a purported property settlement agreement between the spouses, by the
terms of which the wife waived her claims to certain properties, was approved on
the ground that it was contrary to public policy and therefore void.   In this
case the trial court disregarded the illegality of respondent's alleged oral
agreement in which he asserted his wife waived her right to the automobile on
condition that he would not contest her suit for divorce. He failed to contest
that suit.  That was an invalid consideration and may not become the basis for a
waiver of property rights. The court therefore erroneously granted respondent's
motion to dismiss this action.  It is not barred by the decision of the
interlocutory decree.

   For the foregoing reasons the judgment is reversed.


                               6 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              SARAH ALTHEA SHARON, Respondent, v. WILLIAM SHARON,
                                   Appellant

                                    No. 9984

                          Supreme Court of California

                   67 Cal. 185; 7 P. 456; 1885 Cal. LEXIS 596


                                 June 29, 1885

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:      Rehearing 67 Cal. 185 at 214. Rehearing 67 Cal. 185 at
220.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Appeal from a judgment of the Superior Court of the city and
county of San Francisco, and from an order awarding alimony and counsel fees.

COUNSEL: Stewart & Herrin, for Appellant.

An action for a divorce is a case in equity within the meaning of the
Constitution of 1879, as well as under the prior Constitution.  The Supreme
Court has, consequently, jurisdiction of an appeal from a judgment rendered
therein.  ( Lyons v. Lyons, 18 Cal. 448; Hyatt v. Allen, 54 Cal. 353; Palache v.
Hunt, 64 Cal. 473; Brock v. Bruce, 5 Cal. 279; People v. Mier, 24 Cal. 61;
Mahlstadt v. Blanc, 34 Cal. 577; 1 Pomeroy's Eq. Jur. §§ 112, 171; Courtwright
v. Bear R. W. & M. Co. 30 Cal. 573, 585.) The order granting alimony and counsel
fees is reviewable on a direct appeal therefrom.  Such order is in the nature of
a final judgment.  ( Blake v. Blake, 80 Ill. 523; Foss v. Foss, 100 Ill. 576;
Hecht v. Hecht, 28 Ark. 92; Casteel v. Casteel, 38 Ark. 477; Lochnane v.
Lochnane, 78 Ky. 467; Golding v. Golding, 74 Mo. 123; Adams v. Woods, 18 Cal. 31
; Lewis v. Campau , 14 Mich. 458; Barry v. Briggs, 22 Mich. 201; Smith v. Walker
, 22 N. W. Rep. 267; Thompson v. McKim, 6 Har. & J. 302; Hagthrop v. Hook, 1
Gill & J. 270; Williamson v. Carnan, 1 Gill & J. 184; Ware v. Richardson, 3 Md.
505; Tucker v. Yell, 25 Ark. 420; Forgay v. Conrad, 6 How. 201; Craighead v.
Wilson, 18 How. 199; Bronson v. Railroad Co. 2 Black, 524; Thomson v. Dean, 7
Wall. 342; Trustees v. Greenough, 105 U.S. 527; Chicago & V. R. R. Co. v.
Fosdick, 106 U.S. 47.)

W. H. L. Barnes, F. G. Newlands, and O. P. Evans, also for Appellant.

Tyler & Tyler, D. S. Terry, Flournoy, Mhoon & Flournoy, and Walter H. Levy, for
Respondent.

No appeal lies from the order awarding alimony and counsel fees.  (Code Civ.
Proc.  § 939; Call v. Call, 65 Me. 407; Russell v. Russell, 69 Me. 338; Cooper
v. Mayhew, 40 Mich. 528; Sparhawk v. Sparhawk, 120 Mass. 390; Ross v. Ross, 47
Mich. 186; Gordon v. Gordon, 88 N. C. 53; Earles v. Earles, 26 Kan. 178; Webber
v. Webber, 79 N. C. 572; Mangles v. Mangels, 6 Mo. App. 481;  Jenkins v. Jenkins
, 91 Ill. 167; Lishey v. Lishey, 6 Tenn. 418; Richardson v. Curtis, 2 Gray, 497;
Adams v. Hampton, 13 Gray, 439; Williams v. Hadley, 19 Pick. 379; Tenly v.
Mahony, 21 Pick. 212.) An action for a divorce is not a case in equity under the
Constitution of 1879, and the Supreme Court has no appellate jurisdiction
therein.  ( Conant v. Conant, 10 Cal. 249; Knowles v. Yates, 31 Cal. 82; Const.
of 1879, §§ 4, 5, art. vi.; Houghton's Appeal, 42 Cal. 65; Bixler's Appeal, 59
Cal. 550; Bishop on Marriage and Divorce, § 71; Perry v. Perry, 2 Paige, 501;
Burtis v. Burtis, 1Hopk. Ch. 628; Williams v. Williams, 1 Johns. Ch. 488;
Whitmore v. Whitmore, 4 Johns. Ch. 343; Barbour v. Barbour, 21 How. 582;
Erkenbrach v. Erkenbrach, 96 N. Y. 456.

JUDGES: In Bank. Sharpstein, J.  Ross, J., Myrick, J., Thornton, J., and
McKinstry, J., concurred.  McKee, J., dissenting.

OPINION BY: SHARPSTEIN

OPINION

     The order to show cause why all proceedings upon the order of the court
below for the payment of alimony and counsel fees should not be staid, pending
the appeals from the order and judgment, and the motions to have said appeals
dismissed, devolve upon us the consideration and determination of the following
questions: --

   1. Has this court appellate jurisdiction in actions of divorce?

   2. Can the order for the payment of alimony and counsel fees be reviewed on
an appeal from the judgment?

   3. Can this court entertain jurisdiction of the direct appeal from that
order?

   Although this court has, during a period almost coeval with its existence,
heard and determined appeals in divorce cases, its jurisdiction to do so has not
until now been sharply challenged.  In Conant v. Conant, 10 Cal. 250, the
appellate jurisdiction was disputed only in cases in which no question of
property was involved.  With that exception, the complete appellate jurisdiction
of this court in such cases appears to have been uniformly acquiesced in.

   The first Constitution conferred appellate jurisdiction on this court in all
cases in which the matter in dispute exceeded $ 200; the next, "in all cases in
equity," and the present Constitution likewise confers appellate jurisdiction on
this court "in all cases in equity." Appellate jurisdiction in other enumerated
cases was and is conferred, but the jurisdiction of this court of an  action of
divorce, in our opinion, depends on its being, in this State, at least, a case
"in equity." The first Constitution prohibited the granting of divorces by the
legislature, but did not confer the power to grant them on any court, unless the
conferring of "jurisdiction in law and equity in all civil cases," on the
District Courts, conferred it on those courts.  And in the earliest reported
case of divorce to which our attention has been directed,  the first pleading on
the part of the plaintiff is denominated, in the opinion of the court, "a bill
filed for a divorce." ( Kashaw v. Kashaw, 3 Cal. 312.) And in Fuller v. Fuller,
17 Cal. 605, the court denominates the complaint "a bill for divorce." There was
then, as now, but one form of civil actions in this State, and the first
pleading on the part of the plaintiff was then, as now, "a complaint." In equity
cases, however, but in none other, so far as we are advised, the courts of this
State sometimes, and not infrequently, refer to the first pleading on the part
of the plaintiff as "a bill."

   Under the first Constitution, as before stated, the appellate jurisdiction of
this court embraced all cases, when the matter in dispute exceeded $ 200.  No
distinction was made between cases in equity and at law.  But in Conant v.
Conant, 10 Cal. 249, this was construed to mean what is clearly expressed in
subsequent Constitutions, viz., "appellate jurisdiction in all cases in equity,"
and in certain enumerated cases at law.  The court, Field, J., delivering the
opinion, said: "It never could have been the intention of the framers of the
Constitution to deny to the higher courts both original and appellate
jurisdiction in that large class of cases where the relief sought is not
susceptible of pecuniary estimation."

   In Lyons v. Lyons, 18 Cal. 447, the court filed no findings of fact or
conclusion of law, and it was contended by the appellant's counsel that it
constituted a sufficient ground for the reversal of the judgment.  But this
court, Cope, J., delivering the opinion, said: "This is a suit in equity, and
the only error assigned is that there are no findings to support the judgment."
He then cites Walker v. Sedgwick, 5 Cal. 192, in which it was held that the
statute which required findings to be filed did not apply to cases in equity.

   These cases all arose and were decided before any change had  been made in
the original Constitution.  And when revised it clearly expressed what it had
before been construed to mean.  From the time of that revision down to the date
of the adoption of the present Constitution this court entertained appeals in
divorce cases, and its jurisdiction to do so does not appear to have been
questioned.  And we are bound to presume that when the framers of the present
Constitution literally copied from the late Constitution the clause defining
appellate jurisdiction of this court in cases in equity, they knew how it had
been construed, and intended that it should thereafter be construed as it
theretofore had been.  "It is a safe rule of construction that, when framing the
organic law of the State, the convention thought proper to borrow provisions
from the Constitutions of other States, which provisions had already received a
judicial construction, they adopted the provisions in view of such construction
and acquiesced in its correctness." ( People v. Coleman, 4 Cal. 46.) A fortiori,
when a clause in an earlier Constitution,  after having received a judicial
construction, is copied into a later one of the same State.

   It is, however, contended, that while there is no difference between the
clauses of the late and present Constitutions, which define the appellate
jurisdiction  of this court in equity cases, its jurisdiction in divorce cases,
if it ever had any, is taken away by the clause in the present Constitution
which defines the jurisdiction of Superior Courts, and which expressly confers
on them original jurisdiction "in actions of divorce."

   In support of that theory it is said that the common law of England prevails
here, except so far as it is superseded or modified by some statute or
fundamental law of our own, and that at common law no court could grant a
divorce a vinculo, Parliament alone having that power.  Therefore it is claimed
that no court, in the absence of some statutory or constitutional provision
expressly conferring that jurisdiction upon it, can exercise original or
appellate jurisdiction in divorce cases; that in analogy to the procedure in
England the legislatures of the several States of the United States, in the
absence of any statutory or constitutional provision on the subject, would
possess the exclusive power to grant divorces a vinculo, in their respective
States; and that this gives great significance to the action of  the late
constitutional convention, in conferring upon Superior Courts original
jurisdiction of actions "of divorce," eo nomine, and in omitting any express
mention of them in the clause which defines the jurisdiction of this court.  The
effect claimed for this is that it confers on the Superior Courts a jurisdiction
which their predecessors the District Courts exercised under Constitutions which
did not expressly confer on them jurisdiction in divorce cases; and deprives
this court of a jurisdiction which it exercised unchallenged for fifteen years,
basing its right to do so upon a constitutional provision, of which a literal
copy may be found in the present Constitution.

   It is true that divorces a vinculo matrimonii in Great Britain were, at least
for a long time prior to 1858, granted by act of Parliament exclusively; but it
is not quite so clear that such divorces were not at one time granted by the
High Court of Chancery, which borrowed its jurisdiction from the aequitas and
judicial powers of the Roman magistrates.  In Wightman v. Wightman, 4 Johns. Ch.
343, Chancellor Kent says: "All matrimonial and other causes of ecclesiastical
cognizance belonged originally to the temporal courts (vide the case of
Legitimation and Bastardy, Sir J. Davis' Rep. 240, and his argument in the case
of Praemunire, 273); and when the spiritual courts cease, the cognizance of such
causes would seem as of course to revert to the lay tribunals." From the
argument in the Praemunire case above cited we extract the following paragraph:
--

   "First, then, let us see when this distinction of ecclesiastical or spiritual
causes from civil and temporal causes did first begin in point of jurisdiction.
Assuredly for the space of 300 years after Christ this distinction was not known
or heard of in the Christian world.  For the causes of testaments, of matrimony,
of bastardy, and adultery and the rest, which are called ecclesiastical or
spiritual causes, were merely civil and determined by the rules of the civil
law, and subject only to the jurisdiction of the civil magistrate as all
civilians will testify with me."

    Gibbon says: "The magistrates of Justinian were not subject to the authority
of the church; the emperor consulted the unbelieving civilians of antiquity; and
the choice of matrimonial laws in the Code and Pandects is directed by the
earthly motives of justice, policy, and the natural freedom of both sexes."

    It is clear, therefore, that in Roman jurisprudence divorce cases were heard
and determined by the civil magistrates, who had jurisdiction of cases both at
law and in equity as we now distinguish them.

   "In the reign of Richard II., the barons formally declared that they would
not suffer the kingdom to be governed by the Roman law; and the common-law
judges prohibited it from being any longer cited in their courts.  This action
was certainly a mistake, and it produced an opposite effect from the one
intended.  The Roman law instead of being banished was simply transferred to
another court which was not governed by common-law doctrines.  As the law courts
cut themselves off from all opportunity of borrowing equitable principles from
this foreign source, the necessity arose for a separate tribunal in which those
principles could be recognized.  It therefore followed immediately upon this
prohibition that the hitherto narrow jurisdiction of the Court of Chancery was
greatly increased, and extended over subject-matters which required an ample and
constant use of Roman law doctrines." (1 Pomeroy's Eq. 20.) It would not
necessarily follow from this that the Court of Chancery succeeded to all the
powers of the Roman magistrates, except those which the common-law courts were
administering; but it does seem to us that the Court of Chancery might, unless
prohibited by act of Parliament, have exercised jurisdiction in matrimonial as
well as in other causes.  And there is some evidence of its having done so.
"Tothill, in his transactions of the Court of Chancery, states that there are on
the rolls of the court two decrees for divorce (but of what description he does
not mention) in the time of Henry VIII., and two in the time of Elizabeth, after
verdicts in the Court of Queen's Bench, I presume for adultery.  I have been
unable to discover them even with the help of Mr. Munro.  It is not unlikely,
however, that the Court of Chancery under its clerical chancellors exercised
jurisdiction to decree a divorce a vinculo matrimonii." (1 Spence's Eq. 702.)
The first edition of Tothill's book was published in 1649, and as he is styled a
"famous lawyer," it is highly probable that what he relates as having occurred
not long before the time in which he lived actually took place.

   Conceding, however, the fact to be otherwise, it is quite clear that the
civil courts did not decline such jurisdiction because it  had been conferred on
the spiritual courts.  If those courts ever claimed the power, they never, after
a date long anterior to the Reformation, attempted to decree a divorce a vinculo
matrimonii.  For more than 200 years, at least prior to a recent date, when the
divorce court was  established in England, marriage was there treated as a
status or condition which was indissoluble except by death or act of Paliament.

   "But the marriage status is entered into through the door of an ordinary
contract; and for avoiding ordinary contracts, the jurisdiction of equity
extends to all questions of fraud, mistake, duress, and lunacy.  Hence, when an
impediment of this sort intervenes, and jurisdiction for nullity has been
conferred on no court by statute, our equity tribunals will entertain the
complaint and declare the marriage void.  Equity in England will not do this,
because formerly there was an express jurisdiction in the ecclesiastical courts,
and now there is in the divorce courts." (2 Bishop on Marriage and Divorce, §
291.)

   Now, as before the statute permitting divorces by courts, the contract is to
assume the duties and obligations of matrimony.  The contracting parties cannot
limit those duties or obligations, nor expressly provide that their binding
force shall last for a period other than life.  But the duties and obligations
are assumed only by the mutual consent of the parties, and marriage itself is
often spoken of by law-writers and judges (without material inaccuracy) as a
"civil contract." Assuming, however, the marital status, into which the parties
enter through a contract, is itself more than or different from ordinary
contracts, yet when the legislature of this State provided that the relations
between husband and wife, previously indissoluble, might be terminated as the
result of a judicial proceeding, the nature of the status was, to that extent,
modified, and it assumed the character of a contract, from future compliance
with the obligations of which the parties cannot indeed release each other, but
from which they may be relieved by the decree of an appropriate tribunal. Under
the statute the marriage state is subject to termination by judicial decree.
This element of possible disseverance affects the contract because the parties
marry in view of a possible divorce, and the decree of divorce operates on the
contractual relations by relieving the spouses of the duties they have  assumed
towards each other by or through a contract.  The power to divorce, which, save
for the prohibition of the Constitution, could have been exercised by the
legislature, has become judicial.  Courts of equity have jurisdiction to decree
or declare dissolution of copartnerships, and of other like contracts entered
into to continue indefinitely, where there are mutual and continuing conditions.
It would seem there could be little doubt that, when marriage has been deprived
of its quality of indissolubility, and no special tribunal has been created for
divorce cases, courts of equity should assume cognizance of such actions.
Courts of equity have always exercised an analogous jurisdiction; their modes of
procedure are adapted to the inquiries involved, and their decrees are more
specific and flexible than the ordinary law judgments.

   It is therefore not surprising that this court should have uniformly regarded
actions of divorce as "cases in equity."

   The fact that it did so regard them is too clear to admit of doubt, and that
being so, its reasons  for so regarding them are not now important.  Our
position is that for a period of thirty years next preceding the adoption of the
present Constitution, actions of divorce were uniformly held to be "cases in
equity," and that the framers of the present Constitution were aware of that
when they conferred on this court jurisdiction "in all cases in equity."

   On the other hand, it is contended that the framers of the present
Constitution manifested their intention to effect a material change in that
respect by conferring original jurisdiction on the Superior Court in actions of
divorce eo nomine, and omitting to confer appellate jurisdiction in divorce
cases eo nomine on this court.

   But it conferred no other or greater jurisdiction on the Superior Courts in
divorce cases than their predecessors the District Courts had exercised from the
first under Constitutions in which no special mention was made of such cases.
And from 1873 down to the date of the adoption of the present Constitution there
was no statute in force which expressly conferred such jurisdiction on the late
District Courts.  The language of the Code was and is that, "marriage may be
dissolved: --

   "1. By the death of either of the parties; or

    "2. By a divorce adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction."

   To ascertain what court had "competent jurisdiction" it was necessary to
consult the Constitution, which simply declared that "the District Courts shall
have original jurisdiction in all cases in equity," etc.  Why original
jurisdiction in actions of divorce was not expressly conferred by the Code, as
it had previously been by statute, on the District Courts, we will not attempt
to explain.  But from January 1, 1873, down to the time when the present
Constitution went into effect, the District Courts derived whatever jurisdiction
they had in divorce cases from the same source that this court has always
claimed to derive its jurisdiction in such cases, viz., the Constitution.  Nor
can we satisfactorily explain why the words "of divorce and for the annulment of
marriage," which are not to be found in either of the earlier Constitutions,
were inserted in the present Constitution.  They give the Superior Courts no
greater or other jurisdiction in such cases than their predecessors, the
District Courts had exercised under both of the former Constitutions, neither of
which contained those words.  And we cannot adopt the suggestion that they were
inserted in the clause defining the original jurisdiction of the Superior Courts
, for the purpose of curtailing the appellate jurisdiction of this court.  That
is not the way in which the framers of Constitutions and laws express their
intentions.  If the intention had been to take from this court the jurisdiction
which it had previously exercised in divorce cases, the very clause, under
which, for a period of seventeen years, it had claimed such jurisdiction, would
not have been copied verbatim.

   But while entertaining no doubt of the appellate jurisdiction of this court
in divorce cases, pure and simple, it is at least pertinent to remark that this
is not simply an action of divorce. Section 78 of the  Civil Code provides: "If
either party denies the same, or refuses to join in a declaration thereof, the
other may proceed by action in the Superior Court to have the validity of the
marriage determined and declared." The first count of the complaint or separate
statement of a cause of action herein, after alleging in three paragraphs, the
residence of plaintiff, her marriage with defendant, their cohabitation as
husband and  wife, and that on the 25th of August, 1880, they jointly made a
written declaration of marriage, proceeds to aver that, about the 21st of
November, 1881, "the defendant demanded of plaintiff a surrender to him of said
declaration of marriage, and threatened plaintiff with personal violence in case
she refused to comply with said demand; refused to recognize his said marriage
with plaintiff, drove the plaintiff away from him, and refused to live or
cohabit with her unless she complied with his demand; and the defendant, for
more than one year last past, has not lived with plaintiff, nor has he requested
her to return to or live with him, thereby wilfully deserting the plaintiff."
The answer denies the marriage and execution of the declaration.  The prayer of
the plaintiff is that "her marriage with said defendant may be declared legal
and valid, and that she may be divorced,"  etc.  If the plaintiff had utterly
failed to prove any cause for divorce she would have been entitled to a decree
declaring the alleged marriage valid, if the evidence established the fact of
marriage. An action to have the validity of a disputed marriage determined and
declared, under section 78 of the Civil Code, is in its nature a suit in equity.
Such an action is not a "special proceeding," for even if it should be conceded
that the right was newly created, no special proceedings for enforcing it are
provided by the statute.  The judgment herein in effect responds to the prayer
of the complaint and declares that the alleged marriage was a valid marriage.
From that portion of the decree, in any view of the case, an appeal lies.

   If the order for the payment of alimony and counsel fees is in the nature of
a final judgment, it is appealable. It certainly possesses all the essential
elements of a final judgment. Nothing remained to be done except to enforce it,
and for that purpose an execution might issue and be proceeded on, as if the
judgment had been rendered in an ordinary action for the recovery of a specific
sum of money.  Although the pendency of an action for divorce constituted the
basis is of the order, it was no part of the relief demanded by the plaintiff in
her complaint.  She might at any time during the pendency of the action have
applied to the court for such an order.  And if granted it would not be affected
by subsequent proceedings in the action.  Its validity would not depend in any
way on the result of the action.  If  the court had afterward found that the
marriage relation never existed between the parties, that would not have
affected the order for the payment of temporary alimony. It would have afforded
good ground for vacating it.  It was to all intents and purposes, "a final
judgment entered in an action." Quite as much so as the decree of divorce in
this case in which "the question of property" is reserved for future
consideration, "with leave to the plaintiff to apply upon the coming in of the
referee's report . . . . for a future and final decree." But it has not been
suggested that the decree appealed from is not a final judgment in the action.
It is final upon the questions adjudicated in it, and the order for the payment
of temporary alimony is a final judgment upon all the questions adjudicated in
it.

   A final judgment is not necessarily the last one in an action.  A judgment
that is conclusive of any question in a case is final as to that question.  The
Code provides for an appeal from a final judgment, not from the final judgment
in an action.  In some of the States the question has been directly passed upon
by the courts, some holding that such orders are, and others that they are not
appealable. Of course, it rarely happens that the constitutions and statutes
relating to appeals are precisely alike in any two States.  But the reasons
given by the courts for holding that appeals might or might not be taken from
such orders in their respective States are worthy of consideration.

   In Lochnane v. Lochnane, 78 Ky. 468, the court says: "That an appeal may be
taken from a decree making an allowance to support the wife pending a suit for
divorce cannot be questioned.  It possesses all the essential elements of a
final judgment. It may be enforced by rule or execution, and is in every respect
independent of the final determination of the court as to the rights of the
party in regard to the question of divorce." In Hecht v. Hecht, 28 Ark. 92, it
was contended by the appellee that, inasmuch as the original suit between the
parties was still pending in the Circuit Court, no appeal would lie to the
Supreme Court from an order granting alimony and counsel fees until a final
decree in the suit had been rendered.  The court said: "Section 4, article vii.,
of the Constitution provides, that final judgment in the inferior courts may be
brought by writ of error or by appeal into the Supreme Court, in such manner as
may  be prescribed by law.  It is not necessary for us, in the determination of
this case, to construe this and section 15 of the same article.  The order or
judgment of the court is not, strictly speaking, an interlocutory one.  While it
may be true that a petition for alimony and attorneys' fees could not be brought
as a separate and independent suit, yet it is also true that such an application
and order for an allowance pendente lite, especially such a one as is made in
this case, is, so far as it affects the rights of this appellant in its
consequences, wholly independent of his suit for divorce. This is a definitive
judgment, from which the appellant can have no relief by the final decree, even
though it should appear that injustice had been done to him.  By due process on
the execution the money will have been collected and paid over to the parties in
whose favor it is awarded, and its recovery will have passed beyond the power of
the court.  It is true that the allowance of alimony and other necessary costs
is discretionary with the court trying the case, and will be interfered with by
this court only upon the clearest proof that there has been a palpable abuse of
that discretion.  Yet when there has been such abuse which affects the
substantial rights of a party, we are of the opinion that he can have redress by
appeal to this court."

    In Golding v. Golding, 74 Mo. 123, an appeal was taken to the Supreme Court
from the judgment of the St. Louis Court of Appeals, affirming a judgment of the
Circuit Court of St. Louis County granting a decree of divorce to plaintiff, and
allowing to her, as alimony, the gross sum of $ 15,000.  The Supreme Court had
no jurisdiction in divorce cases, when taken there by appeal from the St. Louis
Court of Appeals, to pass upon the question whether the decree granting a
divorce was justified by the evidence, and it was contended for the respondent
that that provision of the Constitution which permitted appeals in cases where
the "amount in dispute exclusive of costs exceeds $ 2,500," had no application,
"because the divorce was the matter in dispute, and the alimony was but an
incident to the dispute." But the appellate court held against the respondent on
the point and reviewed the award of alimony.

   In Blake v. Blake, 80 Ill. 532, the Supreme Court of that State in ruling
upon a motion exactly like the one now under  consideration said: "The question
raised is one that has never been passed upon by this court, but upon first
impression we are of opinion the appeal will lie.  It is a money decree, is for
a specific sum, and is payable absolutely.  No execution has been as yet
awarded, but the court has the undoubted authority to award an execution, or, if
payment was wilfully and contumaciously refused, the decree might be enforced by
attachment as for contempt, or payment might be coerced by sequestration of real
or personal estate.  By one mode or the other the decree could be enforced, and
if defendant has property, it could, in some way consistently with the practice
in Courts of Chancery be subjected to its payment.  Such a decree does not seem
to us to be merely interlocutory. It is more in the nature of a final decree,
and if no appeal lies, this case affords an instance of a money decree against a
party from which no relief can be had, no matter how unjust or oppressive.  This
ought not to be.  It is no answer to this position to say, defendant can have
this decree against him reviewed on appeal or error, after final decree in the
original cause.  Of what avail would that privilege be to him then?  The
litigation might be protracted, and years elapse before any  final decision
could be reached.  In the meantime, he has been imprisoned for disobedience to
the decree, or his property under process of law been subjected to the payment
of the sum decreed.  Nor does the fact an appeal is allowed impose any hardship
not incident to other money decrees from which appeals may be prosecuted.  On
the theory alimony is for the immediate benefit of the wife, to enable her to
prosecute or defend her suit against her husband on terms of equality, the only
serious result would be to delay the litigation until the propriety of the
decree for temporary alimony and solicitors' fees could be determined in the
appellate court.  On the contrary, if an appeal should be denied, it might
subject defendant to very great hardships in many cases, as the sequel will
show.  It is apprehended there can be no decree against a party that will work a
deprivation of his property or liberty, from which no appeal or writ of error
will lie.  Such is the decree against defendant.  Under it he may be deprived of
his liberty, or his property subjected to levy and sale."

    The statute then in force in that State in relation to appeals was not
substantially different from our own.

   The reasoning of the Illinois court becomes much stronger when applied to the
present case,  where the main controversy between the parties is the question of
marriage. It is, of course, indispensable to the granting of alimony at all,
that the relation of husband and wife, in fact, exist.  We are of opinion,
therefore, that the order in question is in its legal effect a judgment and
appealable as such.  Indeed, the very section of the Code of Procedure under
which execution was directed to be issued placed such order upon the same plane
as a judgment.  It reads: "Whenever an order for the payment of a sum of money
is made by a court, pursuant to the provisions of this Code, it may be enforced
by execution in the same manner as if it were a judgment." And by section 942 of
the same Code it is provided that "if the appeal be from a judgment or order
directing the payment of money, it does not stay the execution of the judgment
or order, unless a written undertaking be executed on the part of the
appellant," etc.  Such undertaking was executed in this case, and wrought a stay
of proceedings under the order.

   As the order for the payment of alimony and counsel fees is an appealable
order, it cannot be reviewed on the appeal from the judgment decreeing a divorce
.

   Motions to dismiss the appeals from the judgment and from the order for the
payment of alimony and counsel fees are denied.  And it is ordered that all
proceedings upon the last named order and the judgment be stayed pending said
appeals.

DISSENT BY: McKEE

DISSENT

   McKee, J., dissenting.  I dissent.  Two appeals have been taken in the case;
one from the final judgment of divorce entered on the 19th of February, 1885,
the other from an order made on the 16th of February, 1885, awarding to the
plaintiff in the action alimony and counsel fees.  To render his appeals
effectual appellant has obtained from this court an order requiring respondent
to show cause why, pending the appeals, all proceedings upon the judgment and
order appealed from should not be  staid.  This rule for a stay of proceedings
has been met by a counter-motion to dismiss the appeals, upon two grounds, viz.:
That the order is not appealable, and that no appellate jurisdiction of
judgments of divorce has been given by law to this court.  If these grounds be
well taken they constitute sufficient cause against granting a stay of
proceedings.

   The order appealed from was made before the entry of judgment.  An order made
before judgment in a cause is interlocutory; that is to say, it is an order made
between the commencement of the action and its final determination, incident to
and during the progress of the action, which decides not the cause, but only
some intervening matter relating to the cause.  (2 Abb. Dict. 637.) Under the
Code law of the State an appeal is the only mode in which a judgment or an order
in a civil action can be reviewed.  An interlocutory order is, therefore, not
reviewable, except by an appeal directly from it, or from the judgment  in the
cause under the conditions specified in section 956 of the Code of Civil
Procedure.

   The right of appeal is entirely statutory.  By chapter 1, title xiii., of the
Code of Civil Procedure, the legislature has enumerated and defined the
character and nature of the cases permitted to be appealed from the Superior
Court to this court.  These are: --

   "Section 939.  An appeal may be taken: --

   "I.  From a final judgment in an action or special proceeding commenced in
the court in which the same is rendered, within one year after the entry of
judgment; but an exception to the decision or verdict, on the ground that it is
not supported by the evidence, cannot be reviewed on appeal from the judgment
unless the appeal is taken within sixty days after the rendition of the
judgment.

   "II.  From a judgment rendered on appeal from an inferior court, within
ninety days after the entry of such judgment.

   "III.  From an order granting or refusing a new trial; from an order granting
or dissolving an injunction; from an order dissolving or refusing to dissolve an
attachment; from an order granting or refusing to grant a change of the place of
trial; from any special order made after final judgment, and from an
interlocutory judgment in actions for partition of real property, and from an
order confirming, changing, modifying, or  setting aside the report, in whole or
in part, of the referees in actions for partition of real property, in the cases
mentioned in the provisions in section 763 of this Code, within sixty days after
the order or interlocutory judgment is made and entered in the minutes of the
court, or filed with the clerk."

   All orders made in a case before judgment, other than those enumerated are,
therefore, unappealable; for as the remedy by appeal is purely statutory, the
right cannot be extended to cases not included within the statute.  Assuming,
therefore, that the order appealed from is an interlocutory order, as it is not
one of the interlocutory orders designated in the Code, to which the remedy of
appeal attaches, no appeal can be taken from it.  This is the settled law as to
appeals from interlocutory orders; and it is applicable alike to all cases of
law or equity.  (Rhodes' Cal. Digest, vol. 1, pp. 31-33; Broadribb v. Tibbets,
60 Cal. 412; McNevin v. McNevin, 63 Cal.  186; Holmes v. McCleary, 63 Cal. 497;
People v. Markham, 64 Cal. 157; Emeric v. Alvarado, 64 Cal. 529, and Beach v.
Hodgdon, 66 Cal. 187.)

   But the contention is, that as the order in this case commands payment of a
large sum of money, it is more than interlocutory -- it possesses the force and
dignity of a final judgment, because the Code provides ( § 137, Civ. Code) that
it may be enforced by execution; and being enforceable by execution it is
equivalent to a final judgment, which is appealable.

   If that position were maintainable, the giving of the requisite undertaking
on appeal, as from a money judgment in a case, would itself operate under
section 940 of the Code of Civil Procedure, as a stay of proceedings; and this
court could, in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction, in case of failure
or omission to file a proper undertaking on appeal, permit the appellant to
perfect his appeal by filing a new undertaking.

   But section 940, and those sections of the Code which follow it, have no
reference to non-appealable orders; they regulate the mode of appealing from
final judgments, and appealable orders in suits at law or in equity.

   Besides, the interlocutory character  of the order appealed from is not
changed by the fact that it commands payment of a large sum of money.  Nor is it
affected by the provision of the Code as to the process by which it may be
enforced.  It is the execution  that may be issued upon the order to which the
Code gives the same legal effect as if issued upon a final judgment; but it does
not give to the order the effect of a final judgment. The order is unchanged in
its nature by the remedy adopted for enforcing it, and the execution is given
merely as an additional remedy for that purpose.  As an additional remedy the
court making the order is not bound to resort to it.  Especially in actions of
divorce it is left to the discretion of the court to enforce an order made
pendente lite by execution, or by proceedings for contempt for not complying
with it, or by requiring reasonable securities for making the payment of the
money, or by the appointment of a receiver, or by any other remedy applicable to
the case.  ( § 140, Civ. Code.) As remedies for the enforcement of an order
pendente lite, these with the exception of the remedy by execution are not
prescribed by the Code for the enforcement of a money judgment.

   Moreover, a judgment is the final sentence of the law in an original suit; a
money judgment is a legal demand or a record debt upon which suit may be
brought.  The money order in this case is for alimony. Alimony is not an
original suit; it arises out of some other suit in which a marriage de facto is
confessed or proved.  The allowance of alimony, pending such a suit, is not a
debt; it is a legal liability which arises out of the obligation imposed by law
upon every married man to contribute to the support of his wife.  When the fact
of marriage is judicially ascertained the jurisdiction of the court to award
alimony, pendente lite, as incidental to the suit before it, may be called into
exercise by the motion of the wife; and the court, in the exercise of its
jurisdiction, may award it out of the community property, or the separate
property of the husband.  ( § 141, Civ. Code.) In making the award the court
acts upon the principle that the husband and wife are jointly interested in the
property and fortunes of the community, and that one is as much entitled as the
other to maintenance and support out of it during the proceedings between them
for a separation.  So that allowing the wife alimony is only awarding her what
she is as a wife lawfully entitled to.  Her rights of property in the community
estate are vested until divested by a judicial decree, which dissolves the
marriage status, and makes distribution of the estate.  Given,  therefore,
jurisdiction of the parties to an action of divorce by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the court also acquires jurisdiction of the estates and income of
the husband for the purpose of compelling the husband to support the wife
pending the action.  Section 137 of the Civil Code provides:

   "While an action for divorce is pending the court may, in its discretion,
require the husband to pay as alimony any money necessary to enable the wife to
support herself or her children, or to prosecute or defend the action.  When the
husband wilfully deserts the wife, she may, without applying for a divorce,
maintain in the Superior Court an action against him for permanent support and
maintenance of herself, or of herself and children.  During the pendency of such
an action the court may, in its discretion, require the husband to pay as
alimony any money necessary for the prosecution of the action and for support
and maintenance, and executions may issue therefor in the discretion of the
court.  The final judgment in such action may be enforced by the court by such
order or orders as in its discretion it may from time to time deem necessary,
and such order or orders may be varied, altered, or revoked at the discretion of
the court."

   And when the court in the exercise of its discretionary power ascertains and
fixes the amount of the alimony and awards it to the wife, the right to the
amount awarded attaches to her and becomes vested in her as a right, and there
arises a corresponding duty on the part of the husband to pay it to her.  The
order binds both the right and the duty; and as an order made in the exercise of
a discretionary power, it is not, in its nature, or the remedy adopted for its
enforcement, subject to the control of this court.  It is not a debt which the
husband is required to pay.  It is a duty which he is bound to perform.  ( Chase
v. Ingalls, 97 Mass. 274.) This is the settled law of the question of alimony
pendente lite in an action of divorce.

   In Miller v. Miller, 75 N. C. 71, the Supreme Court of North Carolina says:
"The statute relating to divorce and alimony proceeds upon the natural duty of
the husband to support the wife as well before as after divorce, and must be
liberally construed to express that duty.

   "Alimony is not itself an 'estate' in a technical legal sense of the word,
nor is it necessarily a charge upon the husband's  estate.  He may have no
estate.  But alimony is a mere personal charge upon the husband, or a duty
imposed upon him which the courts will enforce against him from time to time, at
discretion, compelling the payment thereof from his income, whether he have an
estate or not."

   In this State the question arose in Ex parte Perkins, 18 Cal. 60. There the
defendant in an action of divorce was ordered, pendente lite, to pay to the wife
a certain sum of money for her support during the litigation, and for counsel
fees and other legal expenses.  The court enforced its order by imprisonment for
contempt in not complying with the order, and the defendant asked to be
discharged from imprisonment upon the ground that the sum adjudged to be paid to
the wife was a debt within the meaning of the Constitution, for which he could
not be legally imprisoned.  But the Supreme Court said, Mr. Justice Baldwin
delivering the opinion: "This is not a debt within the meaning of the
Constitution.  The husband is bound to support the wife, yet this duty is an
imperfect obligation which is not  technically a debt.  He does not owe her any
specific amount of money; but he owes a duty to her which may be enforced by the
order of a court compelling him to pay her money.  So alimony, temporary or
permanent, may be decreed by the court, and this may be done at the discretion
of the court."

   In the proceedings in that case it was conceded that there was no appeal from
the order, because it was an order pendente lite, and therefore interlocutory,
to which the right of appeal was not extended  by section 336 of the Practice
Act, which then regulated appeals to the Supreme Court from the judgments and
orders of the District Courts; and the husband afterwards sought to have the
order reviewed on certiorari; but as the alimony awarded was within the
discretion of the court, it was held upon the reasons stated by Mr. Justice
Baldwin to be unreviewable.  (See also Call v. Call, 65 Me. 40.) The order was
therefore absolute, and so far as other courts are concerned final, subject only
to be changed, modified, or revoked by the court that rendered it, in the
exercise of its discretionary powers.

   Such being the nature of an order awarding alimony, pending an action of
divorce, it is not an intermediate order which affects the merits of the action
itself, or the final judgment that may  be rendered therein; for a divorce may
or may not be granted in the action.  It is therefore not reviewable under
section 956 of the Code of Civil Procedure except by appealing from the final
judgment, if the law grants the right to appeal from it.  And that brings us to
the consideration of the question, is there an appeal to this court from the
judgment of a Superior Court in an action of divorce?

   The question must be determined with reference to the Constitution of 1879,
and the laws enacted in conformity to it in carrying out its provisions as to
the organization and jurisdictions of the two courts.  By section 5, article
vi., of the Constitution, it was ordained as follows: --

   "The Superior Court shall have original jurisdiction in all cases in equity,
and in all cases at law which involve the title or possession of real property,
or the legality of any tax, impost, assessment, toll, or municipal fine, and in
all other cases in which the demand, exclusive of interest or the value of the
property in controversy, amounts to $ 300, and in all criminal cases amounting
to felony, and cases of misdemeanor not otherwise provided for; of actions of
forcible entry and detainer, of proceedings in insolvency, of actions to prevent
or abate a nuisance, of all matters of probate, of divorce and for annulment of
marriage, and of all such special cases and proceedings as are not otherwise
provided for."

   As organized, under and by virtue of this section, the Superior Court
consists of seven or eight different courts, namely, a court of law, a court of
equity, an insolvency court, a court of forcible entry and detainer, a probate
court, a criminal court, a court of divorce, and a court of special cases and
proceedings; and when sitting in any one of those courts, the Superior Court has
and exercises jurisdictions of matters cognizable in the court.

   At the same time that the Superior Court was created and partitioned off into
different courts, and clothed with the jurisdiction belonging to each, the
Supreme Court of the State was reorganized and invested with its appellate and
original jurisdiction. Section 4, article vi., of the Constitution, declares: --

   "The Supreme Court shall have appellate jurisdiction in all cases in equity,
except such as arise in Justices' Courts; also in all cases at law which involve
the title or possession of real  estate, or the legality of any tax, impost,
assessment, toll, or municipal fine, or in which the demand, exclusive of
interest, or the value of the property in controversy amounts to $ 300;  also in
cases of forcible entry and detainer, and in proceedings in insolvency, and in
actions to prevent or abate a nuisance, and in all such probate matters as may
be provided by law; also in all criminal cases prosecuted by indictment or
information in a court of record on questions of law alone.  The court shall
also have power to issue writs of mandamus, certiorari, prohibition, and habeas
corpus, and all other writs necessary or proper to the complete exercise of its
appellate jurisdiction."

   This grant of judicial power expressly includes within the appellate
jurisdiction of the court cases of law and equity, cases of forcible entry and
detainer, cases of insolvency, cases for preventing and abating nuisances,
probate matters, and criminal cases; but it excludes, negatively at least, from
the jurisdiction of the court, cases for annulment of marriages and of divorce,
and special cases and proceedings.  No express mention is made of any one of
these cases as cases of which the Supreme Court has jurisdiction.  Special
cases, it has been adjudged, do not fall within the jurisdiction of the court (
Bixler's Appeal, 59 Cal. 550), and for the same reasons divorce cases do not,
unless they are to be considered as included within one or other of the two
great divisions of administrative justice known as law and equity.  ( Bixler's
Appeal, 59 Cal. 550.)

   That much is conceded by counsel for appellant.  It is also conceded that an
action of divorce is not an action at law.  They say: "It must be either an
action at law, a suit in equity, or in the language of the Constitution, 'It is
a case in equity or a case at law'; that is, it is the former, and not the
latter, as has been generally assumed by the courts of equity in this country,
and particularly so in the State of California.  If an action for divorce falls
within the expression 'case in equity,' then, clearly, by the terms of the
Constitution this court has appellate jurisdiction in such cases."

   Thus stated, the contention is reduced to the single proposition, that an
action of divorce is a suit in equity, and that is the question.

   The Chancery Court of England, as the "King's High Court of Conscience,"
claimed an elastic, original, concurrent, and  auxiliary jurisdiction under
which it assumed to exercise a supervisory control, according to equity
principles, of almost all proceedings in the Superior Courts of common law. But
it never claimed to have or exercise original or concurrent jurisdiction of the
subjects of marriage and divorce. These were alone cognizable in a court known
as the ecclesiastical court, whose jurisdiction being founded on the canon or
civil law, was entirely separate from the secular jurisdiction of other courts.
It is true that the court, under the influences of legislation and judicial
construction, slowly developed from a spiritual court into the form prescribed
for it by the common law; and the legal powers which it exercised became part of
the common law system of jurisprudence; but it retained its name and its
exclusive jurisdiction throughout all its changes in form.  With that
jurisdiction the Chancery Court never interfered, except incidentally, by
issuing original writs to keep the court within its jurisdiction, or to aid it,
after  divorce, in enforcing its decrees or orders, or to prevent the husband
from evading by fraud payment of alimony awarded to the wife.  Otherwise the
Chancery Court never claimed or exercised any original or concurrent
jurisdiction over the subjects of marriage and divorce. These constituted the
subject-matters of jurisdiction which under the common law belonged at all times
exclusively to the ecclesiastical courts.

   In Fonblanque's treatise on Equity, note n, p. 107, it is said: "The right to
decree alimony was only exercised as incidental to an action of divorce; and a
decree of divorce, or even a separation, was never even suggested to be within
the jurisdiction of a court of equity, except after divorce or upon special
agreement." And in Head v. Head, 3 Atk. 550, Chancellor Hardwick observed: "I do
not find that this court ever made a decree for establishing a perpetual
separation between husband and wife, or to compel a husband to pay a separate
maintenance to his wife, unless upon an agreement between them, and even upon
this unwillingly." (See Story Com. on Eq. §§ 1420-1425; Mattison v. Mattison, 1
Strob. Eq. 381.)

   So in an action in equity to prevent a decree from being defeated by fraud,
the Supreme Court of the United States took occasion to say: "Our first remark
is -- and we wish it to be remembered -- that this is not a suit asking the
court for the  allowance of alimony. That has been done by a court of competent
jurisdiction.  The court in Wisconsin was asked to interfere to prevent that
decree from being defeated by fraud.

   "We disclaim altogether any jurisdiction in the courts of the United States
upon the subject of divorce, or for the allowance of alimony, either as an
original proceeding in chancery, or as an incident to divorce a vinculo, or to
one from bed and board." ( Barber v. Barber, 21 How. 584.)

   Unquestionably, therefore, under the common law wherever established, no
other than the ecclesiastical or spiritual court had the legal power to grant
divorces or annul marriages. And that court, as a court of divorce, administered
its powers by a body of principles and procedure of its own, which, in
themselves, constituted a system of jurisdiction as separate and distinct as
that of a court of law, or of equity or admiralty.  As incidental to its power,
it assumed control of the property of the parties, and allowed alimony to the
wife, pending an action of divorce, on the principle that she -- the husband
having possessed himself of her fortune -- was without sufficient means
independent of him to support her in her condition in life; and it exercised its
discretion in making the allotment.  When made the sentence of allotment was
absolute, subject only to be revised and modified by the court itself; its
decisions as to matters within its jurisdiction could not be revised by the
civil courts.  No appeal lay from them to any secular jurisdiction.  An appeal
might be taken to the Pope, or to his legate, until the statute of Henry VIII.
abolished that procedure and substituted an appeal to the High Court of
Parliament.  (Browne's Ecclesiastical Law, p. 507.)

   It may be conceded that this system of jurisdiction was a part of  the common
law which constitutes the basis of the jurisprudence of the State, but we have
never had an ecclesiastical court; yet the legal powers formerly exercised by
that court were part of the sovereign power of the people of each of the several
States of the United States; and the people themselves could, by constitutional
command, or legislative enactment, delegate those powers to any tribunal they
saw fit to create, to be exercised absolutely or otherwise.  Until the people
did delegate such powers they remained in abeyance; there was no inherent
jurisdiction in courts of law or equity to grant divorces. Hence, at  an early
day in the history of the country, Judge Gaston of North Carolina held, that in
the absence of constitutional provisions, or of legislation upon the subjects of
marriage and divorce, the courts of North Carolina had no jurisdiction of
divorce suits, or to grant alimony. ( Wilson v. Wilson, 2 Dev. & B. Eq. 377.)
And Chancellor Kent, in his Commentaries, shows that, although prior to the
Revolution a Court of Chancery had existed in every one of the thirteen
colonies, yet for one hundred years preceding the Revolution, and for many years
after New York became an independent State, there was no lawful mode of
obtaining divorce until the legislature in 1787 authorized the Court of Chancery
to pronounce divorces a vinculo.  (2 Kent Com. 98, 125.) "The true doctrine is,"
says Bishop in his treatise on Marriage and Divorce, "that no judicial tribunal
can take jurisdiction of divorce cases without the authority is specially
conferred by the Constitution of the State, or by some law duly passed by the
legislature.  (Bishop on Marriage and Divorce, § 71; Jarvis v. Jarvis, 3 Edw.
Ch. 462; Jamison, v. Jamison, 4 Md. Ch. 293; Wright v. Wright, 2 Md. Ch. 447; 56
Am. Dec. 723; Barker v. Dayton, 28 Wis. 379; Hopkins v. Hopkins, 39 Wis. 171;
Bacon v. Bacon, 43 Wis. 202; Grant v. Grant, 12 S. C. 29, 31; Cook v. Cook, 56
Wis. 203; Erkenbrach v. Erkenbrach, 96 N.Y. 456.)

   Every State has the inherent right to distribute judicial powers over such
subjects to tribunals of its own creation, and to define the jurisdiction of
each, and prescribe its mode of procedure.  And it will be found that most, if
not all the decisions by courts of other States cited to uphold the right of
appeal in such cases rests upon either a constitutional or legislative grant of
original jurisdiction in such cases to courts of law, or courts of chancery, to
be exercised according to legal or chancery principles and practice, or of
appellate jurisdiction to the Supreme Court "in all cases."

   Thus the States of Massachussetts and New Hampshire, by their respective
Constitutions, ordained that "causes of marriage, divorce, and alimony, and all
appeals from the judges of probate, shall be heard and determined by the
governor and council, until the legislature shall by law make other provisions."
(Art. v. ch. 3, Const. of Mass.; § 76, part II., Const. of N. H.)  Georgia, by
her Constitution, prohibits divorces being granted, except on the concurrent
verdicts of two special juries -- the jury rendering the final verdict being
authorized to determine the rights and disabilities of  the parties, subject to
revision by the courts upon legal principles.  (§ 11, art. v. Const. of 1868.)
Alabama and Mississippi, by their respective Constitutions, provide that
divorces shall not be granted but in cases by suit in chancery, provided for by
law.  (§ 3, art. iv. Const. of Alabama; § 15, art. iii. Const. of Mississippi.)

    The Constitutions of other States whose adjudications have been cited on
argument contain no express grants of jurisdiction of the subjects of marriage
and divorce to any judicial tribunal. Power, however, has been delegated to the
legislature of each of those States to select or establish a judicial tribunal
upon which to confer legal powers to annul marriages and grant divorces; and it
will be found that the legislature has generally vested such jurisdiction and
powers in a separate Court of Chancery, sometimes in a nisi prius court, and at
others in a nisi prius court sitting as a Court of Chancery. Thus in Arkansas it
is provided: "The Circuit Court, sitting as a Court of Chancery, shall have
jurisdiction in all cases of divorce and alimony or maintenance, and like
process and proceedings shall be had in said cases as are had in other cases on
the equity side of said court." (§ 3, ch. 59, Digest of Statutes; Bauman v.
Bauman, 18 Ark. 320; 68 Am. Dec. 171.) Kentucky conferred such jurisdiction upon
the Chancery Court by Statute of 1809 ( Maguire v. Maguire, 7 Dana, 181),
Maryland by Statute of 1841, supplemented by statutes passed in 1843 and 1844 (
Brown v. Brown, 2 Md. Ch. 316; Bayly v. Bayly, 2 Md. Ch. 326), New York by
statute passed in 1824 ( Perry v. Perry, 2 Paige, 501; Williamson v. Williamson,
1 Johns. Ch. 488), Virginia by statute passed in 1827 ( Jennings v. Montague, 2
Gratt. 350), Illinois by Revised Statute of 1874 ( Dinet v. Eigenmann, 88 Ill.
274), Indiana by Revised Code of 1831, confided the jurisdiction to courts of
law ( Varner v. Varner, 3 Blackf. 163); but in 1833 the Statute of 1831 was
repealed, and the jurisdiction was expressly given to Courts of Chancery. Ohio
by Statute of 1835 conferred such jurisdiction on the court of common pleas (
Hoffman v. Hoffman, 15 Ohio St. 217), Rhode Island and Vermont on  the Supreme
Court, until the latter State by Statute of 1870 granted jurisdiction to the
county court ( Preston v. Preston, 44 Vt. 630; Thayer v. Thayer, 9 R. I. 379).
So that in those States divorce cases are by express statutory provisions made
cases in law, or cases in equity, and appealable as such, unless as in Kentucky,
under a Statute of 1816, and in Kansas under a Statute of 1860, appeals in such
cases are interdicted.  ( Maguire v. Maguire, supra; Worth v. Worth, 4 Kan. 223
.)

   So when this State in 1879, in the exercise of its sovereign powers, amended
the Constitution, it could have granted to the Superior Court as a court of law
or equity, jurisdiction and powers to annul marriages, and decree divorces
according to legal or equity principles and practice, and made its judgments and
orders final, or revisable by this court; but it did not.  The framers of the
Constitution did not clothe the Superior Court as a court of law, or of equity,
with such  jurisdiction.  In their wisdom they framed the Constitution so as to
prohibit the legislature from passing special laws for granting divorces (art.
iv. § 25), clothed the Superior Court with original jurisdiction of divorces and
of annulment of marriages (art. vi. § 5), and this court with appellate
jurisdiction in cases at law . . . . and in cases in equity . . . . and made no
express provision for appeal to this court from judgments or orders in divorce
cases (art. vi. § 4).

   Nor has the legislature in executing the behests of the Constitution as to
the organization and jurisdiction of the Superior Court made any provision for
appeal from its judgment or orders in cases of divorce. It has prescribed the
jurisdiction of the court as a court of divorce, a jurisdiction identical with
that formerly exercised by the ecclesiastical courts, and authorized it to
exercise its jurisdiction and powers in the same manner that the ecclesiastical
court had exercised them, that is, at its discretion.  It provided for an appeal
in all cases in law and equity, and in probate matters, etc., but it provides no
appeal in divorce cases.

   And the reason for thus regulating the right of appeal is, we think, apparent
from the nature of the jurisdiction conferred on the court.  The subjects of the
jurisdiction are marriage and divorce. "In respect of the Constitution of the
State," says Mr.  Amos in his treatise on the Science of Law (p. 124), "marriage
must be viewed as an act which determines the creation of a new family group,
and from which act spring a number of relations, actual and possible, moral and
legal; relations which, taken in their aggregate, constitute marriage as a
status."

   In this State marriage is also regarded in law as a status, a public
institution, and more than a mere contract.  Section 55 of the Civil Code
defines it as "a personal relation arising out of a civil contract, to which the
consent of parties capable of making it is necessary.  Consent alone will not
constitute marriage; it must be followed by a solemnization, or by a mutual
assumption of marital rights, duties, or obligations," those "actual and
possible, moral and legal relations" which constitute the status.

   An action for the annulment or dissolution of a matrimonial status is,
therefore, not an action in equity, involving the personal and separate property
of married women, the adjudication of antenuptial or postnuptial settlements and
articles, or of marriage contracts absolutely void as against public policy or
for fraud -- subjects of which Chancery Courts have jurisdiction; it is a
statutory proceeding within a jurisdiction sui generis, which is exercisable at
the discretion of the court to which it has been confided; and the judgments and
orders rendered by the court in the exercise of its discretionary powers are not
reviewable.

   In view of this familiar principle of law, and knowing that the judgments or
orders of any of the judicial tribunals of the State, which may be voidable or
void for want of jurisdiction, or excess of jurisdiction, or abuse of
discretion, are reviewable by original writs issuable by  the Superior Court or
the Superior Courts, the legislature doubtless determined there was no reason
for according the right of appeal in divorce cases; therefore no appellate
jurisdiction has been by express terms prescribed to this court in such cases (
§ 52, Code Civ. Proc.), and the right of appeal is withheld, except where, after
granting a divorce, a question arises as to the distribution of the community
property or of the homestead property.  On a question concerning such property
an appeal is expressly allowed by section 148 of the Civil Code, but on no other
question involved in the case.  Such was the nature of the appeals decided by
this court in the divorce  cases of Bovo v. Bovo, 63 Cal. 77, and Brown v. Brown
, 60 Cal. 579, and such have been the nature of appeals in many of the divorce
cases in which appeals have been heard and decided by former Supreme Courts.
(See Kashaw v. Kashaw, 3 Cal. 312; Elmore v. Elmore, 10 Cal. 224; Gimmy v. Gimmy
, 22 Cal. 633, 635; McLeran v. Benton , 31 Cal. 29.) So that a decree of divorce
is not only a dissolution of the matrimonial status, but it is also a
dissolution of the marital rights of parties in their real estate; and while
this court is denied jurisdiction to disturb that part of the decree granting a
divorce, it has jurisdiction to revise that part of the decree for a division of
the estate.

   Undoubtedly former Supreme Courts of the State as well as the present court
have heard and decided appeals in divorce cases on the merits.  In no case,
however, has the question to hear and determine such appeals been directly made,
except in Conant v. Conant, 10 Cal. 249. In that case the appeal was taken from
a divorce granted by one of the then District Courts to the Supreme Court, as
then clothed with jurisdiction by the Constitution of 1849.  And it was held,
that under the Constitution the court had appellate jurisdiction "in all cases,"
except where the matter in litigation, being capable of pecuniary compensation,
did not exceed in value $ 200.  In rendering its decision the court said: --

   "The fourth section of article vi., of the Constitution provides that the
Supreme Court shall have appellate jurisdiction in all cases when the matter in
dispute exceeds $ 200, when the legality of any tax, toll, or impost, or
municipal fine is in question, and all criminal cases amounting to felony, on
questions of law alone.  We do not understand the last words of the first clause
of this section as restricting the jurisdiction only to those cases which
involve questions of property, or the legality of a tax, toll, impost, or
municipal fine.  As we read the section, the court possesses appellate
jurisdiction in all cases; provided, that when the subject of litigation is
capable of pecuniary compensation the matter in dispute must exceed $ 200."

   Under the same Constitution of 1849 the Supreme Court, in the year 1861, in
deciding an appeal from a divorce granted in the case of Lyons v. Lyons, 18 Cal.
447, said: "This is a suit  in equity, and the only error assigned is that there
are no findings to support the judgment." And assuming it to be a suit in
equity, it was held, on the authority of Walker v. Sedgwick, 5 Cal. 192, which
was a chancery  case, that findings were not necessary.  But neither the
assumption in that case, nor Conant v. Conant , which was questioned in Knowles
v. Yates, 31 Cal. 82, and in Houghton's Appeal, 42 Cal. 35, nor the practice of
dealing on appeal with divorce cases, as cases in equity, can be considered as
authoritative of the question as now raised for the first time under the
Constitution of 1879 and the statutes passed in executing its commands.

   In view of the Constitution and the laws passed under it, I think cases of
divorce and for the annulment of marriage are not cases of which appellate
jurisdiction has been granted to this court.  This conclusion is justified, if
not sustained, by the reasoning in Bixler's Appeal, 59 Cal. 550, and by the
decision in the case of Church v. Church, No. 9405, Jan. Sess. 1884.  This last
case was a case in divorce, commenced and prosecuted since the adoption of the
Constitution of 1879, dissolution of the marriage was decreed; the wife was
awarded the custody of the children, and the husband was adjudged to pay her out
of his separate property certain sums of money for alimony and counsel fees, and
for the support, maintenance, and education of the children.  To enforce payment
of the sums awarded for those purposes the court appointed a receiver to take
charge of the separate property of the husband, collect its rents, and pay them
to the wife, until the husband gave reasonable security to pay her.  He refused
to pay, or to give security, and appealed from the decree to this court; and to
render his appeal effectual, he applied to the court here and obtained an order
to show cause (as has been done in this case), why proceedings in the divorce
court should not be stayed pending the appeal, and to fix the amount of an
appeal bond to operate as a stay.  But this court refused to interfere with the
proceedings of the court below, or to fix the amount of a stay bond.

   I think the application for a stay of proceedings should be denied, and the
appeals dismissed.


                               7 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          MONICA S. BRINER, Appellant, v. C. CONRAD BRINER, Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 6973

            Court of Appeal of California, Third Appellate District

          63 Cal. App. 2d 429; 146 P.2d 709; 1944 Cal. App. LEXIS 960


                                 March 23, 1944

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied April 17, 1944,
and Respondent's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court was Denied May 18,
1944.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Placer County.
Raymond McIntosh, Judge assigned.

   Action to compel performance of a separation agreement in which defendant
cross-complained for reformation and for setting aside of the agreement.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Public Policy--Contracts.  --A separation agreement entered into
after separation of a husband and wife is not void and unenforceable as against
public policy merely because the parties had agreed to the wife's obtaining a
divorce by reason of irreconcilable marital difficulties, and to the adjustment
of their affairs in contemplation thereof, where a ground for divorce existed
and the divorce was not secured by collusion. It is immaterial that the husband
did not oppose the divorce action and signed the necessary papers so that an
immediate trial could be had.

COUNSEL: James J. Arditto and Emery F. Mitchell for Appellant.

T. L. Chamberlain and Gerald Beatty Wallace for Respondent.

JUDGES: Adams, P. J.  Peek, J., and Thompson, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: ADAMS

OPINION

     Plaintiff, appellant herein, brought this action to compel performance of a
separation agreement entered into between the parties on September 22, 1937,
wherein defendant, respondent herein, agreed to pay to plaintiff the sum of $
100 per month for her individual maintenance, care and support, while she
remained single, and also agreed to pay her $ 7,000 in semi-annual installments
of $ 1,000 each.  It was alleged by plaintiff that defendant had not made the
monthly payment of $ 100 for certain months,  and that he had also failed to pay
$ 500 due on account of the $ 7,000 payment.

   Defendant filed an answer and cross-complaint in which he denied that he had
ever failed or refused to carry out the terms of the contract, alleged that the
separation of the parties was agreed upon because of "irreconcilable marital
differences," admitted the execution of the separation agreement, but contended
that through inadvertence and mistake of counsel who drafted same the agreement
as written did not embody all of the terms previously agreed to orally, one of
which terms being that plaintiff would not engage in her profession as a
physician and surgeon, with which provision, he alleged, she had failed to
comply.  He prayed that the agreement be reformed  so as to include conditions
alleged to have been so omitted.  Plaintiff, as cross-defendant, denied these
allegations.  A trial of the issues was had and the cause submitted.
Approximately a year later, the cause being still undecided, plaintiff was
granted leave to file a supplemental complaint setting up failure of defendant
to pay subsequent delinquencies.  Defendant, over plaintiff's objection, was
then allowed to file an amended answer and an amended cross-complaint. In this
amended cross-complaint defendant set up that "during the month of August, 1937,
cross-defendant and cross-plaintiff agreed that cross-defendant would secure a
divorce  from the cross-plaintiff and that for that purpose, and conditioned
thereon, and in contemplation thereof, and to facilitate the securing of said
divorce," the parties agreed substantially as alleged in the original
cross-complaint. To this cross-complaint cross-defendant answered and denied the
foregoing allegation.

   After the taking of further testimony in the case the trial court made
findings to the effect (Finding VI) that about September 1, 1937, the parties
entered into an oral agreement "conditioned upon the plaintiff's securing a
divorce from the defendant and in contemplation of such a divorce being secured
and to facilitate the securing of said divorce"; that a written agreement was
executed about September 22, 1937, and (Finding X) that the execution and
delivery of same were "conditioned upon and in contemplation of plaintiff's
securing a divorce from defendant, and the thereby promoting of an immediate or
forthwith dissolution of the marriage then existing between plaintiff and
defendant, and said contract had for its object the dissolution of the marriage
contract of said parties and the facilitating of that result by the securing of
such a divorce." It also found (Finding XII) that "said oral and written
agreements so made in contemplation and furtherance of divorce proceedings
between plaintiff and defendant, and for the purpose of facilitating the
securing of a divorce by plaintiff," were illegal and void, and (Finding XXIII)
that plaintiff did not desire to secure a divorce from defendant and would not
have secured said divorce except for the agreements between plaintiff and
defendant.  It did find, however, that defendant had not paid plaintiff the
amounts which in her complaint she alleged to be due her; but in its judgment it
denied recovery of any sum whatsoever.

   On this appeal it is contended that there is no evidence to sustain the
findings aforesaid to the effect that the agreement relied upon by plaintiff is
illegal and void as made for the purpose of obtaining a divorce.

     Considering first the contract itself which is dated September 22, 1937, it
recites that "marital difficulties have arisen between the parties hereto which
make a separation of the said parties to be desirable," and that "said parties
have agreed to separate." Then follow the provision for the payment of $ 100 per
month for the support of the wife and the additional sum of $ 7,000, a provision
for the custody and  support of two children of the parties, a provision for the
wife to have one of the two automobiles belonging to them and certain household
effects, all other property of the parties, real and personal, to go to the
husband, the wife agreeing to execute deeds to three pieces of real property,
and any other necessary instruments.  The form thereof is that commonly used in
such cases, and it contains, in itself, nothing tending to support the findings
of the court that it is invalid for the reasons therein stated.   Section 159 of
the Civil Code provides that a husband and wife may agree, in writing, to an
immediate separation, and may make provision for the support of either of them
and of their children during such separation; and ( sec. 160, Civ. Code) the
mutual consent of the parties is a sufficient consideration for such an
agreement.

   Turning then to the testimony in the case, it shows a long period of domestic
infelicity between the parties who were both doctors of medicine.  Respondent
himself testified that preceding the making of the agreement there had been
"many and various marital difficulties"; that in 1933 there had been a divorce
action and an interlocutory decree, at which time the parties were separated,
but that they subsequently agreed to stay together because of their children;
that that was "all we ever stayed together for after 1933"; that they had had a
"turbulent marital history from at least 1933 on"; that they had had "many, many
marital difficulties." He further testified that in 1937 plaintiff and defendant
and their two children went to the Klamath River, returning the end of August;
that two or three days after their return "I told plaintiff that I -- that we
couldn't go on any longer, and that we would have to get a divorce and
separate"; that she agreed that it was necessary, "we were not getting along,"
but that before she would do that she insisted  upon a property settlement; that
they agreed she would need $ 175 per month for herself and the boys, and that in
addition to that "I offered her $ 7,000 property settlement, which was to be
paid, a thousand dollars every six months"; that that was satisfactory and
agreed; that she wanted the thing written out -- she insisted upon being
protected; that it was agreed they could not both stay in Auburn; that they went
to an attorney, Mr. Lowell, and after that plaintiff went to Carmel where she
stayed about three weeks, returning just before the agreement was signed; that
she then went to Reno and got  the divorce; that there had been several
discussions about divorce between 1933 and 1937, and the only reason they stayed
together was because of the children.

   Plaintiff herself testified that defendant stated, on their return from
Klamath River, "I must have a divorce"; that she asked him why, and he said "he
couldn't stand me any longer"; that she asked for time to think it over, and
went away; that there had been some discussion about her keeping the home, but
defendant said he would not allow that and she must leave town; that he said he
would pay her $ 200 per month, and an additional sum for the children; that she
did not then say she would get a divorce but did so on her return; that they
then went to the attorney's office and signed the agreement,  after which she
went to Reno.

   Neither party testified that either of them conditioned the property
settlement upon the divorce, or the divorce upon the settlement, and we find no
evidence that if no divorce was to be had there was to be no contract or that if
there was no contract there would be no divorce.

   It is not contended that plaintiff did not have ground for a divorce, and
certainly when defendant told her he could not stand her any longer and insisted
that she must leave Auburn she had such grounds; and there was no impropriety in
her desiring that a settlement of their property rights and provision for the
support of plaintiff and the children should be made.  The parties were doing
just what section 159 of the Civil Code provides they may do -- agree to an
immediate separation and make provision for the support of either of them or
their children during such separation.

   Respondent, in support of the judgment of the trial court, cites but two
cases, to wit: Brown v. Brown, 8 Cal.App.2d. 364 [47 P.2d 352] and McCahan v.
McCahan, 47 Cal.App 173 [190 P.458].  In the former case the trial court found,
regarding a separation agreement entered into between the parties, "that the
execution and delivery of said instrument at that time and date was conditioned
upon, and in contemplation of, the thereby promoting of an immediate or
forthwith dissolution of the marriage then existing between plaintiff and
defendant"; and it was held that the agreement was void, so far as it obligated
the defendant to make certain installment payments provided therein to be made
to the wife by the husband; but it was found that there was ample consideration
for  the promise of the husband to pay the sum of $ 12,500 also provided for in
said agreement.  The appellate court said, page 367:

   "We are of the opinion that the above findings do not support the judgment in
plaintiff's favor.  Where a husband and wife agree that a divorce shall be
obtained by one or the other, and adjust their affairs in contemplation of a
divorce by entering into a settlement conditioned thereon, of their property
rights and make promises of an executory nature pertaining thereto, and such
facts are established in a subsequent action on the contract, they have no right
to receive the aid of the court in the enforcement of their agreement, which the
law condemns as a violation of the policy of the state.  If, as the court found,
it was of the essence of the agreement, although not stated therein, that
plaintiff should obtain a divorce from the defendant, and the promises of the
defendant were made in contemplation of and to facilitate, and conditioned upon,
a dissolution of the marriage, that fact bars a recovery by plaintiff in a suit
based on the contract." (Italics ours.)

   What facts the court there relied upon as showing that the execution and
delivery of the agreement were conditioned upon and in contemplation of a
divorce does not appear in the opinion.  It is obvious from the somewhat
peculiar wording of the court's Finding X in this case, that it was following
the language of the finding in the Brown case, and that it relied upon that case
in rendering its decision.

   In McCahan v. McCahan, supra, the question before the court was whether a
provision in a separation agreement that if a divorce action should ever be
instituted between the parties defendant would pay plaintiff $ 100 in full
settlement of her  claims for counsel fees and costs, was enforceable.  A
divorce decree having been granted in favor of the husband,  the wife appealed,
and sought and was granted an order of court for counsel fees on said appeal,
over the objection of plaintiff that the contract limited the amount she was
entitled to from him for such fees.  It was held that the agreement to pay such
fees was contra bonos mores and void. But plaintiff's right to counsel fees is
not in controversy in this case, and it is interesting to note that the same
court that decided the foregoing controversy, and on the same date, sustained
the validity of the same separation agreement, except as to attorney's fees,
stating that there was no evidence that same was  entered into with the object
of dissolving the marriage contract or facilitating that result.  It said, pages
182-183:

   "Under our code either husband or wife may enter into any engagement or
transaction with the other, or with any other person, respecting property, which
either might if unmarried.  ( Civ. Code, sec. 158.) They may also agree, in
writing, to immediate separation, and may make provision for the support of
either of them, and of their children during such separation.  ( Civ. Code, sec.
159.) The agreement in question was apparently drawn pursuant to the authority
thus given, and was one which the parties had the right to enter into.  (
Pereira v. Pereira, 156 Cal. 1, 4, [134 Am.St.Rep. 107, 23 L.R.A.N.S. 880, 103
P. 488]; Walker v. Walker, 14 Cal.App. 487, 493, [112 P.479].) Although that
portion of the agreement, providing for the payment of an attorney fee to the
wife, in the event that either of the parties should ever institute a divorce
action against the other, is void (McCahan v. McCahan, ante, p. 173 [190 P. 458]
), it relates to a different subject, and is entirely distinct, disconnected,
and separable from, and does not invalidate, the valid provisions of the
contract.  ( Estate of Sloan, 179 Cal. 393-397 [177 P. 150]; Mack v. Jastro, 126
Cal. 130, 134 [58 P. 372]; Beard v. Beard, 65 Cal. 354, 356 [4 P. 229].)"
(Italics ours.)

   However, since the decision of the trial court in the case before us, the
Supreme Court has rendered its decision in Hill v. Hill, 23 Cal.2d 82 [142 P.2d
417], which disapproves the Brown case, and, we believe, necessitates a reversal
in the case before us.  In the Hill case it appears that the parties separated
in 1926 and the husband commenced an action for divorce in which the wife filed
a cross-complaint for separate maintenance.  Two years later, while this action
was still pending, the wife called upon the husband's attorney, Mr. Horton, and
stated that while she had grounds for divorce she did not desire to commence an
action therefor, but would think the matter over, and, if she decided to get
one, it would have to be on her terms.  The husband then advised the wife that
if she did not give him a divorce he would quit the practice of medicine, in
which event he would not have enough to pay her anything.  There was another
conference between the wife and Mr. Horton, at which the matter of support for
the wife  and the children was discussed.  Subsequently the wife employed an
attorney, Mr. Haas, whereupon Mr. Horton prepared and sent to Mr. Haas a
proposed settlement agreement which provided that it should not become effective
until or unless the wife obtained a divorce. Mr. Haas returned this agreement,
together with one prepared by him from which the foregoing condition was
omitted.  The husband finally signed the latter agreement but it was returned to
Mr. Haas with a letter by Mr. Horton,  in which it was said that the agreement
was to be held by Mr. Haas and not used except in the event of the securing of a
divorce. The wife, in August, 1928, filed suit for divorce and the husband
answered, both parties requesting the court's approval of the settlement
agreement.  At the hearing the husband's attorney took no part in the
proceedings, the divorce was granted to the wife, and the settlement approved.
The husband failed to live up to the agreement, whereupon the wife sued to
recover payments due thereunder.  The husband then sought to have the agreement
declared void on the ground that it was against public policy; and the trial
court and the District Court of Appeal (133 P.2d 445) sustained this contention,
the latter court saying that a property settlement conditioned upon and made in
contemplation that one of the parties should secure a dissolution of the
marriage by divorce is against public policy and void. Hearing by the Supreme
Court was granted, and that court unanimously reversed the judgment.  It said
that the evidence clearly showed that the agreement was made in contemplation of
divorce and conditioned thereon, but that it is now well settled that a husband
and wife may agree to an immediate separation, and having so agreed, or having
actually separated,  may enter into contracts adjusting their property rights;
that by the great weight of modern authority property settlements are upheld
even though made in contemplation of divorce; that, as stated in 17 Am.Jur.,
sec. 499, p. 408, the validity of such agreements depends on whether there is an
attempt to obtain a divorce not justified by the real facts, and thus to
practice a fraud upon the court; but that where a separation of the parties has
been induced by vicious conduct of one of the parties without inducement or
fault of the other, a contract looking to a settlement of property rights and a
proper maintenance of the one not in fault is in no sense repugnant to public
policy; also that it has been said in this  state that property settlements are
highly favored in the law, and that most property settlement agreements are
incidental to or conditioned upon divorce, since they are the means employed in
the disposition of property upon divorce, and they are also promotive of divorce
in the sense that an amicable adjustment of property rights facilitates the
completion of contemplated divorce proceedings; that in the absence of fraud,
collusion or imposition upon the court, public policy does not prevent parties
who have separated from entering into a contract disposing of their property
rights which shall become effective only in the event one of the parties obtains
a divorce, even though such contract may be a factor in persuading a party who
has a good cause for divorce to proceed to establish it.

   Applying the principles of the foregoing case to the case before us, it must
follow that the separation agreement in controversy should be upheld.

   Respondent seeks to differentiate this case by arguing that here plaintiff
and defendant agreed that a divorce was to be obtained by plaintiff, and that
they adjusted their affairs in contemplation thereof.  But so did the parties in
Hill v. Hill.  He also argues that the parties were living together when the
agreement was executed.  But the evidence does not so show.  They separated when
the wife left Auburn about September 1st, after the husband had told her that he
couldn't stand her any longer and that she would have to get a divorce; and
there is no evidence that they lived together thereafter.

   It is also contended that in the Hill case no evidence was offered tending to
show that defendant agreed not to defend an action or to do anything to
facilitate the granting of a divorce, while here the evidence shows that the
husband did not oppose the divorce and signed whatever papers were requested so
that an immediate trial could be had.  Obviously the same procedure was followed
in the Hill case.

   The Hill case is also sought to be distinguished on the ground that the wife
did not there agree to get a divorce, while here when the husband demanded that
a divorce be had, she agreed to get one.  We do not consider this important
since the court held in the Hill case that a settlement may be made legally,
though made in contemplation of divorce and conditioned thereon.  Here, as in
that case, there is no evidence that the divorce was secured by collusion, and
it is, in  fact, agreed that it was not.  Defendant in his answer alleged that
the separation of the parties was agreed upon because of "irreconcilable marital
difficulties"; and the contract itself recited that marital difficulties had
arisen between the parties which made a separation desirable.

   The equities of the case before us do not call for any especial consideration
for defendant.  He has accepted the benefits of the agreement.  His own
testimony shows that he was the one who desired the divorce and demanded that
his wife leave the family home and the city of their residence; that the terms
of the agreement were those which he himself proposed, and that, in reliance
upon said agreement, plaintiff secured a divorce without having provision made
in the decree for either support or a division of community property.
Respondent does not contend that the divorce was invalid by reason of collusion,
and, in fact, his counsel, in argument before this court, stated that no such
contention was made.  Obviously, he is in no position to so contend since his
testimony shows that within eight months after the divorce he married his office
nurse.  Furthermore, the idea that the agreement might be set aside as violative
of public policy was an eleventh hour idea, and was pleaded in his amended
cross-complaint nearly five years after the execution of the agreement and more
than a year after he had submitted his original defense and cross-complaint
wherein he had appealed to the equity side of the court for reformation of the
agreement.

   The judgment is reversed and the cause is remanded with directions to the
trial court to enter judgment in behalf of plaintiff as prayed.


                               8 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           FRANCES C. BOWMAN, Plaintiff and Respondent, v. HORACE D.
            BOWMAN, Defendant and Respondent; BRYAN HOUSTON BOWMAN,
                        Cross-complainant and Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 3730

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, THIRD APPELLATE DISTRICT

            97 Cal. App. 613; 275 P. 1023; 1929 Cal. App. LEXIS 762


                            March 18, 1929, Decided

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing of this Cause was Denied by
the District Court of Appeal on April 17, 1929, and a Petition by Respondent to
have the Cause Heard in the Supreme Court, after Judgment in the District Court
of Appeal, was Denied by the Supreme Court on May 16, 1929.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of San Diego
County. W. P. Cary, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Motion by Divorced Wife to Set Aside Final Decree--Fraudulent
Concealment--Right of Second Wife--Notice--Parties.  --A second wife is entitled
to notice of a divorced wife's motion to vacate a final decree of divorce, as
one whose rights would be injuriously affected by the order vacating the final
decree, under section 61 of the Civil Code, and to a hearing of her application
to set aside such order for the divorced wife's fraud in concealing from the
court the fact that she had acquiesced in the decree, under section 389 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, irrespective of whether or not she was a proper party
to the proceeding.

(2) Id.--Delay in Applying for Annulment of Final Decree--Laches--Estoppel--
Jurisdiction.  --Where the first wife delayed approximately ten months after
knowledge of entry of the final decree before attempting to have it set aside,
and during that time acquiesced therein, expressed satisfaction therewith, and
was willing that said decree should stand as a valid decree, she was guilty of
laches and is estopped to apply for annulment of the decree more than a year
after its issuance, by which time the trial court had lost jurisdiction to
vacate it or set it aside.

COUNSEL: Hill, Morgan & Bledsoe, Vincent Morgan and Kenneth K. Wright, for
Appellant.

F. F. Grant for Respondent.

JUDGES: McDANIEL, J., pro tem. Thompson (R. L.), J., and Finch, P. J.,
concurred. Richards, J., and Langdon, J., dissented.

OPINION BY: McDANIEL

OPINION

     McDANIEL, J., pro tem. This appeal is from the judgment on the
judgment-roll alone. Frances C. Bowman, as plaintiff, sued the defendants for
annulment of the marriage of defendants Horace D. Bowman and Bryan Houston
Bowman. The defendant Horace D. Bowman entered his voluntary appearance in the
action, and by his answer admitted each and every of the allegations of the
complaint herein and waived notice of the time of trial.

   The defendant Bryan Houston Bowman answered with appropriate denials the
averments of the complaint and set up in separate counts certain affirmative
defenses. She also filed a cross-complaint, making both the plaintiff, Frances
C. Bowman, and the defendant Horace D. Bowman cross-defendants. They duly
answered the cross-complaint. Each of them filed an answer to the
cross-complaint.

   The court made findings of fact, conclusions of law and entered judgment in
favor of plaintiff, vacating, annulling and setting aside the marriage of Horace
D. Bowman and Bryan Houston Bowman, which was duly solemnized April 21, 1925;
denying the application of Bryan Houston Bowman, the cross-complainant for
relief. Judgment was entered December 31, 1926.

   The appeal presents the question as to whether or not the conclusions of law
were supported by the findings, and whether or not, in view of the findings of
fact, the cross-complainant should have been granted the relief prayed for in
her cross-complaint.

   The findings show the action was tried August 27, 1926, by the court without
a jury; the parties were represented by counsel. The court found that
respondents Frances C. Bowman and Horace D. Bowman intermarried October 16,
1915, and ever since have been and now are husband and  wife; that on September
28, 1923, in the Superior Court of San Diego County, California, Frances C.
Bowman, as plaintiff, commenced an action, numbered 40,292, and obtained an
interlocutory decree October 13, 1923, entitling her to a final decree of
divorce from Horace D. Bowman, after the lapse of one year; that on or about
July 27, 1924, the said Horace D. Bowman and Frances C. Bowman, said husband and
wife, became reconciled; that she forgave him the offenses constituting her said
cause of action, and they lived together as husband and wife until October 22,
1924, when they again separated, she going to Pasadena to live and he to Los
Angeles; that they were not living together as husband and wife at the time of
the entry of the final decree, October 28, 1924. The remaining findings of fact
and conclusions of law will be set out verbatim.

   "IV.

   "That at all times said defendant and cross-complainant Bryan Houston Bowman
knew of the reconciliation and separation of the said Frances C. Bowman and the
said Horace D. Bowman, and of the facts recited in paragraph III hereof.

   "V.

   "That on or about October 28, 1924, the said defendant Horace D. Bowman
caused to be entered in the records of the Superior Court of the county of San
Diego, state of California, in said action No. 40,292, a final decree of divorce
, wherein and whereby it was purported to be decreed that the bonds of matrimony
theretofore existing by and between the said Frances C. Bowman and the said
Horace D. Bowman were dissolved; that said final decree of divorce further
provided for the awarding of the custody of the minor children of the said
marriage of the said Frances C. Bowman, and for the payment of certain sums of
money for the support and maintenance of said children; that said Horace D.
Bowman procured said final decree of divorce to be entered as aforesaid in the
following manner:

   "That on or about October 28th, 1924, the said Horace D. Bowman requested his
attorney, David P. Hatch, to call by long-distance telephone, the attorney for
the said Frances C. Bowman, and to request the said attorney for the said
Frances C. Bowman to have said final decree of divorce entered; that the said
Horace D. Bowman did not tell or  notify the attorney for the said Frances C.
Bowman that he, the said Horace D. Bowman, and the said Frances C. Bowman had,
prior thereto, become reconciled subsequent to the entry of the interlocutory
decree of divorce in said action, or that the said parties had, after becoming
reconciled, separated, and were at said time living separate and apart; that the
said Horace D. Bowman did not notify the said attorney for the said Frances C.
Bowman of any facts or matters, or make any statements or representations to
him, other than to request him to have said final decree of divorce entered;
that the said attorney for the said Frances C. Bowman thereupon, pursuant to the
request of the said Horace D. Bowman, caused said final decree to be entered, by
preparing said final decree and presenting it to the court for signing; that the
said attorney for said Frances C. Bowman did not make any statements or
representations to the court at the time of presenting the said final decree  of
divorce for the signature of the court, and did not make any disclosures to the
court as to the prior reconciliation and separation of the said parties, and
that at the time of the signing, filing and entering of said final decree of
divorce, the court did not know that the said parties had, prior thereto, become
reconciled, and had lived together as husband and wife, or that the said parties
had thereafter, and prior to the signing, filing and entering of said final
decree of divorce, separated, and were at said time living separate and apart.

   "VI.

   "That from and after the separation of the said Horace D. Bowman and the said
Frances C. Bowman on or about the 22nd day of October, 1924, the said Horace D.
Bowman and the said Frances C. Bowman continued to live separate and apart, and
that the reconciliation previously effected by and between them on or about said
date terminated, and that at the time of the signing, filing and entering of
said final decree of divorce, the said parties were not living together as
husband and wife, and that they continued to live separate and apart thereafter
until long after the marriage of the said Horace D. Bowman and the said
defendant and cross-complainant Bryan Houston Bowman.

   "VII.

   "That the said Horace D. Bowman did not notify the said Frances C. Bowman of
the fact that he had, through her  attorney, caused said final decree of divorce
to be signed, filed and entered on or about October 28th, 1924, until some time
during the early part of January, 1925; that in causing said final decree of
divorce to be signed, filed and entered as aforesaid, the attorney for the said
Frances C. Bowman did not, prior thereto, inquire of the said Frances C. Bowman
as to whether or not she desired said final decree of divorce to be signed,
filed and entered, and did not thereafter notify her of the fact that said final
decree had been signed, filed and entered; that the said Frances C. Bowman first
knew of the fact that said final decree had been filed and entered about or
during the first part of January, 1925; that thereafter the said Frances C.
Bowman made no effort whatsoever to cause said final decree of divorce to be set
aside or vacated until after the marriage of the said Horace D. Bowman to the
said Bryan Houston Bowman, but, on the contrary, the court finds that the said
Frances C. Bowman, upon being informed of the fact of the entry of the said
final decree of divorce in the early part of January, 1925, acquiesced therein,
expressed satisfaction therewith, and was willing and desirous that said decree
stand as a valid and subsisting final decree of divorce until after the marriage
of the said Horace D. Bowman and the said Bryan Houston Bowman, when for the
first time said Frances C. Bowman manifested any desire to, or did make any
effort whatsoever, to have said final decree of divorce set aside, annulled or
vacated.

   "VIII.

   "That on the 21st day of April, 1925, the said Horace D. Bowman and the said
defendant and cross-complainant Bryan Houston Bowman were intermarried, and
thereafter to and until about the 1st day of October, 1925, lived together as
husband and wife; that the said Frances C. Bowman became aware of the marriage
between the said Horace D. Bowman and the said defendant and cross-complainant
Bryan Houston Bowman on or about the 1st day of May, 1925; that at all times
after said marriage of the said Horace D. Bowman and the said Bryan Houston
Bowman, the said parties resided in the city of Santa Monica as husband and wife
up to or about the 1st day of October, 1925, and that during all of the said
period the said Frances C. Bowman was also residing in the said city of Santa
Monica; that on  or during the month of August, 1925, the said Horace D. Bowman
and the said Bryan Houston Bowman began to have difficulties, and thereafter the
said Horace D. Bowman entertained the idea of having the marriage of himself and
the said Bryan Houston Bowman annulled; that thereupon the said Horace D. Bowman
and the said Frances C. Bowman entered into an agreement and conspiracy in which
they conspired and agreed that the said Frances C. Bowman should appear before
the Superior Court of the County of San Diego in the aforesaid divorce action
No. 40,292, and represent to the court in said action that the said final decree
of divorce, filed and entered in said action, had been obtained against her
consent, and that at the time of the filing and entering of said final decree of
divorce, that she and the said Horace D. Bowman were reconciled, and were living
together as husband and wife, and that she, the said Frances C. Bowman, never at
any time desired said final decree of divorce to be filed and entered, and that
she had never acquiesced therein, and that she, upon learning of the filing and
entering of said final decree of divorce, proceeded with due diligence to have
said final decree of divorce vacated, annulled and set aside, and it was further
agreed by and between the said Horace D. Bowman and the said Frances C. Bowman
that the appearance and motion of the said Frances C. Bowman for the annulment
and vacation of the said final decree of divorce should be kept secret from the
said Bryan Houston Bowman, and that the said Bryan Houston Bowman should not be
notified thereof, and that the said Horace D. Bowman would make no opposition to
said appearance or said motion, but would acquiesce therein, and would do all
that he could to aid and assist the said Frances C. Bowman in procuring and
obtaining an order annulling and setting aside said final decree of divorce.

   "IX.

   "That court further finds that thereafter, pursuant to said agreement and
conspiracy, the said Frances C. Bowman filed in the Superior Court of the county
of San  Diego, in the aforesaid divorce action No. 40,292, a notice of motion
that she, the said Frances C. Bowman, would, on November 2nd, 1925, move said
court for an order vacating and setting aside the final decree of divorce
theretofore filed and entered in said action; that in support of said motion,
the  said Frances C. Bowman filed, and caused to be filed, certain affidavits,
including an affidavit signed and sworn to by her; that in said proceedings the
said Frances C. Bowman was represented by F. F. Grant, an attorney at law, who
had been her attorney of record at all times in said action; that no notice of
said motion was given to the said Bryan Houston Bowman, and no papers or process
served upon her, but that said proceedings were kept secret from the said Bryan
Houston Bowman, and that she had no knowledge or information thereof; that in
the affidavit signed and filed by the said Frances C. Bowman in support of said
motion to set aside and vacate said final decree of divorce, the said Frances C.
Bowman, pursuant to said agreement and conspiracy with the said Horace D.
Bowman, alleged and set forth, that subsequent to the interlocutory decree of
divorce, there had been a reconciliation between her and the said Horace D.
Bowman, and that at the time of the entry of said final decree of divorce,
to-wit, on October 28th, 1924, that she and the said Horace D. Bowman were
reconciled and living together as husband and wife; that she did not know of or
consent to the entering of said final decree of divorce; that she did not want a
divorce; that the said defendant did not tell her that he had entered a final
decree of divorce, but that later she learned that he had secured a final decree
of divorce 'away back in the month of October, 1924'; that the said Frances C.
Bowman further recited in said affidavit that very soon after she learned that
the final decree of divorce had been entered, she began to find out what she
could do about setting aside said final decree of divorce, and that she
consulted with friends and some attorneys concerning the possibility of having
said final decree of divorce set aside and vacated; that the said Frances C.
Bowman did not, by affidavit or otherwise, inform the court, on the hearing of
said motion to set aside and vacate said final decree of divorce, that at the
time of the entry of said final decree of divorce, that she and the said Horace
D. Bowman were living separate and apart, or that their prior reconciliation had
been terminated, nor did she, by affidavit or otherwise, inform the court, on
the hearing of said motion, nor was the court informed by anyone, that the said
Frances C. Bowman upon hearing of the filing and entering of said final decree
of divorce during or about the 1st day of January,  1925, acquiesced therein or
expressed satisfaction therewith, or that she, the said Frances C. Bowman, did
not, for a period of seven or eight months thereafter, make any effort,  or take
any steps, to have said final decree of divorce set aside, annulled or vacated;
that the said Horace D. Bowman did not make any opposition to the granting of
said motion, nor file any contest thereto, but, on the contrary, pursuant to his
agreement and conspiracy as aforesaid with the said Frances C. Bowman, the said
Horace D. Bowman, by his silence and acquiescence and failure to contest, and by
actively aiding the said Frances C. Bowman in the filing of said motion, and in
keeping secret from the said Bryan Houston Bowman all knowledge or information
concerning said proceedings and motion, permitted the court to believe on the
hearing of said motion that he had perpetrated a fraud upon said court in having
said final decree of divorce signed, filed and entered.

   "X.

   "The court further finds that the purpose and motive of the said Horace D.
Bowman in conspiring and agreeing with the said Frances C. Bowman as aforesaid,
and in doing, and failing to do, the things aforesaid, was to enable him, the
said Horace D. Bowman, to obtain a decree of annulment, annulling and setting
aside the marriage which he had prior thereto contracted with the said Bryan
Houston Bowman, and to enable him, by so doing, to defeat and defraud the said
Bryan Houston Bowman of her rights growing out of said marriage, and that the
motives of said Frances C. Bowman were to enable her and the said Horace D.
Bowman to defeat and defraud the said Bryan Houston Bowman of her rights growing
out of the said marriage, and to enable her to maintain this action to annul and
set aside said marriage; that thereupon and pursuant thereto, and without being
advised as to all of the true facts, the Superior Court of San Diego county, in
said case No. 40292, granted the motion of the said Frances C. Bowman, and
caused an order to be signed, made, filed and entered, setting aside, vacating
and annulling the final decree of divorce theretofore entered in said action on
October 28, 1924; that the said defendant, Bryan Houston Bowman, was not present
at the hearing of said motion, nor was she represented by counsel, or anyone;
that she had no opportunity to be present at the hearing  of said motion, and
had no knowledge thereof, and no opportunity to defend herself.

   "XI.

   "The court further finds that pursuant to the said conspiracy and agreement
by and between the said Horace D. Bowman and the said Frances C. Bowman, the
said Frances C. Bowman, after obtaining said order setting aside and annulling
said final decree of divorce, commenced this action to annul and set aside the
marriage between the said Bryan Houston Bowman and the said Horace D. Bowman,
and that the said Horace D.  Bowman, although a party defendant in this action,
has at all times during the pendency of this action, actively aided and assisted
the said Frances C. Bowman in the prosecution of this action against the said
defendant and cross-complainant, Bryan Houston Bowman.

   "XII.

   "The court further finds that subsequent to the signing, filing and entry of
the said final decree of divorce in said action No. 40,292, the said plaintiff,
Frances C. Bowman, accepted the provisions and benefits of said final decree of
divorce, by receiving and accepting from the said Horace D. Bowman the amounts
of money provided in said decree for the support and maintenance of the children
named in said decree until said decree was set aside and annulled, as
hereinbefore set forth.

   "As conclusions of law from the foregoing findings of fact the court finds:

   "First: That the said defendant and cross-complainant, Bryan Houston Bowman,
was not a necessary or indispensable party to the proceedings had in the
Superior Court of San Diego county in case No. 40,292, wherein the said Frances
C. Bowman sought and obtained an order setting aside, annulling and vacating the
final decree of divorce theretofore filed and entered in said action, and was
not entitled to notice of said proceedings, nor to the service of any of the
papers therein, and is not entitled to complain of the procuring of the order
setting aside and vacating said final decree.

   "Second: That the said Bryan Houston Bowman is not entitled to a judgment
vacating or annulling the order of said Superior Court setting aside said final
decree of divorce in said action, nor is she entitled to a judgment that said
final decree of divorce be restored or declared to be a valid and subsisting
final decree of divorce, nor is she entitled to any relief whatsoever.

   "Third: That the said plaintiff, Frances C. Bowman, is entitled to a judgment
vacating, annulling and setting aside the marriage between the said Horace D.
Bowman and the said Bryan Houston Bowman.

   "That each party pay his or her costs.

   "Let judgment be entered accordingly."

   Appellant contends that the learned trial court erred and judgment should be
reversed for the following reasons:

   1. That the appellant, Bryan Houston Bowman, was a necessary and
indispensable party in the action or motion to set aside the final decree of
divorce.

   2. Irrespective of whether appellant was a necessary or proper party to the
proceeding to vacate the final decree of divorce, she is entitled, as one whose
rights have been injuriously affected thereby, to complain of the fraud
practiced upon the court, and to have said order set aside in an independent
suit in equity.

   3. That the fraud practiced in procuring the setting aside of said final
decree of divorce was extrinsic and not intrinsic fraud.

   4. That the respondents, under the facts found by the court, were estopped to
attack or in any way set aside said final decree of divorce.

   Respondents, in their reply brief, call attention to an omission in
appellant's statement of facts of a fact admitted in appellant's answer, to wit:
"The trial court was informed at the hearing on the motion to vacate the final
decree of divorce that Horace D. Bowman had entered into a second marriage with
Bryan Houston Bowman," and argues in support of the order in the proceedings for
vacating the final decree and the judgment in this suit, "that the order setting
aside the final decree was in all respects a proper order; that no fraud was
committed in procuring the said order, and that, therefore, such order must be
permitted to stand."

   Respondent, although not an appellant, criticizes the findings of the trial
court herein to the effect that Horace D. Bowman and Frances C. Bowman, the
first wife, entered into a conspiracy to set aside the final decree and to
institute the annulment action. After quoting the definition of  conspiracy as
being, "a combination of two or more persons by concerted action to accomplish
an unlawful purpose or to accomplish a lawful purpose by unlawful means," and
citing in this connection the case of Pettibone v. United States, 148 U.S. 197
[37 L. Ed. 419, 13 S. Ct. 542, see, also, Rose's U.S. Notes], argues, in
reliance upon said authority, that the trial court should have found herein that
Frances C. Bowman and Horace D. Bowman, acting in concert, did absolutely
nothing in connection with the setting aside of the final decree or the bringing
of this action, except to take legal and lawful steps; that the court found
improperly that they conspired together or entered into a conspiracy.

   That contention seems to overlook the charge herein in that the respondents
conspired to accomplish the unlawful purpose of defrauding the second wife,
Bryan Houston Bowman.

   Briefly stated, said respondent further argues that the said final decree of
divorce was procured by extrinsic fraud upon the court; that the fact that the
reconciliation had terminated had no bearing upon the questions of law involved;
that the order setting aside the final decree was properly made; that no fraud
was committed upon the superior court of San Diego County in obtaining the order
setting aside the final decree; that the fact of Horace D. Bowman's second
marriage did not deprive the court of power to set aside the final decree; that
no grounds were shown herein sufficient to invalidate the order setting aside
the final judgment, and, in conclusion, urges some general considerations
expanding, recapitulating, and adding to his said several points.

   The foregoing statement of facts and arguments indicates interesting features
of this suit, but our conclusions upon the essential  legal propositions
involved make it unnecessary to follow respective counsel in all their able and
well-presented points and authorities.

     We determine that, irrespective of whether appellant was a necessary or
proper party to the proceeding to vacate the final decree, she was entitled to
notice of the application, as one whose rights as a wife have been injuriously
affected by the order vacating the final decree of divorce, and that she is
entitled to complain of the fraud practiced upon the  court and upon herself,
and, by her cross-complaint in equity, have the said order set aside and
annulled.

   In Bennett v. Wilson, 122 Cal. 509 [68 Am. St. Rep. 61, 55 P. 390], the court
said: "The general rule is, that none but the parties to a judgment can have it
set aside. But this rule is not without its exceptions, and third parties --
persons not nominal parties -- who are necessarily affected by the judgment, may
be protected from its operation." This rule is reaffirmed by the supreme court
in the same case, Bennett v. Wilson, 133 Cal. 379 [85 Am. St. Rep. 207, 65 P.
880].

    Carlisle v. Carlisle, 96 Mich. 128 [55 N.W. 673], was a case where the
plaintiff obtained a decree of divorce which subsequently was set aside. Anna E.
Carlisle, the second wife, who had not been given notice of the proceedings to
set aside the decree of divorce, intervened, and on her petition, the order
vacating the decree was set aside.

   In that case, as in the case at bar, it was contended that as the second wife
was not a party to the original suit of divorce, and, therefore, not a party to
subsequent proceedings in that case, she was not entitled to notice, and could
not intervene, even though the effect of the proceeding would be to destroy her
rights as a legal wife. The court held she was entitled to notice of the
proceeding to vacate the decree and, also, to maintain an independent action to
set aside the judgment. The court said, in part, after an exhaustive review of
the authorities: "To hold that in such a case the second wife, who had in good
faith relied upon the decree sought to be set aside, was not entitled to notice,
and had no right to intervene, would be rank injustice."

   Respondent herein on page 26 of his brief says: "When the Superior Court knew
that Bowman had remarried, it then became the province and duty of the court to
consider the interests of the second wife." Respondent then quotes with approval
2 Bishop, Marriage, Divorce and Separation, section 496, relating to the sacred
obligation upon the trial court in a divorce proceeding to look after the
interest of all who cannot be present, as well as the rights of the public, and
then continues: "The foregoing rules are of universal application in divorce
actions. When it was once brought home to the trial court that Horace D. Bowman
had remarried, that court must of necessity have taken that fact  into
consideration and weighed that fact in exercising its discretion. The court
might, had it so desired, brought the second wife before it or made such further
investigation as the Judge thereof deemed necessary to reveal those facts which
would govern it in the exercise of a sound, judicial discretion." (Italics
ours.)

   It is further argued that as the court knew of the reconciliation, there was
little else in the way of information, which could have been given, which would
have affected the court's discretion, which it exercised in giving due
consideration to the rights and status of all parties concerned.

   We agree with the propositions of law pertaining to the sacred duty of the
trial court to protect all concerned. If, however, under the facts as stated by
respondent it was a matter of discretion, we are convinced that the exercise of
a wise and sound discretion would have required the court to issue its order
that the second wife, Bryan Houston Bowman, be given her day in court and the
application to be heard under the provisions of section 389 of the Code of Civil
Procedure.

   The granting of the motion to vacate the final decree prejudiced the rights
of the cross-complainant, because it ipso facto destroyed her marriage. ( Sec.
61, Civ. Code.) Rowland v. Horst, 188 Cal. 772 [207 P. 373], cited by appellant,
is as follows: "Necessary parties to an action in the capacity of defendants are
those who are interested in resisting the demands of the plaintiff either
immediately or consequently and whose rights would be prejudicially affected by
the controversy." See, also, Wickersham v. Comerford, 96 Cal. 433 [31 P. 358];
Bergin v. Haight, 99 Cal. 52 [33 P. 760]; Estate of Seaman, 51 Cal. App. 409
[196 P. 928]; Murray v. Murray, 115 Cal. 266 [56 Am. St. Rep. 97, 37 L. R. A.
626,  47 P. 37]. Other authorities having more or less bearing on this point
will be referred to later.

     The second reason we find which would indicate that the judgment in this
case should be reversed is that, in our view, the order made in the proceedings
in the divorce suit after the entry of the final decree was void, as being in
excess of the jurisdiction of the court, because: 1. Frances C. Bowman was
guilty of laches, as affirmatively appears in findings VII and IX, in delaying
her application for suit  herein from the early part of January, 1925, when it
is found she first knew of the entry of said final decree, until November 2,
1925, a delay of approximately ten months; 2. She was estopped from the right to
make application for an annulment of the final decree, as it affirmatively
appears from said findings that when she first learned of the final decree in
the early part of January, about three months after her own counsel had applied
for and obtained the said  decree on October 28, 1924, she acquiesced therein,
expressed satisfaction therewith, and was willing and desirous that said decree
should stand as a valid and subsisting decree. After she learned of the marriage
of Horace D. Bowman to Bryan Houston Bowman, which took place in April, 1925,
Frances C. Bowman accepted all of the benefits granted her by the said decree in
the way of support, maintenance and the custody of minor children, etc. She
thereby confirmed and ratified the action of her attorney, Mr. Grant, in causing
the issuance of said final decree. She made no effort thereafter to have said
decree set aside until November 2, 1925, more than a year after its issuance, by
which time the trial court had lost jurisdiction to vacate it or set it aside,
under the well-established law of this state.

    Wheelock v. Superior Court of San Diego County, 67 Cal. App. 601 [227 P.
931], was a proceeding in prohibition to restrain the superior court from
vacating a final decree of divorce. The court therein said: "If the motion which
was finally made to respondent court more than seven months after the entry of
the final decree of divorce be regarded as one invoking the inherent power of
the court to set aside orders and judgments procured through fraud, irrespective
of the provisions of section 473 of the Code of Civil Procedure, it is
unseasonably late." That case is based on facts similar in some respects to
those involved in the proceedings before the trial court on the motion to vacate
the final decree of divorce. It reviews many California decisions and we believe
is controlling in principle upon the issue here. We cite, also, Consolidated
Construction Co. v. Pacific Electric Ry., 184 Cal. 244 [193 P. 238]; 19 Cor.
Jur. 170, sec. 424.

   In her application to the trial court in the divorce proceedings to vacate
the final decree Frances C. Bowman concealed from the court the fact that she
had accepted, acquiesced  in and expressed satisfaction with said final decree,
and her wish and desire that it stand as a valid and subsisting decree for
months after its issuance. That concealment was fraud practiced by her upon the
court and undoubtedly fraudulent as to the cross-complainant and appellant
herein. Whether or not this was extrinsic and not intrinsic fraud need not here
be decided. As shown, there are other ample grounds for the reversal of the
judgment in this case.

   The judgment is reversed and the cause remanded, with directions to the trial
court to enter its judgment against the plaintiff, Frances C. Bowman, denying
her prayer for annulment of the marriage of Bryan Houston Bowman with Horace D.
Bowman. It is further ordered that judgment be entered in favor of Bryan Houston
Bowman, appellant and cross-complainant, as prayed for in her cross-complaint,
against both the said cross-defendants; and that the order made in action
entitled "Frances C. Bowman v. Horace D. Bowman," number 40,292, in said
superior court, purporting to set aside and vacate the final decree in said
action, be set aside, vacated, and annulled, and that the said final decree of
divorce therein stand as a subsisting and valid decree of divorce, dissolving
the bonds of matrimony formerly existing between Frances C. Bowman and Horace D.
Bowman, and that appellant have and recover all her costs herein.

   Thompson (R. L.), J., and Finch, P. J., concurred.

   A petition for a rehearing of this cause was denied by the District Court of
Appeal on April 17, 1929, and a petition by respondent to have the cause heard
in the Supreme Court, after judgment in the District Court of Appeal, was denied
by the Supreme Court on May 16, 1929.

   Richards, J., and Langdon, J., dissented.


                               9 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          F. H. GODFREY, Appellant, v. JOHANNE F. GODFREY, Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 6050

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, THIRD APPELLATE DISTRICT

           30 Cal. App. 2d 370; 86 P.2d 357; 1939 Cal. App. LEXIS 523


                           January 16, 1939, Decided

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition by Appellant to have the Cause Heard in the
Supreme Court, after Judgment in the District Court of Appeal, was Denied by the
Supreme Court on March 16, 1939.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County. Charles L. Bogue, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Judgments--Capacity--Knowledge--Fraud--Findings.  --In this action
to set aside a decree of divorce alleged to have been procured by fraud, where
plaintiff was familiar with every detail of defendant's divorce proceeding
against her first husband, and the court was warranted in assuming that he
encouraged and influenced her to procure such prior divorce, so that they might
marry, and he was advised that they could not legally marry until the final
decree was entered, but he deliberately planned to avoid the law by marrying her
in another state, he was charged with knowledge of her disqualification to marry
him, and the finding that he was not deceived or defrauded in that regard was
fully supported by the evidence.

(2) Id.--Fraud--Contracts--Notice--Consideration--Evidence--Findings.  --In said
action, where defendant refused to sign a deed to plaintiff's farm until he made
some provision for her support, and he then contracted to and conveyed to her
one-half of the proceeds of the sale of said farm, and, if he doubted that a
deed to his separate property required her signature, he was placed on notice
requiring him to seek expert advice, and she had lived and worked faithfully
with him as his wife for several years, contributing her own separate funds to
their household expenses and the maintenance of his property, there was adequate
support for the findings that he was not deceived, defrauded or coerced into
making said contract and conveyance, and that there was adequate consideration
therefor.

(3) Id.--Deeds--Contracts--Intent--Presumptions--Estoppel.  --In said action, it
was presumed that, by the execution of the deed to said farm, with the
accompanying agreement to pay defendant one-half of the proceeds of that sale,
and the request for the grantee to make her a joint payee of the note and a
joint mortgagee of the mortgage, plaintiff thereby intended to convey to her the
funds in dispute, and his conduct estopped him from contending that the
execution of that contract and the conveyance of that property were void.

(4) Id.--Judgments--Collateral Attack--Jurisdiction--Presumptions--Appeal.  --In
a collateral attack upon a judgment, the jurisdiction of the court over the
subject matter and the parties involved will be presumed unless the contrary
appears on the face of the decree; and in said action, where the record did not
contain the pleadings, decrees or evidence in the prior divorce action, wherein
plaintiff was served with process and suffered default, it was to be assumed on
appeal, in support of the judgment, that the court which tried the divorce
proceeding was vested with jurisdiction to try and determine that proceeding
against plaintiff.

(5) Id.--Appeal--Record--Pleading--Presumptions--Issues.  --In said action,
where the record did not contain the pleadings, decrees or evidence in said
divorce action, wherein plaintiff was served with process and suffered default
after talking with several lawyers about the case, it was to be assumed on
appeal that the divorce complaint alleged in adequate form a good cause of
action for divorce, together with the ownership and right to an award of title
to the property involved, and that those issues were determined upon competent
evidence favorable to the plaintiff therein, and were properly incorporated in
the final decree.

(6) Id.--Void Marriage--Judgments--Estoppel--Fraud.  --In said action, even
conceding that the marriage was void ab initio because defendant was not an
unmarried woman when it was consummated, where plaintiff was served with process
in the divorce action, and suffered default after talking with several lawyers
about the case, and then permitted the judgment against him to become final, he
was estopped by his conduct from challenging the form of that action, the
sufficiency of the evidence or the conclusiveness of the decree, except for
extrinsic fraud.

(7) Id.--Judgments--Collateral Attack--Fraud--Evidence.  --A collateral attack
upon a judgment or decree may not be sustained upon evidence of mere intrinsic
fraud such as the presenting of perjured testimony or forged documents; and
extrinsic fraud, which alone will warrant a court of equity in setting aside a
judgment or decree, consists of such false representations as will prevent a
real trial of the cause upon the merits of the issues involved, like the conduct
which may induce an interested party to refrain from appearing or participating
in the trial, a failure to serve timely notice of the hearing, or acts
preventing the presence of material witnesses at the trial.

(8) Id.--Fraud--Coercion--Default--Judgments--Equity.  --When the alleged fraud
or coercion is of such nature that it may reasonably be presented to the court
at the trial so as to afford full and fair protection to the rights of the
interested parties and they fail or neglect to avail themselves of that
opportunity, a court of equity will not disturb the judgment rendered under such
circumstances, but will leave the parties in the position in which they have
placed themselves.

(9) Id.--Collusion--Interlocutory Decree--Knowledge--Estoppel.  --When an
interlocutory decree of divorce is procured by collusion of the parties to the
action, equity will not interfere with the final divorce at the instance of
either of the culpable parties; and in said action, where plaintiff was served
with process in the divorce action and, with full knowledge of all the issues
presented therein, including the question regarding the illegal marriage, made a
personal appearance therein and then permitted judgment to be rendered against
him by default, the court was warranted in assuming that the divorce suit was
brought through his connivance, and his conduct estopped him from seeking relief
in equity.

(10) Id.--Fraud--Equity--Parties--Appeal--Judgments--Presumptions.  --Even
assuming that a decree of divorce procured by false testimony may be set aside
under proper circumstances on the court's own motion, or at the instance of an
injured party who is a stranger to the proceeding, equity will not interfere
with such a judgment at the behest of either of the culpable parties; and in
said action, in the absence of the evidence adduced in the divorce proceeding,
the appellate court could not assume that the divorce decree was procured on
false testimony, or that the decision of the court was not fully supported by
the pleadings and the evidence, and said decree was final and conclusive, as
between the parties to that action, with respect to their legal status.

(11) Id.--Laches--Evidence--Knowledge--Acquiescence.  --In said action, where
plaintiff, with full knowledge of the circumstances, acquiesced in the transfer
to plaintiff of one-half of the proceeds of the sale of his farm, without
objection, for a period of eight years, and he failed to appeal from the decree
of divorce or to object to the terms thereof for more than four years after the
interlocutory decree was rendered, he was barred from recovering by laches.

COUNSEL: Burton Briggs Crane for Appellant.

Leo B. Wayland and Hobart W. Gladden for Respondent.

JUDGES: THOMPSON, J. Ross, J., pro tem., and Pullen, P. J., concurred.

OPINION BY: THOMPSON

OPINION

     The facts are stated in the opinion of the court.

    THOMPSON, J. -- The plaintiff has appealed from a judgment which was
rendered against him in a suit to set aside a decree of divorce alleged to have
been procured by fraud. It is asserted the court was without jurisdiction in the
divorce proceeding to dissolve the marriage or to determine title to property
rights incident thereto for the  reason that the marriage was void ab initio
because it was contracted in less than one year from the time when defendant's
interlocutory decree of divorce from her first husband was rendered. A reversal
of the judgment in this case is sought on the ground that the findings and
judgment are not supported by the evidence.

   The respondent contends that this suit constitutes a collateral attack upon
the decree of divorce which was procured without fraud, with the knowledge and
consent of the appellant, and that it is therefore final and conclusive against
him.

   The defendant married Peter Fugleberg in 1905 and lived with him as his wife
in South Dakota for many years. In 1923 she went to Los Angeles, where she met
and frequently associated with the appellant. He was then unmarried. He had a
small sum of money and owned a little farm in Idaho, a part of the proceeds of
the sale of which is involved in this action.

   With the knowledge and approval of the appellant, the respondent brought suit
for divorce in Los Angeles County against her former husband, Peter Fugleberg,
with the evident purpose of subsequently marrying F. H. Godfrey. The
interlocutory decree of divorce from her first husband was awarded to this
respondent February 21, 1924, but the entry of the final decree was
inadvertently deferred until December 15, 1934. The appellant was advised and
knew he could not lawfully marry the respondent until her final decree was
rendered after one year from the granting of the interlocutory decree.
Nevertheless, in about a month after the interlocutory decree was entered, he
took her in his automobile to Idaho Falls, where they applied for and were
refused a marriage license on the ground that her divorce was not complete. They
then went to Dillon, Montana, where they procured a license and were married
April 30, 1924, after which they lived together as husband and wife for several
years. During the years they lived together as husband and wife, she contributed
sums of money derived from her separate earnings before their marriage to help
defray the household  expenses and to aid in maintaining the appellant's
property. Dissensions arose between them. The appellant was desirous of selling
his farm to the Idaho Muskrat Corporation for the agreed price of $ 10,000. The
respondent refused to sign the deed to that farm until he provided her with
reasonable maintenance. The appellant then agreed to divide equally with her the
proceeds of the sale of that ranch. He accordingly executed a written contract
to that effect December 27, 1927. The land was then sold and the spouses joined
in the deed of conveyance. Two thousand dollars of the purchase price was paid
in cash, and divided equally between them. The remaining $ 8,000 was represented
by a promissory note payable to them jointly, on or before April 15, 1930, with
6 per cent interest on deferred payments. The note was secured by mortgage on
the property in which the spouses were named as mortgagees. The note and
mortgage were drawn in that manner at the specific request of the appellant. The
appellant's full share of that note was paid to him. He directed the payment of
the balance of that note to the respondent. She received a portion of the
interest, but at the time of the commencement of this suit there was due her on
that obligation $ 4,000 and some accrued interest. That money was awarded to her
in her subsequent divorce proceeding against the appellant.

   In 1930 the spouses returned to Los Angeles. Their differences became
irreconcilable. The respondent commenced suit in Los Angeles County for divorce
against the appellant on the ground of extreme cruelty. He was personally served
with copies of the summons and complaint. He consulted with several lawyers
about the case, but employed none of them. He made a personal appearance in the
cause, and then permitted judgment by default to be entered against him. The
action was regularly tried and determined. Johanne Godfrey was granted an
interlocutory decree of divorce against the appellant on the ground of extreme
cruelty, on October 2, 1931. She was also awarded costs and counsel fees in the
sum of $ 150, and she was determined to be the owner of the note with a balance
of $ 4,000 and accrued interest unpaid thereon. A final decree of divorce was
rendered against this appellant in that action October 5, 1932, dissolving the
marriage and confirming to this respondent the award of property mentioned in
the interlocutory decree. The appellant was fully informed of all proceedings
in the divorce suit. No objection was made to the allegations of that complaint
or to the terms of that decree. No appeal from either decree was taken. The
judgment  became final and conclusive against him with respect to all the issues
therein determined.

   This suit in equity was filed March 7, 1935, to set aside the decree of
divorce last mentioned and to recover from the respondent the money which she
received from the sale of the Idaho farm on the ground that the marriage was
void, since it was consummated in less than one year after the respondent's
interlocutory decree of divorce was procured from her first husband. It is
alleged the respondent deceived the appellant into believing she was legally
qualified to marry him; that she fraudulently coerced him into executing the
contract for, and in conveying to her, one-half of the proceeds of his Idaho
farm; that the Los Angeles court was without jurisdiction to try or determine
the divorce suit against him, and that the decree of divorce was procured by
fraud and perjury on the part of the respondent.

   Mrs. Godfrey answered the amended complaint in this action, denying the
allegations of fraud and asserting that she married the appellant in good faith
and lived in harmony with him as his wife for several years, believing she had a
legal right to marry him in less than one year from the time her interlocutory
decree of divorce was granted from her first husband, provided they were married
in a state other than California. She denied that she deceived or coerced him
into contracting or conveying to her one-half of the proceeds of the sale of his
Idaho farm, and she alleged that the appellant at all times had personal
knowledge of her exact legal status to marry and of the proceedings in the
divorce case against him. The answer further sets up the special defenses of
laches, the statute of limitations, and the bar of the final decree of divorce
as res judicata of the issues in this case.

   This cause was tried by the court sitting without a jury. Findings were
adopted favorable to the respondent in every particular. Judgment was
accordingly rendered against the appellant to the effect that he take nothing by
his action. From that judgment this appeal was perfected.

     The findings and judgment in this case are adequately supported by the
evidence. It satisfactorily appears that the respondent did not deceive or
defraud the appellant into  believing she was legally qualified to marry him
before her final decree of divorce from her first husband was rendered. Nor did
she fraudulently coerce him into making the contract or conveying to her
one-half of the proceeds of the sale of his Idaho farm. He was familiar with
every detail of her divorce proceeding against her first husband. The court was
warranted in assuming from the evidence that he not only encouraged her, but no
doubt induced her to procure the divorce from her first husband, so that they
might marry. He not only knew when the interlocutory decree was granted against
Peter Fugleberg, but he was advised that he could not legally marry the
respondent until the final decree was entered after one year from the time of
granting the interlocutory decree. He deliberately planned to avoid the law by
taking her to another state for marriage, almost immediately after the
interlocutory decree was granted. He was present in Los Angeles at a conference
between the respondent and her witnesses regarding the divorce proceeding the
night before the cause was tried. He was anxious to attend the trial with them,
but was persuaded not to do so. When the interlocutory decree was granted it was
immediately shown to him and he expressed great pleasure at her success. They
planned to leave at once to be married in Idaho or Montana. Just before they
left Los Angeles, about a month after the interlocutory decree was rendered, Mr.
Carkin, a friend of the appellant told him, "You know she [the respondent] has
just got a divorce and you can't legally marry her for a year," to which he
replied, "Well we can marry out of the state." They traveled together in his
automobile to Idaho Falls, where they interviewed a judge regarding their
proposed marriage. He advised them to procure a license. They went together and
applied to the county clerk for a marriage license, which was refused with the
statement to respondent made in the presence of appellant that "You haven't been
divorced long enough to get a license." In spite of that information they
subsequently procured a license and were married at Dillon, Montana, April 30,
1924. They lived together as husband and wife and worked for the mutual benefit
of both parties for several years. Domestic trouble arose between them. In
December, 1927, when he proposed to sell his farm, she refused to sign the deed
to the land until he made some provision for her support. He then  made the
contract and arranged to convey to her one-half of the proceeds of that sale.
She signed the deed and  the sale was consummated according to that agreement.
They returned to Los Angeles in 1930. Their difficulties became irreconcilable.
Evidently with his knowledge and consent, she brought suit for divorce against
him on the ground of extreme cruelty. He was served with process and knew all
about that proceeding. He permitted judgment by default to be rendered against
him. The respondent was granted a divorce against him without objection. No
appeal from that decree was taken. It became final and conclusive.

   Under such circumstances it does not seem possible the appellant could have
been deceived or defrauded by the respondent into believing she was legally
qualified to marry him two months after her interlocutory decree of divorce from
her first husband was granted. The appellant knew fully as much about her status
to marry as she did. He was not susceptible of such fraud or deceit. With the
knowledge and warning which he had, he certainly was placed upon inquiry to
determine whether she then had a legal right to marry him. He was charged with
knowledge of her disqualification to marry him. The finding of the court that he
was not deceived or defrauded in that regard is fully sustained by the evidence.

     For the reasons heretofore stated, the finding of the court that the
appellant was not deceived, defrauded or coerced into contracting with the
respondent or conveying to her one-half of the proceeds of the sale of his Idaho
ranch is also abundantly supported by the evidence.  The same is true regarding
the finding that that contract and conveyance were supported by adequate
consideration. Knowing what the appellant knew regarding the illegality of their
marriage, if he doubted the fact that a deed of conveyance of his separate
property did not require her signature, he was certainly placed on notice
requiring him to seek expert advice on that subject. She had lived and worked
faithfully with him as his wife for several years, contributing her own separate
funds to their household expenses and to the maintenance of his property.
Equitably she was entitled to provision for her support. We are of the opinion
the evidence furnishes adequate consideration for that contract and conveyance.

     There is a presumption that by the execution of the deed to that property,
with the accompanying agreement to pay Johanne Godfrey one-half of the proceeds
of that sale, with the request for the grantee to make her a joint payee of the
note and a joint mortgagee of the mortgage, the grantor intended thereby to
convey to her the funds in dispute. (18 C. J. 409, sec. 482.) His conduct estops
him from contending that the execution of that contract and the conveyance of
that property were void. ( H. W. Wright Lumber Co. v. McCord, 145 Wis. 93 [34
L.R.A. N.S. 762, 128 N.W. 873, 50 A. L. R. 807, note, Ann. Cas. 1912B, 92].)

     We are of the opinion the decree of divorce which was rendered against the
appellant is final and conclusive upon all the issues determined thereby; that
the Los Angeles court was vested with jurisdiction of the subject-matter and of
the parties to that divorce proceeding, and the record in this case is devoid of
evidence of any extrinsic fraud exercised by the respondent in prosecuting the
cause or procuring the divorce. The final decree of divorce which was rendered
against the appellant is res judicata of the issues presented in this cause.

   In support of the judgment in this case, we must assume the Los Angeles court
was vested with jurisdiction to try and determine the divorce proceeding against
the appellant. In a collateral attack upon a judgment the jurisdiction of the
court over the subject-matter and the parties involved will be presumed unless
the contrary appears on the face of the decree.  In the present case neither the
pleadings, the decrees nor the evidence of that divorce proceeding are before
us.  They are not included in the transcript on appeal. We must, therefore,
assume that the complaint alleges in adequate form a good cause of action for
divorce on the ground of extreme cruelty, together with the ownership and right
to an award of title to the property involved, and that those issues were
determined upon competent evidence favorable to the respondent and properly
incorporated in the final decree. That was not a suit for annulment. It was a
suit for divorce in the usual form. The appellant was served with process in
that action and suffered default after talking with several lawyers about the
case.   He is now estopped from challenging the form of that action, the
sufficiency of the evidence or the conclusiveness of the decree,  except for
extrinsic fraud. Even though it be conceded the marriage was void ab initio
because the respondent was not an unmarried woman  when it was consummated, the
appellant is estopped by his conduct from disputing the validity and genuineness
of the marriage.

   The present case presents no evidence of extrinsic fraud which will justify a
court of equity in setting aside the decree of divorce.   The rule is thoroughly
established in an unbroken line of authorities that a collateral attack upon a
judgment or decree may not be sustained upon evidence of mere intrinsic fraud
such as the presenting of perjured testimony or forged documents. Extrinsic
fraud, which alone will warrant a court of equity in setting aside a judgment or
decree, consists of such false representations as will prevent a real trial of
the cause upon the merits of the issues involved, like the conduct which may
induce an interested party to refrain from appearing or participating in the
trial, a failure to serve timely notice of the hearing, or acts preventing the
presence at the trial of material witnesses. ( Ringwalt v. Bank of America, 3
Cal. 2d 680, 684 [45 P.2d 967]; Flood v. Templeton, 152 Cal. 148 [92 P. 78, 13
L.R.A. N.S. 579]; Clavey v. Loney, 80 Cal. App. 20, 25 [251 P. 232]; Jeffords v.
Young, 98 Cal. App. 400, 404 [277 P. 163]; 9 Cal. Jur. 748, sec. 101; 17 Am.
Jur. 373, sec. 455.)

     When the alleged fraud or coercion is of such nature that it may reasonably
be presented to the court at the trial so as to afford full and fair protection
to the rights of the interested parties and they fail or neglect to avail
themselves of that opportunity, a court of equity will not disturb the judgment
rendered under such circumstances, but will leave the parties in the position in
which they placed themselves. ( Hendricks v. Hendricks, 216 Cal. 321 [14 P.2d
83]; Estate of Bell, 153 Cal. 331 [95 P. 372]; Short v. Short, 106 Cal. App. 210
[288 P. 1111]; 9 Cal. Jur. 751, sec. 104; 25 Cal. Law Rev. 79.)

     When an interlocutory decree of divorce is procured by collusion of the
parties to the action, equity will not interfere with the final divorce at the
instance of either of the culpable parties. ( Hendricks v. Hendricks, supra;
Bancroft v. Bancroft, 178 Cal. 359 [173 P. 579]; Bruno v. Guglielmo, 113 Cal.
App. 148 [297 P. 967]; 15 Cal. Jur. 63, sec. 148.)  In the present case the
plaintiff planned and conspired to avoid the California law against marriage
within one year of the entry of an interlocutory decree of divorce, and he
deliberately arranged the union and participated in the illegal marriage with
defendant. He also returned with her to Los Angeles where she promptly
instituted a suit for divorce, serving him with summons and complaint therein.
With full knowledge of all the issues presented in that divorce proceeding,
including the question regarding the illegal marriage, he made a personal
appearance in the case and then permitted judgment by default to be rendered
against him. The court was warranted in assuming the divorce suit was brought
through the connivance of this appellant. His conduct bars him from seeking
relief in equity from a situation brought about by his own connivance.
Assuming that a decree of divorce procured by false testimony may be set aside
under proper circumstances on the court's own motion or at the instance of an
injured party who is a stranger to the proceeding, still equity will not
interfere with such a judgment at the behest of either of the culpable parties.
In the absence of evidence adduced at the divorce proceeding, we may not assume
the decree was procured on false testimony, or that the decision of the court
was not fully supported by the pleadings and the evidence. That decree, is,
therefore, final and conclusive, as between the parties to that action, with
respect to their legal status. ( Estate of Lee, 200 Cal. 310, 314 [253 P. 145];
Blumenthal v.  Blumenthal, 97 Cal. App. 558, 561 [275 P. 987]; sec. 1908, Code
Civ. Proc.; 9 R. C. L. 459, secs. 270-272; Averbuch v. Averbuch, 80 Wash. 257
[141 P. 701, Ann. Cas. 1916B, 873].) In the Blumenthal case above cited it is
said:

   "It seems to be the general rule, with respect to final decrees of divorce at
least, that as between the parties and privies a decree granting a divorce is
conclusive of the existence of the marriage dissolved thereby."

     We are of the opinion this cause is also barred by laches, since with full
knowledge of the circumstances the plaintiff acquiesced in the transfer of
one-half of the proceeds of the sale of land, without objection, for a period of
eight years, and he failed to appeal from the decree of divorce  or to object to
the terms thereof for more than four years after the interlocutory decree was
rendered.

   The judgment is affirmed.

   Ross, J., pro tem., and Pullen, P. J., concurred.


                              10 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             ALICE E. HINER, Respondent, v. J. E. HINER, Appellant

                                 Sac. No. 1576

                          Supreme Court of California

                 153 Cal. 254; 94 P. 1044; 1908 Cal. LEXIS 449


                                 March 16, 1908

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from an order of the Superior Court of Sonoma County
granting an allowance to a wife for alimony in an action for maintenance.  Emmet
Seawell, Judge.

COUNSEL: J. M. Thompson, for Appellant.

J. W. Oates, for Respondent.

JUDGES: In Bank.  Lorigan, J.  Henshaw, J., Angellotti, J., Sloss, J., and Shaw,
J., concurred.

OPINION BY: LORIGAN

OPINION

     The plaintiff, who is the wife of defendant, brought this action against
him in the county of Sonoma to obtain a judgment for permanent support of
herself and minor children under section 137 of the Civil Code without asking
for a divorce.

   The complaint filed on February 9, 1906, alleged the marriage of the parties
in 1902; set forth facts constituting desertion of plaintiff by defendant under
the laws of this state; alleged that such desertion of plaintiff took place in
the state of Washington in October, 1902; that plaintiff is a resident of said
state of Washington and that defendant, since shortly after October, 1902, has
been and now is a bona fide resident of Sonoma County, this state, and by
further apt allegations set forth the poverty of plaintiff and the failure of
the defendant to support her and their minor children since the date of his
desertion.

   The defendant demurred to the complaint, challenging the sufficiency of the
facts stated to constitute a cause of action and questioning the jurisdiction of
the court over the subject-matter of the controversy.  Before the demurrer was
disposed of plaintiff moved the court for alimony pendente lite and for costs
and counsel fees, which, though resisted by defendant, the court granted.

    This appeal is taken by defendant from such order of allowance and the only
question presented for consideration is: Can a non-resident wife maintain an
action in this state against a resident husband for permanent support and
maintenance when she has cause for a divorce against him under the law of this
state?

   This is the first time this particular question has arisen in this court and
it is to be solved from an examination of the various provisions of the code
bearing upon the inquiry and these consist of sections 92, 128 and 137 of our
Civil Code.

    Section 92 declares the several causes for which a divorce may be granted in
this state and enumerates "willful desertion" as one of them.  Section 128
provides that "a divorce must not be granted unless the plaintiff has been a
resident of this state for one year and of the county in which the action is
brought three months next preceding the commencement of the action." That
portion of section 137 pertinent to the question here declares that "when the
wife has any cause of action for divorce, as provided in section 92 of this
code, she may, without applying for a divorce, maintain in the superior court an
action against him for permanent support and maintenance of herself, or of
herself and children."

   The principal point to be considered upon this appeal is as to the meaning of
the language used in this latter section.  To simplify matters it may be stated
that no question is made upon this appeal but that the complaint states one of
the causes for divorce -- willful desertion -- mentioned in section 92.

   The claim of counsel for appellant is that plaintiff could only maintain an
action for permanent support under the provisions of section 137 if she had a
"cause of action for divorce" against defendant, and that to constitute a cause
of action for divorce in this state there must not only exist in her favor one
of the "causes for divorce" mentioned in section 92, but she must also have been
a resident of the state for the period required by section 128; that sections 92
and 128 must be considered together for the purpose of determining whether
plaintiff has a cause of action for divorce or not.

   We make no question of the accuracy of appellant's claim that residence is an
essential element to a cause of action  where a divorce itself is sought,
because the law so declares, but we cannot agree with his claim that residence
was intended by the legislature as an essential element in the "cause of action"
mentioned in section 137.  We perceive no impelling reason which calls upon us,
in determining what is meant by the cause of action referred to in section 137,
to consider in connection with section 92, which is referred to in it, also
section 128, which is not.  There is certainly no rule of construction that
requires us to do so.

   Section 128 deals exclusively with divorce, and the object of the legislature
in requiring a residence of one year in this state before a divorce can be
obtained is quite apparent.  It was intended by requiring a residence of a
permanent character, to prevent persons who could not obtain divorce in the
state or country of their real residence, from establishing temporary residence
here for the purpose of doing so.  The policy of the law is against allowing
divorces and they are only allowed in this state in the enumerated cases in
section 92.  The spirit of section 128 is to prohibit them entirely from being
granted in this state except to bona fide residents thereof.  That is its only
purpose.  The section was never intended by the legislature to be invoked in the
construction of section 137 so as to defeat the right of the wife to enforce
against the husband resident here, the marital obligation of supporting her and
their minor children which that section conferred.  The policy of the law, as
illustrated by the enactment  of section 137, is to afford the wife, when cause
for a divorce exists under section 92, the right to enforce support from her
husband, which springs from the marital status, without praying for or requiring
a total dissolution of such status.  Public policy defends the wisdom of a
provision of law requiring that the plaintiff shall be a bona fide resident of
the state, the jurisdiction of whose courts is invoked to obtain a divorce. Its
purpose is to prevent a fraud upon the law of the state by non-residents and is
in aid of restricting the dissolution of the marriage status except at the suit
of a resident of this state.  There is, however, no possible consideration of
public policy which could be suggested in support of precluding a non-resident
wife, or a wife resident here for less than a year, from invoking the aid of our
courts to compel support from her husband  who is a bona fide resident of the
state.  The policy of the present age, following an instinct of humanity and
justice, and crystallizing it into legislative enactment, has been to afford
facilities to the wife to compel the delinquent husband to discharge his marital
duty of support without seeking a divorce, and no one has ever deprecated the
justice or wisdom of the provision except the delinquent husband himself.
Particularly in this country has the doctrine of our courts and the legislation
of the states furthered that right.  Under the rule prevailing in the English
system a court of equity could not decree a specific performance of the marital
obligation on the part of the delinquent husband by requiring him to furnish his
wife separate maintenance; that the only remedy was in a court of law by action
against the husband in favor of any one who was considerate enough to supply her
with the necessaries of life; that the jurisdiction of awarding alimony to the
wife rested with the spiritual courts, could only be granted in those courts,
and then only as an incident to a decree of divorce.

   A more reasonable doctrine early obtained in most of the American courts and
it was held that under its general powers, a court of equity, was authorized in
the case of abandonment of the wife by the husband, to award her, at her own
suit, a decree for separate maintenance against her husband without any
application for a divorce. It was so held in this state before there was any
legislation upon the subject.  ( Galland v. Galland, 38 Cal. 265.) Subsequently
it was provided by section 137, and so stood before the amendment of 1895 which
is now under consideration, that the wife might maintain an action for separate
maintenance without applying for a divorce "when the husband willfully deserts
the wife." This original section extended such right only in cases of willful
desertion. In 1895 the present section was passed which extended the right not
only where there had been willful desertion, but to all cases where the wife has
any cause of action for divorce as provided in section 92 of this code.  The
purpose of the amendment was to enlarge the right of action in favor of the
wife.  It is remedial in its character and the rule is that remedial statutes
are to be liberally construed.  Now, considering the remedy which the
legislature by the section intended to afford to the wife,  which was the right
of separate maintenance without the necessity of suing for divorce, we perceive
no reason why the language of the section conferring it should be construed to
mean that before she could invoke this particular remedy she should, through
residence for the statutory period, be able to invoke the remedy for divorce,
which she did not desire, and which the section declares she need not apply for.
What the legislature intended was to accord the wife the right to compel the
husband to discharge his marital obligation of support, and while it provided
that this could be enforced without asking for a divorce when the "wife has any
cause of action for divorce as provided in section 92 of this code" the cause of
action referred to consisted solely of the existence of one of the "causes for
divorce" mentioned in section 92 as affording a basis for divorce. There is no
rule that requires that the term "cause of action" shall be given a strict
technical construction.  As is said in Cyc., vol. I, p. 643: "As with most legal
terms it often becomes necessary, acting upon the well-settled rules of
construction, to depart from the technical meaning and use of the words 'cause
of action' when contained in statutes, . . . in order to carry out the intention
of the legislature.  . . ." Now applying this rule to the further consideration
of this question.  Section 92 declares what shall constitute "causes for divorce
," and when the legislature in section 137 authorized an action by the wife for
separate maintenance where she had "a cause of action for divorce as provided in
section 92," the cause of action referred to was intended to mean the existence
of any of the causes for divorce which were specified in the latter section;
that while for the purpose of constituting a cause of action where dissolution
of the marriage relation was sought, residence according to section 128 was
essential, still, for the purpose of sustaining an action for maintenance
without divorce, the existence of "cause for divorce" as provided in section 92
constitutes the cause of action, and was all that was necessary or required.  We
think this is a reasonable and just construction to be given to section 137, and
is in accord with the language used in it.  It was undoubtedly a question for
the legislature to declare under what conditions it should accord the right to a
married woman to maintain an action for separate maintenance. If it had intended
that she should not  have that right unless a resident of the state for a year,
it would have said so plainly.  It could have declared it by referring to
section 128 as well as section 92, in enacting section 137.  Or, if it was
intended  that residence should have any application to the right of action
referred to in section 137, it could have amended section 128 so as to declare
that a divorce or judgment for permanent support shall not be granted unless
plaintiff has resided in the state a year.  The fact that it neither referred to
that section nor amended it, but referred solely and specifically to section 92,
is persuasive evidence that the right of a wife to sue for support was to be
measured alone by the existence of a cause for divorce, as provided in section
92 referred to, and is the cause of action meant, and that section 128 was not
intended to have any application.

   Aside from this, effect must be given to all the language used in section
137.  It may not be assumed that any words employed in it were used idly.  And
if it was not intended by referring to section 92 to declare that the existence
of the "cause for divorce" provided therein should constitute the cause of
action for separate maintenance, then the reference to that section was idle.
If it had been intended by the legislature that residence for the required
period should enter as an element in the cause of action for separate support
which it was conferring under section 137, it would have been entirely
unnecessary to refer to section 92 at all.  If that was the intention, it would
have been effectually disclosed by simply providing that "when the wife has any
cause of action for divorce . . . she may maintain" such action for support.  No
reference to section 92 would then have any place or purpose, because there are
no other causes for divorce except as stated in that section, and to have
referred to causes for divorce generally would have accomplished every purpose,
and have left no room for doubt but that residence for the statutory period
would have been essential as an element to the cause of action mentioned in
section 137.

   On the other hand, by referring to section 92 and authorizing suit by the
wife for permanent support without divorce when she has a cause of action for
divorce as therein provided, the only effect and purpose of the reference to
such section must have been to declare that a cause of action for maintenance
is complete when any cause or ground for divorce exists in her favor, and that
her right to sue is to be measured alone by the existence of any such cause for
divorce, and that residence under section 128 was not intended to enter as an
essential element to its maintenance.  And there is every just reason why this
should have been the intention of the legislature and that such a construction
should be put on the language of the section.

   Section 128 has reference solely to the dissolution of the marriage; section
137 solely to conferring a right to secure support without applying for a
dissolution. The one was intended to prevent a fraudulent use of the courts of
this state by temporary residents to obtain the divorces here which they could
not obtain in the states where they properly resided; the other in aid of the
right of a wife to compel the husband to fulfill his marital obligation to
support her and his minor children. While restricting divorces is a matter of
public policy, enforcing the obligations of the husband to support his family is
a matter of justice and duty to be exercised as well in favor of a non-resident
as a resident wife, against a husband who is bona fide a resident of this state.
It was undoubtedly in this spirit that the legislature declared that this
obligation might be enforced and that the right to do so should exist when the
wife had a cause of action as declared in section 92.  It is not consonant with
justice, nor is it warranted by the terms of section 137, to say that the
legislature meant, in addition to the existence of a cause for divorce under
section 92, that the plaintiff should also be a resident for a year before she
would be entitled to maintain an action for her support.  Happily it is not the
law for, while section 128 is intended to apply solely to actions where a
divorce itself is sought, and to prevent this state from being made a resort in
which to obtain a divorce by imposition upon our courts under a fraudulent claim
of residence, it was not intended to apply under section 137 as a basis for
preventing a non-resident deserted wife having a cause of action under section
92 of the code from obtaining the benefit of its provisions.

   We are cited by counsel for appellant to certain decisions from Florida which
he contends sustain the views he urges here.  They do to some extent, but the
statutes of Florida are  so different from our code provision 137 that these
cases do not aid us in the construction of our section of the code.

   The order appealed from is affirmed.


                              11 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             ADRIENNE LUCILLE O'CONNOR, Appellant, v. GERALD JOSEPH
                              O'CONNOR, Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 13879

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                  Division One

          91 Cal. App. 2d 147; 204 P.2d 916; 1949 Cal. App. LEXIS 1196


                                 April 7, 1949

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court
was Denied June 2, 1949.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of the City and
County of San Francisco.  Edward P. Murphy, Judge.

   Action for divorce.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Kinds--Limited Divorce.  --There is in this state no "limited"
divorce placing the relationship of the parties beyond the reach of either of
them alone, and having the effect that they are still married in the sense that
neither of them may remarry, but that they are no longer married in the sense
that either can give the other the choice of resuming the marital relation or
being guilty of desertion.

(2) Id.--Custody and Support of Children -- Where Divorce is Denied.  --In a
divorce action, the court retains authority to deal with the custody and support
of the children of the parties although a divorce is denied. (Civ. Code, §§ 136,
138.)

(3) Id.--Custody and Support of Children--Findings and Order.  --No findings are
required in a custody order; and in a divorce action the court does not lack
power to make an order concerning the custody and support of the children of the
parties simply because it made no finding that the parties were separated at the
time of the judgment.

(4) Id.--Judgment.  --A judgment in a divorce action was not uncertain in that
it denied the divorce, gave custody of the children to defendant, ordered him to
pay for their support, and made no award of community property found to be in
the hands of plaintiff, since it left the parties as they were with respect to
the marital relation and property, and merely made provision for the support of
the children in view of the parties' actual separation without approving such
separation.

COUNSEL: P. H. McCarthy, F. Nason O'Hara and Herbert S. Johnson for Appellant.

Sullivan, Roche, Johnson & Farraher for Respondent.

JUDGES: Bray, J.  Peters, P. J., and Ward, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: BRAY

OPINION

     Appeal by plaintiff on the judgment roll alone from a judgment denying a
divorce with prejudice, awarding to plaintiff and defendant jointly the custody
of their two minor children, and requiring defendant to pay plaintiff $ 75 per
month for the support of said children.

   It is somewhat difficult to understand plaintiff's position on this appeal.
She does not contend that the evidence did not justify the court's refusal to
grant her a divorce, or that the court abused its discretion in granting joint
custody of the children,  nor does she attack the amount awarded for support of
the minors or the court's failure to grant support for herself.  Her appeal
seems to be based mainly upon the rather tenuous proposition that when the court
denied her a divorce, the entire proceeding fell and the court had no power to
deal with the children.  Other minor questions are raised, which will be
discussed later.

    Pleadings

   Plaintiff complained for divorce on the ground of extreme cruelty, asked for
custody of the two minor children, support for them and herself, and that "a
distribution of the community property be made," its size or value being unknown
to her.  Defendant answered, denying the charges of cruelty and that he was not
a fit and proper person to have custody of the children, setting forth the
community property which was of little value, and all of which he alleged was in
the possession of the plaintiff, and asked that a divorce be denied plaintiff
and that the family remain together.

    After a trial, the court found that defendant was not guilty of any cruelty
towards plaintiff, but on the other hand, was "a kind and loving husband" and
"affectionate father." It then entered the judgment above mentioned, making no
disposition of community property.

   "Limited Divorce."

   To support her contention that the court had no jurisdiction to deal with the
children, plaintiff evolves a rather unique theory.  It is, that in a divorce
action, the court must do one of three things: (1) grant an absolute divorce;
(2) grant a "limited" divorce (in both of these cases the court has full
authority to deal with the children); or (3) deny a divorce (as here), but such
denial constitutes a complete dismissal of the proceedings and the court loses
all jurisdiction to deal with the children.

     Plaintiff argues at great length that there is such a thing in California
as a "limited divorce," that is, a judicial decree that one spouse, although
still married, has the right to live away from the other spouse, regardless of
the desire of the latter for reconciliation.  Actually, this issue is not
important to the case, as the plaintiff does not contend that the evidence
required the court to grant such a divorce, but uses such a theory for the
purpose of arguing that without granting such a divorce (or an absolute one) the
court lost jurisdiction over the children.  Plaintiff is wrong in both
particulars.  There is no "limited" divorce in this state, nor by a denial of a
divorce does the court lose jurisdiction to deal with the custody and support of
the children.

   While there are some early California decisions which speak of "limited"
divorces, generally they are referring to decrees of separate maintenance and do
not use the term in the sense used by plaintiff.  However, in Grant v. Grant, 68
Cal.App. 23 [228 P. 412], the court stated that section 137 of the Civil Code
provided, in effect, for a limited divorce. That this is not the proper
construction of the section is clearly decided in Monroe v. Superior Court, 28
Cal.2d 427 [170 P.2d 473], where the court said (p. 431): "A limited divorce
places the relationship of the parties beyond the reach of either of them alone.
They are still married in the sense that neither may remarry, but they are no
longer married in the sense that either can give the other the choice of
resuming the marital  relation or being guilty of desertion. As between
themselves the parties are in the same position as they are after a decree of
absolute divorce. The California law makes no provision for such limited
divorces. It was expressly so held in McMullin v. McMullin, 123 Cal. 653 [56 P.
554], and although Grant v. Grant, 68 Cal.App. 23 [228 P. 412], contains a
dictum to the contrary, the question was definitely settled in Cardinale v.
Cardinale, 8 Cal.2d 762 [68 P.2d 351]." (See, also, 35 Cal.L.Rev., 153.)

   Custody and Support

     That the court, after denying a divorce, has the authority to deal with the
children is well settled in this state.  In Morrow v. Morrow, 60 Cal.App. 688
[214 P. 239], the wife sued for a divorce. The husband cross-complained, also
asking for a divorce. The court denied either a divorce and awarded the custody
of the three minor children to the husband.  On appeal it was held: "The court
was authorized to make the order giving the custody of the children to the
defendant ( Civ. Code, secs. 138, 246; Ex parte Gordan, 95 Cal. 377 [30 P. 561]
), notwithstanding that a divorce was denied to both parties." (P. 692.)

    Section 138 of the Civil Code, referred to in the Morrow case, is quite
comprehensive.  It provides: "In actions for divorce the court may, during the
pendency of the action, or at the final hearing or at any time thereafter,
during the minority of any of the children of the marriage, make such order for
the custody, care, education, maintenance and support of such minor children as
may seem necessary or proper . . ."

   The Morrow case, in applying section 138 in a case where divorce was denied,
answers a further contention made by plaintiff that the court in our case could
only act under section 136 of the Civil Code, which is a more limited section
than 138.  Section 136 provides: "Though judgment of divorce is denied, the
court may, in an action for divorce, provide for the maintenance by the husband,
of the wife and children of the marriage, or any of them." (See, also, the
quotation, infra, from Jacobs v. Jacobs, 68 Cal.App. 725 [230 P. 209].) Whether
the court here acted under section 136 or section 138 is unimportant, as under
either section it was empowered to provide for the care and custody of the
children.

   A case similar to the one at bar is Jacobs v. Jacobs, supra, 68 Cal.App. 725.
There the wife sued for divorce on the  ground of cruelty. The husband
cross-complained, alleging cruelty and desertion. The court denied a divorce to
either party, granted the wife the custody of the minor child, and ordered the
husband to pay $ 100 per month for the support of the wife and child.  Exactly
as in our case, the husband, on appeal, contended, as the wife does here, that
by denying a divorce the court divested itself of jurisdiction to award support
for the wife and custody of and support for the child.  After first holding that
the court did have the power to make such an award for the wife, the court then
said that the jurisdiction of the court to award custody and support of the
child "is expressly found in sections 136 and 138 of the Civil Code.  The
welfare of minor children being of paramount concern in cases of this kind, the
court may, under the authority of section 136, as well as section 138, of the
Civil Code, make such order for the custody, care, education, maintenance and
support of the minor child as may seem necessary or proper.  . . .  There
cannot, therefore, be any doubt as to the jurisdiction of the trial court to
award the custody of the minor child to the wife and to compel the father to pay
for its support." (P. 731.)

   Findings and Judgment

     Plaintiff contends that the court made no finding that the parties were
separated at the time of judgment, and hence the court lacked power to make an
order concerning the custody and support of the children.  This latter
conclusion is erroneous.  No findings are required on a custody order. ( Booth
v. Booth, 69 Cal.App.2d 496 [159 P.2d 93].) Moreover, the complaint alleged and
the answer admitted that the parties separated on a certain day.  The court
found that the allegations in the complaint "respecting the length of time
elapsing between said marriage and the time of separation of the parties hereto
are true" and that "the separation of plaintiff and defendant was in no way
caused by any act or conduct of defendant." If findings on the subject were
needed, these, in view of the court's award of custody and support, were
sufficient to show that the parties were still separated.

     The court found that there was community property in the hands of
plaintiff.  It made no award thereof.  Plaintiff contends that this leaves her
uncertain as to the present status of this property.  The interesting part of
this contention is that although plaintiff has contended strenuously that the
court did not, but should have, granted a limited divorce, she now states "if
the trial court simply denied her prayer for a divorce without allowing her a
limited divorce," the parties, under the authority of Barrow v. Barrow, 42
Cal.App. 48 [183 P. 365], would then be left where they were.  The court did not
grant a limited decree; therefore the property is still community property.
Plaintiff, again on the assumption that she received a limited divorce, contends
that she does not know what her marital status is.  As she was denied a divorce,
she and her husband are still married, although actually, not legally,
separated.  The decree is not uncertain, nor  does it indicate that the court
approved of this separation.  The court merely took cognizance of the fact of
separation and made provision, as was its duty, for the protection of the
children.

   The judgment is affirmed.


                              12 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              RICHARD R. HARLAN, Respondent, v. MERICIA G. HARLAN,
                                   Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 14885

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Three

          70 Cal. App. 2d 657; 161 P.2d 490; 1945 Cal. App. LEXIS 1118


                                August 31, 1945

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Respondent's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court
was Denied October 29, 1945.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  Carl A. Stutsman, Judge.

   Action to annul a marriage.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Foreign Divorces.  --Where a Mexican divorce decree does not
affirmatively show on its face that neither of the parties had resided in that
country and the fact of nonresidence is shown, the decree is invalid in this
state, since the court granting the decree did not have jurisdiction of either
of the parties or of the subject matter of the action.

(2) Id.--Foreign Divorces.  --Where the Mexican court had neither jurisdiction
of the parties nor of the subject matter of a wife's divorce action, the
husband's consent could not confer jurisdiction to grant his wife a decree of
divorce.

(3) Id.--Foreign Divorces.  --A Mexican divorce decree obtained without
jurisdiction of either of the parties or of the subject matter is not entitled
to recognition by the California courts under the provisions of Code Civ. Proc.,
§ 1915, since this section expressly limits its application to final judgments
of courts having jurisdiction.

(4) Id.--Foreign Divorces--Estoppel to Question Validity of Decree.  --A man who
married a woman after he was instrumental in securing a Mexican divorce from her
former husband and paid the attorney's fee and expenses for said divorce is not
in a position to take advantage of the invalidity of said decree, obtained
without jurisdiction of either of the parties or of the subject matter, where he
had lived with the woman as husband and wife for many years both before and
after the decree was obtained.

COUNSEL: August J. O'Connor and George J. Hider for Appellant.

Button, Herzog & Butts for Respondent.

JUDGES: Fox, J. pro tem.  Shinn, Acting P. J., and Wood (Parker), J., concurred.

OPINION BY: FOX

OPINION

     Plaintiff brought this action to have his ceremonial marriage to defendant
annulled on the ground that at the time of said ceremony defendant had a former
husband living, and that her marriage to said former husband had not been
dissolved by divorce or otherwise.

   Defendant is a native of Cuba.  In December, 1921, she married, in Havana,
Karl Hugo Karlsson, a national of Sweden.  In 1927, plaintiff was in Havana
making some motion pictures. He met defendant, a housewife, and employed her for
a brief period in making two pictures. When plaintiff and his party returned to
California later on that year, defendant came with them on the same boat.
Defendant testified that plaintiff promised her work in certain pictures he had
under contract to make if she would come along.  Sometime after arriving in
California plaintiff and defendant began living together as man and wife.  In
1929 defendant went back to Havana and, at the request of the plaintiff,
discussed with her husband the matter of her getting a divorce. He consented.
Soon after her return to California plaintiff, with whom she continued to live,
took her to a Mexican attorney in Los Angeles and made arrangements with him to
secure a Mexican divorce for defendant.  She did not then speak or understand
English, and testified at the trial herein through an interpreter.  The part
that plaintiff had in arranging for this divorce is best shown by the deposition
of the attorney  who was employed to procure this divorce. The following
interrogatories and answers are pertinent on this point: "[Q.] Did Richard
Harlan and Mericia G. Harlan engage your services to secure a Mexican divorce
for Mericia G. Harlan from her then husband, Karl Hugo Karlsson?  A. Yes, that's
right.  [Q.] Did Mr. Richard Harlan ask you about securing this divorce for
Paulina Mericia Gonzales Karlsson?  A. Yes, that's right.  [Q.] Please state
what you recall Richard Harlan said regarding that matter at that time.  A. Mr.
Richard Harlan expressed to this deponent that he desired to obtain a divorce
for Paulina Mericia Gonzales Karlsson, with whom he wanted to get married after
the divorce. . . .  [Q.] After you secured the decree of divorce, did you inform
Mr. Richard Harlan and Paulina Mericia Gonzales Karlsson of that fact?  A. Yes,
I informed them.  [Q.] Thereafter, did you receive any monies from Richard
Harlan for your fee?  And if so, how much, if you recall?  A. Yes, I received
the money from Mr. Harlan, and I assume it was in the neighborhood of $ 300.
[Q.] Did Richard Harlan pay you anything for your services in connection with
this divorce? A. Mr. Harlan from its beginning  undertook to pay the costs of
this divorce, and he paid them.  [Q.] Did Richard Harlan tell you at any time
that he wanted you to secure this foreign divorce so that he could marry Paulina
Mericia Gonzales Karlsson?  A. Yes, that is true, as I have expressed
hereinabove. . . .  [Q.] Please relate the conversation which you claim took
place between you and Mrs. Karlsson and Mr. Harlan at your first interview,
stating in substance what each person said.  A. The conversation that took place
in the first interview consisted in the fact that the persons who came expressed
to deponent that they desired a Mexican divorce. They asked for details
regarding price, time of duration, validity of the same; and Mr. Harlan
expressed the desire that he wanted this divorce rapidly because he desired to
marry Mrs. Karlsson.  [Q.] Isn't it true that Mr. Harlan was simply introduced
as a friend of Mrs. Karlsson and that he took no active part in engaging you?
A. Mr. Harlan took active part in the matter, because it was he who undertook to
pay for the matter I have expressed in my answer hereinabove. . . .  [Q.] On how
many occasions, if any, did you contend Mr. Harlan accompanied Mrs. Karlsson at
such conferences?  A. I cannot fix the occasions when Mr. Harlan accompanied
Mrs. Karlsson to the  office of the deponent, but I do remember that besides the
first time on the conference when he was in my office, Mr. Harlan telephoned me
inquiring regarding the decree, the final decree. [Q.] Did you ever confer with
Mr. Harlan alone?  A. I don't remember if Mr. Harlan was alone in my office or
in the office of the deponent, but I do remember that he called me over the
telephone a number of times.  . . .  [Q.] Do you know of your own knowledge who
owned the funds with which you were paid? A. Deponent does not know who was the
owner of the funds, but I repeat that Mr. Harlan was the one who undertook to
pay them." This lawyer also testified that he advised the parties that they
would be free to marry when the Mexican decree was granted.  Pursuant to the
foregoing arrangements an action for divorce from Karl Hugo Karlsson was filed
on behalf of the defendant herein in the State of Sinaloa, Republic of Mexico,
in the summer of 1930.  Neither of the parties established any domicile or
residence in the State of Sinaloa or were physically present therein during the
pendency of said action.  The entire matter was handled by the respective
attorneys of the parties through authority given by powers of attorney.  Mr.
Karlsson filed, through his attorney, his consent that the divorce be granted to
his wife, and such decree was granted to her in December, 1930.  Plaintiff and
defendant went through a marriage ceremony in Los Angeles, California, on March
11, 1931, and lived together as husband and wife until December, 1943, when they
separated.  Mr. Karlsson died in 1942.

     The Mexican divorce granted to the defendant herein from Mr. Karlsson was
of the "mail order" class.  The decree, however, did not affirmatively show upon
its face that neither of the parties had resided there.  Upon this fact being
shown the invalidity of the decree in this state was thereby established, since
the court in Mexico did not have jurisdiction of either of the parties or of the
subject matter of the action.  ( Ryder v. Ryder (1934), 2 Cal.App.2d 426 [37
P.2d 1069]; People v. Harlow (1935), 9 Cal.App.2d 643 [50 P.2d 1052]; Kegley v.
Kegley (1936), 16 Cal.App.2d 216 [60 P.2d 482]; Estate of McNutt (1940), 36
Cal.App.2d 542 [98 P.2d 253].)   The consent of Mr. Karlsson could not confer
jurisdiction to grant his wife, the defendant herein, a decree of divorce. (
Ryder v. Ryder, supra; Kegley v. Kegley, supra; Andrews v. Andrews (1903), 188
U.S. 14 [23 S.Ct. 237, 47  L.Ed 366].)   Nor is this decree entitled to
recognition by the courts of California under the provisions of section 1915,
Code of Civil Procedure,  for "this section expressly limits its application to
final judgments of courts having jurisdiction.  And by section 1917 of the Code
of Civil Procedure, such jurisdiction must be 'over the cause, over the parties,
and over the thing, when a specific thing is the subject of the judgment.'" (
People v. Harlow, supra, at p. 646.) And, as pointed out in Ryder v. Ryder,
supra, at page 431, no assistance is afforded by section 1915, Code of Civil
Procedure, "because of the lack of the very elements specified" by that section.
In the instant case, as in the  Ryder case, "There is nothing in the record to
indicate what the law of Mexico is concerning divorce. We have been directed to
no statute or code or other law of that country governing the subject of divorce
. If, however, it be assumed that the laws of that country require no residence
nor the presence of the parties within its territory as a basis of jurisdiction,
and that the formal requirements established by Mexican law were met, then the
divorce cannot be recognized under the laws of this state" (p. 432).

     Plaintiff, however, is not in a position to take advantage of the
invalidity of the Mexican divorce decree which the defendant obtained from Mr.
Karlsson.  The record is clear that plaintiff paid the attorney's fee and
expenses for obtaining said divorce and that he had an active and dominant part
in arranging for same and in seeing that it was carried through expeditiously.
Plaintiff herein was not technically a party to the Mexican suit.  But he
certainly was interested in its outcome.  He was anxious that defendant be in a
position so that he could marry her.  He would thereby extricate himself from
the immoral and illegal relationship in which he had been living.  He as much as
any other, not excepting the defendant, was responsible for institution of the
suit and obtaining the decree. His interest then was to procure the result which
he now seeks to nullify, after having lived with defendant as husband and wife
for over twelve years.  That the sweet may have turned sour does not make it
conscionable that the plaintiff should be allowed now to undo what his own hand
and mind had so much to do in creating.  Plaintiff is therefore not in a
position to question the validity of defendant's divorce. This is on the
principle of quasi estoppel "which is based  upon the principle that one cannot
blow both hot and cold, or that one 'with full knowledge of the facts shall not
be permitted to act in a manner inconsistent with his former position or conduct
to the injury of another.' (10 Cal.Jur., p. 645; McDanels v. General Ins. Co., 1
Cal.App.2d 454, 459 (35 P.2d 394), [36 P.2d 829].) Another way of stating the
same general principle (applicable directly to the instant case) is that one who
has invoked the exercise of a jurisdiction within the general powers of the
court cannot seek to reverse its orders upon the ground of lack of jurisdiction.
'The principle opposing such action is one of estoppel in the interest of a
sound administration of the laws whereby the regularity or even validity of an
act procured by one himself cannot be raised -- not that the act is valid, for
it may not be, and estoppel does not make valid the thing complained of, but
merely closes the mouth of the complainant.  ( Spence v. State Nat. Bank,
(Tex.Com.App.) 5 S.W.2d 754.) The principle is known as the doctrine of
acquiescence often referred to as quasi estoppel.'" ( Estate of Davis (1940), 38
Cal.App.2d 579, 584-5 [101 P.2d 761, 102 P.2d 545].) In the Davis case the
deceased urged respondent to go to Nevada, establish a residence for the sole
purpose of securing a divorce, and then to marry him.  He paid the costs and
expenses of the divorce, and went to Reno and took an active part in the
preparation of the case, and married respondent on the day the divorce was
granted.  Upon the death of Mr. Davis his heir attacked the validity of
respondent's divorce and subsequent marriage to Mr. Davis.  The court held that
because of Mr. Davis' part in procuring the Nevada decree for respondent he
would have been foreclosed from denying the validity thereof or the subsequent
marriage under the doctrine of quasi estoppel and that his heir was in no better
position.

   In Goodloe v. Hawk (1940), 113 F.2d 753, the plaintiff husband sought an
annulment of his marriage with defendant on the ground that her Virginia divorce
was not valid.  He claimed that she was never either domiciled in or a bona fide
resident of Virginia.  It appeared, however, that the plaintiff had asked her to
get a divorce so that he could marry her and that he had paid for the divorce.
After they had lived together more than a decade plaintiff brought an action for
annulment in the District of Columbia.  The United States Court of Appeals, in
an opinion by Mr. Justice Fred M. Vinson,  held that the husband "should be
barred by the salutary principles of laches or estoppel from challenging the
Virginia court's finding" that the defendant wife was domiciled there.

   In Saul v. Saul (1941), 122 F.2d 64, in an opinion written by Mr. Justice
Rutledge (now of the United States Supreme Court) the principle of estoppel was
applied to prevent the plaintiff husband in an annulment action from questioning
the sufficiency of the notice that was given in the defendant's prior divorce
action to her then husband, Mr. Gardner.  This was upon the basis that he had
financed the divorce and actively aided her in procuring it.

   In Margulies v. Margulies (1931), 109 N.J.Eq. 391 [157 A. 676], it is said in
the syllabus by the court that "One who induces a defendant to obtain a foreign
divorce and pays the expenses thereof, and afterwards marries her, is precluded
from attacking the validity of the divorce."

   In Van Slyke v. Van Slyke (1915), 186 Mich. 324 [152 N.W. 921], the plaintiff
wife sued defendant for a divorce. He sought to show that she had procured her
divorce from a former husband through misrepresentation of her residence and
that therefore said decree was not valid and consequently their marriage was
invalid.  The court pointed out that he was "quite as much interested in
procuring the decree of divorce as was the complainant, proposed to pay her
counsel and advised her and her counsel of his interest.  He intended to profit
by the decree of divorce, not in a financial way, but in removing an obstacle to
his marriage with complainant." The court held that by reason of these
circumstances he had no standing to present such a defense.  (See, also, Bowen
v. Finke (1940), 34 F.Supp. 235.)

   That the defendant was imposed upon by the plaintiff is clear.  After
discussing the evidence at great length at the close of the trial, the learned
trial judge at the very conclusion of his summation of the case said: "I think
here the defendant is the innocent party.  No question about it in my mind.  The
plaintiff is not innocent." Under such circumstances and in view of the evidence
and authorities the defense of quasi estoppel should have been sustained.  To
hold otherwise protects neither the welfare nor morals of society but, on the
contrary, such holding is a flagrant invitation to others to attempt to
circumvent the law, cohabit in unlawful  state, and when tired of such
situation, apply to the courts for a release from the indicia of the marriage
status.

   Respondent relies on Sullivan v. Sullivan (1934), 219 Cal. 734 [28 P.2d 914].
That case has no application here because the plaintiff there only had an
"interlocutory" decree when she remarried.  She was not divorced.

   The judgment is reversed with directions to retry only the issues made by the
amended cross-complaint for divorce and the answer thereto.


                              13 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           JOHN W. SCOTT, Respondent, v. WINIFRED C. SCOTT, Appellant

                                L. A. No. 24855

                          Supreme Court of California

               51 Cal. 2d 249; 331 P.2d 641; 1958 Cal. LEXIS 227


                               November 18, 1958

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Appellant's Petition for a Rehearing was Denied December
17, 1958.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  Newcomb Condee, Judge.

   Action for declaratory relief.

COUNSEL: Monta W. Shirley and George W. Nilsson for Appellant.

Hahn, Ross & Saunders and E. Loyd Saunders for Respondent.

JUDGES: In Bank. McComb, J.  Gibson, C. J., Shenk, J., Schauer, J., and Spence,
J., concurred.  Traynor, J., concurs.  Carter, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: McCOMB

OPINION

     Defendant Winifred C. Scott appeals from a judgment in a declaratory relief
action decreeing that a divorce procured by plaintiff from her in the District
of Bravos, State of Chihuahua, Republic of Mexico, on March 17, 1956, was valid.

   Chronology

   i.  January 10, 1931, plaintiff and defendant Winifred were married.

   ii.  July 9, 1948, they separated.

    iii.  In 1952 plaintiff procured a Mexican divorce from Winifred in Juarez,
Chihuahua, Mexico.

   iv.  December 5, 1952, plaintiff married defendant Elli Scott.

   v. December 11, 1952, Winifred filed a separate maintenance action against
plaintiff in the Superior Court of Los Angeles County.

   vi.  May 9, 1953, the Superior Court of Los Angeles County awarded Winifred
separate maintenance and held  that the Mexican divorce decree procured by
plaintiff in 1952 was invalid.

   vii.  In January 1955 plaintiff, having retired from the United States Army,
went to Guadalajara, in the State of Jalisco, Republic of Mexico, and employed
an attorney to obtain another divorce from Winifred.  The attorney filed an
action in the State of Jalisco, but the judge refused to hear the case, saying
that, so far as he was concerned, the Mexican divorce which plaintiff had
procured in 1952 was valid and that plaintiff could obtain a rehearing on it
only under another set of circumstances and charges in the State of Chihuahua.

   viii.  In January 1956 plaintiff went back to Juarez, in the State of
Chihuahua, and filed a complaint for divorce against Winifred, a copy of which
was served upon her by mail in Omaha, Nebraska.  The hearing in this divorce
proceeding was held on January 14, 1956, at which time plaintiff personally
testified therein.

   ix.  March 2, 1956, the Superior Court of Los Angeles County, upon the
application of defendant Winifred, after service by mail on plaintiff,  issued
the following injunction: "It Is Therefore Ordered, Adjudged and Decreed that
the defendant, John W. Scott, his servants and his agents, be permanently
restrained and enjoined from proceeding with, and from maintaining the validity
of, any divorce proceeding, or divorce decree obtained, in that certain
proceeding instituted by defendant herein on or about the 16th day of January,
1956, against plaintiff herein for a divorce in the Second Civil Court, City of
Juarez, Chihuahua, Mexico, the copies of the Summons and Complaint in said
proceedings having been served upon the plaintiff herein on or about the 25th
day of January, 1956, as is more fully described in the Affidavit of Winifred C.
Scott in Support of Injunction on file herein."

   x.  March 17, 1956, defendant Winifred having failed to appear in the action,
another decree of divorce was granted to plaintiff from her by the Mexican court
in the State of Chihuahua.

   xi.  July 26, 1956, plaintiff filed an application in the Los Angeles
Superior Court separate maintenance action seeking a modification of the support
decree, alleging that he had procured a divorce from Winifred in Mexico on March
17, 1956.  In August 1956 the Superior Court of Los Angeles County  made an
order denying plaintiff's application for a modification of the support decree
and made, among others, this finding: "That the Decree of Divorce obtained by
the defendant in the State of Chihuahua on March 17, 1956, is contrary to and is
in violation of the injunction issued against the defendant in this action on
March 2, 1956, whereby the defendant was restrained from proceeding with any
divorce proceedings instituted in the City of Juarez, State of Chihuahua, Mexico
. . .  For the purposes of this hearing, there is no finding as to the validity
or the invalidity of the Mexican decree of divorce obtained by the defendant
from the plaintiff on March 17, 1956.  . . ." (Italics added.)

   xii.  August 23, 1956, plaintiff filed the present action for declaratory
relief, alleging that he had procured a valid decree of divorce from Winifred on
March 17, 1956.  Winifred filed an answer to the complaint, and after trial the
court entered judgment in favor of plaintiff, declaring:

   "A.  That the Judgment of Divorce between John W. Scott, the plaintiff, and
Winifred C. Scott, the defendant, dated March 17, 1956, in the State of
Chihuahua,  Republic of Mexico, is a valid and subsisting divorce.

   " B.  That Winifred C. Scott is not the wife of John W.  Scott, and that the
defendant Elli Scott is the wife of John W. Scott.

   "C.  That there is the relation, the rights and duties of husband and wife as
between the plaintiff, John W. Scott, and the defendant Elli Scott."

   Questions: First.  Was the second Mexican decree of divorce procured by
plaintiff from defendant Winifred C. Scott invalid because there was a
subsisting separate maintenance decree between the parties on March 17, 1956,
the date said second Mexican decree was entered

   No.   The following rule is here applicable:

   Although there is a subsisting separate maintenance decree, another
jurisdiction can grant a divorce to one of the parties and validly terminate the
relation of husband and wife.

   In Estin v. Estin, 334 U.S. 541 [68 S.Ct. 1213, 92 L.Ed. 1561, 1 A.L.R.2d
1412], a wife procured a separate maintenance decree in New York.  Thereafter
the husband went to Nevada and, upon constructive service, was granted an ex
parte Nevada divorce decree.

   The Supreme Court of the United States held that the Nevada decree was
entitled to full faith and credit, saying, at page 546: "The State has a
considerable interest in preventing  bigamous marriages and in protecting the
offspring of marriages from being bastardized" and again, at page 549: "The
result in this situation is to make the divorce divisible -- to give effect to
the Nevada decree insofar as it affects marital status and to make it
ineffective on the issue of alimony.  It accommodates the interests of both
Nevada and New York in this broken marriage by restricting each State to the
matters of her dominant concern." (See also Worthley v. Worthley, 44 Cal.2d 465,
468 [2] [283 P.2d 19].)

     Second.  Was plaintiff a bona fide resident of Mexico on March 17, 1956

   Yes.  The trial court found that plaintiff was a bona fide resident of Mexico
on March 17, 1956, when he procured the second decree of divorce from Winifred.

   This finding is amply supported by the following evidence in the record: (a)
Plaintiff had resided in Mexico from January 5, 1955, to about July 1956; (b) he
was unable to work, except that he was writing books and short stories while in
Mexico; (c) he was a retired Army officer, whose pension was not sufficient to
support him in the United States, and he therefore lived in Mexico, where his
expenses were less; (d) he leased a residence in Mexico, and his furniture had
been there for a long period of time and was there at the time of trial; and (e)
he expected to return to Mexico when the present litigation was terminated and
live there the rest of his life.

     Third.  Was the second divorce decree which plaintiff procured in Mexico a
valid divorce decree

   Yes.  A Mexican attorney who qualified as an expert on the laws of Mexico
testified that he had examined the divorce proceedings and the decree granted
March 17, 1956, and that under the laws of Mexico plaintiff had been granted a
valid decree of divorce from Winifred, which decree would be recognized in the
State of Chihuahua and all over Mexico.  This being true, the general rule is
applicable that where a party has established a bona fide residence in Mexico
and obtained a Mexican decree of divorce, such decree is entitled to full faith
and credit in California.  (Cf.  DeYoung v. DeYoung, 27 Cal.2d 521, 524 [1] et
seq. [165 P.2d 457].)

     Fourth.  Did the injunction which was granted on March 2, 1956, invalidate
the   divorce decree of March 17, 1956

   No.  The ex parte injunction restraining plaintiff from proceeding  with the
second divorce action in Mexico was never served on him, and he had no personal
knowledge of it until after the divorce had been granted.  The injunction was
issued on March 2, 1956, but the hearing  in the divorce proceeding had been
held some weeks prior to that time, with plaintiff personally testifying
therein, on January 14, 1956.  Therefore, the California court purported to
enjoin plaintiff from taking action which he had already taken.   Obviously an
injunction cannot be granted to prohibit an act which has already occurred.

     Fifth.  Was the ruling of the California court denying plaintiff's
application for a modification of the separate maintenance decree res judicata
in the present action on the question of the validity of the second Mexican
divorce decree

   No.  In denying plaintiff's application for a modification of the separate
maintenance decree, the trial court made the following finding: "For the
purposes of this hearing, there is no finding as to the validity or the
invalidity of the Mexican decree of divorce obtained by the defendant from the
plaintiff on March 17, 1956."

   The judgment is affirmed.

CONCUR BY: TRAYNOR

CONCUR

   TRAYNOR, J.  I concur in the judgment.

   Under the full faith and credit clause of the United States Constitution, the
United States Supreme Court determines what effect state courts will accord
judgments of courts of sister states.

   As to judgments of courts of foreign countries, however, state courts have
generally held that state law is controlling in the absence of treaties or
federal legislation.  (See Reese, The Status in This Country of Judgments
Rendered Abroad, 50 Columb. L. Rev. 783, 787.) For the most part they have
followed the rules applicable to judgments of courts of sister states.  Given
the customary invocation of domicile as the touchstone of divorce jurisdiction
in this country, they have generally invoked it also as to divorce decrees of
courts of foreign countries. They have refused to recognize such decrees, absent
the domicile of either party in the other country, even when that country does
not require domicile as a basis for divorce. (See 28 N.Y.U.L.Rev. 742, 743-745.)

   Critics, however, have pointed out that a country other than  the domicile
may have a legitimate interest in the marital status of the parties, even though
it does not accept the common law jurisdictional concept of domicile. (See Howe,
The Recognition of Foreign Divorce Decrees in New York State, 40 Columb.L.Rev.
373, 375-376; 40 Cal.L.Rev. 93, 99-100.) Likewise the New York courts recognize
civil law decrees obtained without domicile in the country of the court issuing
the decree (e.g., Gould v. Gould, 235 N.Y. 14 [138 N.E. 490]) and, under certain
circumstances, the English courts do not make domicile a condition for the
recognition of a foreign divorce decree. (E.g., Travers v. Holley [1953], P.
246; see Manning v. Manning [1958], 2 W.L.R. 318; Mann, The Royal Commission of
Marriage and Divorce: Jurisdiction of the English Courts and Recognition of
Foreign Decrees, 21 Modern L.Rev. 1; Armitage v. Attorney General [1906], P.
135; Griswold, Divorce Jurisdiction and Recognition of Divorce Decrees -- A
Comparative Study, 65 Harv.L.Rev. 193.)

   This court has never expressly ruled on the question whether a finding of
domicile is prerequisite to the recognition in this state of a divorce decree
rendered abroad.  1 Although there was a finding of  domicile in this case,
there should be no implication from the court's opinion herein that would
preclude contacts with the foreign country other than domicile as a basis of
jurisdiction.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   In
DeYoung v. DeYoung, 27 Cal.2d 521 [165 P.2d 457], we "assumed without deciding"
that a divorce decree of a Mexican court could be collaterally attacked here if
the plaintiff had not been domiciled in the jurisdiction granting the divorce.
In Rediker v. Rediker, 35 Cal.2d 796 [221 P.2d 1, 20 A.L.R.2d 1152], we did not
find it necessary to decide whether a foreign divorce decree could be attacked
on these grounds, since it was to be assumed in the absence of evidence to the
contrary that the plaintiff was a bona fide resident of Cuba and that therefore
the foreign court had jurisdiction even if measured by our standards.

   The District Courts of Appeal of this state have denied recognition to
divorce decrees of a foreign country when domicile was lacking, even though the
foreign country did not require domicile as a basis for divorce jurisdiction.
(See, e.g., Ryder v. Ryder, 2 Cal.App.2d 426 [37 P.2d 1069]; Harlan v. Harlan,
70 Cal.App.2d 657 [161 P.2d 490].) These cases should be disapproved insofar as
they make domicile a sine qua non of recognition.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     Section 1915 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides: "A final judgment of
any other tribunal of a foreign country having jurisdiction, according to the
laws of such country, to pronounce the judgment, shall have the same effect as
in the country where rendered, and also the same effect as final judgments
rendered in this state." (Italics added.) The first task of the court is thus to
determine whether or not the  foreign court had jurisdiction under the laws of
its own country.  The problem is not automatically settled, however, if there is
a determination that there was jurisdiction.  The court must then go on to
determine whether recognition of the foreign decree would violate due process
limitations or established local policy, for we cannot assume that in section
1915 the Legislature meant to override such limitations or policy.  If there is
no such violation, a decree of divorce that is valid according to the laws of
the foreign country should be recognized here.  (See Ruiz, The Effect of Section
1915 of the Code of Civil Procedure on Migratory Divorces Procured in Foreign
Countries, 13 So.Cal.L.Rev. 294; Ehrenzweig, Survey of California Law 1950-1951,
Conflicts of Laws, 141-142.)

   There is no reason to read any requirement of domicile or bona fide residence
into the statute.  The status of persons as married or not married should be
ascertainable with reasonable certainty.  The valid judgments of courts of other
countries should therefore be respected unless they run counter to local policy.
The public policy of California may not permit the recognition of a foreign
divorce decree when the foreign jurisdiction has no legitimate interest in the
marital status of the parties, when the sole purpose of seeking the divorce in a
foreign court is to evade the laws of this state (see Civ. Code, §§ 150- 150.4),
or when the divorce is ex parte without reasonable notice to the defendant.  No
such problem arises in the present case, since plaintiff was a bona fide
resident of Mexico, neither party was a resident of California, and the
defendant had reasonable notice.


                              14 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           SARAH FRANCES RYDER, Respondent, v. ROYAL SIMMERAL RYDER,
                                   Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 5164

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, THIRD APPELLATE DISTRICT

          2 Cal. App. 2d 426; 37 P.2d 1069; 1934 Cal. App. LEXIS 1443


                           November 26, 1934, Decided

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition by Appellant to have the Cause Heard in the
Supreme Court, after Judgment in the District Court of Appeal, was Denied by the
Supreme Court on January 24, 1935.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Mendocino
County and from orders granting alimony, counsel fees and costs. W. D. L. Held,
Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Foreign Decree--Invalidity of--Residence.  --In this action for
divorce, a court of Mexico which granted a divorce decree to the husband never
acquired jurisdiction of the res nor of the parties, and such a foreign divorce
could not be recognized as valid, where neither plaintiff nor defendant had ever
been in Mexico during the year of the divorce, and during all of such time
defendant husband maintained his residence and his employment in this state, and
plaintiff had never consented to submit to the jurisdiction of the Mexican
courts.

(2) Id.--Residence--Jurisdiction--Foreign Judgment--Impeachment.  --Jurisdiction
over the subject-matter of divorce rests upon domicile, or at least residence of
one of the parties, and a decree of divorce rendered in a foreign jurisdiction
may be impeached and denied recognition upon the ground that neither of the
parties had such domicile or residence at the divorce forum notwithstanding the
recitals in the decree.

(3) Id.--Judgments--Jurisdiction--Recitals--Residence--Evidence.  --Neither
recitals in the decree nor consent of the parties can confer jurisdiction in the
face of evidence that plaintiff in the divorce action did not have a bona fide
residence.

(4) Id.--Domicile--Intention.  --Domicile is changed from one place to another
only upon the abandonment of the first place of domicile with the intent not to
return and upon taking up a residence in another place with the intention of
permanently residing in that place.

(5) Id.--Judgments--Residence--Jurisdiction.  --The first essential for the
validity of a decree of divorce between the parties is that it should be
pronounced by a court of competent jurisdiction and that one of the parties at
least be a bona fide subject of that jurisdiction.

(6) Id.--Judgments--Jurisdiction--Evidence.  --The record of a judgment rendered
in another state may be contradicted as to the facts necessary to give the court
jurisdiction, and if the want of jurisdiction appears on the face of the record
or is shown either as to subject-matter or person, the record will be regarded
as a nullity.

(7) Id.--Foreign Divorce--Simulated Residence--Impeachment--Jurisdiction--
Evidence.  --A foreign divorce obtained through simulated residence and not in
good faith is open to attack in the state of the real matrimonial domicile, and
the party sought to be bound by it may always impeach its validity and escape
its effect by showing that the court which rendered it had no jurisdiction over
the parties or the subject-matter, and the jurisdiction of such a foreign court
may be controverted by extraneous evidence.

(8) Id.--Foreign Laws--Judgments.  --In this action for divorce, even assuming
that the laws of Mexico did not require residence or the presence of the parties
within its territory as a basis of jurisdiction, and that the formal
requirements established by Mexican law were met, the Mexican divorce could not
be recognized under the laws of this state, where neither of the parties had a
domicile in Mexico.

(9) Id.--Foreign Divorce--Grounds of--Residence--Invalid Decree.  --In said
action, the matrimonial domicile of the parties having at all times been in this
state, any case for divorce urged by the husband in the courts of Mexico must
necessarily have occurred within this state, and this state could not recognize
a foreign divorce granted upon the grounds of incompatibility, which is not a
ground for divorce in this state.

(10) Id.--Remarriage--Burden of Proof--Evidence.  --In said action, where the
husband remarried after the Mexican divorce, the burden of proof was on the
plaintiff wife to show that such remarriage was invalid, and such burden was met
where she testified positively to the continuous existence of her marriage to
defendant; and the failure of defendant, who was present, to introduce evidence
showing the termination of the marriage created a presumption which supported
the contention of plaintiff that her marriage was still in full force and
effect.

(11) Id.--Estoppel--Evidence.  --In said action, a purported consent by
plaintiff to the jurisdiction of the courts of Mexico and the subsequent
marriage of the defendant husband did not estop her from claiming the existence
of her marriage to defendant.

(12) Id.--Dissolution of Marriage--Contracts--Public Policy.  --Any contract
between married parties having for its object the dissolution of the marriage
contract is void as against public policy.

(13) Id.--Alimony--Attorney's Fees--Costs--Orders--Discretion--Appeal.  --In
said action, while the amounts allowed by the trial court to plaintiff for
support, counsel fees and court costs were somewhat liberal, nevertheless it
could not be held that such allowances constituted an abuse of discretion.

COUNSEL: Charles Kasch for Appellant.

Walter Barry and F. Walter French, Amici Curiae, on Behalf of Appellant.

Taft & Spurr for Respondent.

JUDGES: PULLEN, P. J. Plummer, J., and Thompson, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: PULLEN

OPINION

     The facts are stated in the opinion of the court.

   PULLEN, P. J. -- In this action for divorce the trial court granted the
motions of plaintiff for maintenance, counsel fees and court costs. From these
orders defendant appeals, claiming that the relationship of husband and wife had
terminated prior to the filing of the complaint and the making of the orders
here complained of, by virtue of a decree of  divorce granted defendant in the
state of Chihuahua, in the Republic of Mexico. Defendant also asserts that in
any event the allowance  made was excessive, and that plaintiff is estopped by
her conduct from claiming the invalidity of the Mexican divorce.

   The parties hereto were married in San Francisco in 1907, and in 1922 moved
to the county of Mendocino, where defendant was and is employed, and where they
lived together continuously as husband and wife until some time probably in May,
1933.

   In January, 1933, defendant informed plaintiff he desired a divorce and
submitted a property settlement which was executed by the parties. In June,
1933, defendant submitted to plaintiff for her signature, a certain document in
the following words:

   "Luis A. Trias

   Mexican Lawyer

   Ciudad Juarez, Chih.

   "To the Judge of the First Instance.

   Present. --

   "Sarah F. Goss Ryder, of majority, Northamerican, respectfully appears to
state:

   "That I have taken cognizance of that certain divorce filed against me in
this Court by my husband Royal Simeral Ryder and respectfully submit:

   "That I declare myself as being in conformity with the purport of its terms,
as presented in this Honorable Court, and by virtue of the aforementioned and in
accord with article 19 of the Law of Divorce, I attentively pray that your Honor
pronounce Judgment of Divorce within the three days as provided by law.

   "Wherefore I petition the legal necessity hereabove.

   "State of]

   County of]

   ss

   "Sarah F. Ryder, being by me first duly sworn, deposes and says:

   "That she is the answering party in the above entitled case and has read the
foregoing confession of judgment and knows the contents thereof and that the
same is true of her own knowledge except as to matters as are therein stated
upon her information or belief, and as to those matters that she believes it to
be true.

   Sarah F. Ryder

   "Subscribed and sworn to before me

   this day 30th of June, 1933.

   J. C. Hurley

   Notary Public in and for the County

   of Mendocino, State of California."

   On July 3, 1933, there was filed in the first civil court of Bravos District,
Juarez, state of Chihuahua, upon behalf of defendant, a petition for divorce
upon the ground of incompatibility, and thereafter on July 7, 1933, a decree
purporting to dissolve the marriage of plaintiff and defendant was issued out of
said court. Thereafter, in August, defendant went through a marriage ceremony in
the county of Los Angeles with a woman other than plaintiff and since that time
they have been living together as husband and wife.

   It further appears that defendant had never been in Mexico except perhaps for
a very brief period several days prior to the time herein referred to, when he
visited Tia Juana, Mexico.

   It will be observed that the document hereinbefore set forth was addressed to
no court, bore no filing marks of any proceeding, apparently refers to a divorce
filed several days prior to the proceedings here involved, and was produced by
defendant himself at the hearing herein.   It is quite apparent that the courts
of the Republic of Mexico never acquired jurisdiction of the res nor of the
parties to the action. Under these facts and circumstances, to hold such a
proceeding as constituting a valid divorce would do violence to all our
conceptions of such actions and tend to utterly destroy the sanctity of the
marriage status, as well as upholding a fraud upon the courts of Mexico itself.

   We are not here concerned with the "full faith and credit" clause of the
Constitution of the United States, for that provision is not applicable to
judgments of foreign countries, nor is our attention called to any treaty
existing between the United States and Mexico dealing with questions of divorce.
However, section 1915 of the Code of Civil Procedure et seq., recognizes the
effect of foreign judgments where the foreign tribunal has jurisdiction to act
in the  cause, over the parties and over the thing, when the specific thing is
the subject of the judgment, but under the facts here existing no assistance is
accorded defendant and appellant by that section, because of the lack of the
very elements specified.

     The general rule is that jurisdiction over the subject-matter of divorce
rests upon domicile, or at least residence of one of the parties, and a decree
of divorce rendered in a foreign jurisdiction may be impeached and denied
recognition upon the ground that neither of the parties had such domicile or
residence at the divorce forum notwithstanding the recitals in the decree.
(Note, 39 A.L.R. 677, and cases cited.)   Neither recitals in the decree nor
consent of the parties can confer jurisdiction in the face of evidence that
plaintiff in the divorce action did not have a bona fide residence.   It is a
general rule that domicile is changed from one place to another only upon the
abandonment of the first place of domicile with the intent not to return and by
taking up a residence in another place  with the intention of permanently
residing in that place. (9 R. C. L. 542.)   The first essential for the validity
of a decree of divorce between parties is that it should be pronounced by a
court of competent jurisdiction, and one of whom at least is a bona fide subject
of that jurisdiction.   Even in this country where it is prescribed by the
Constitution that full faith and credit must be given in each state to the
judicial proceedings of another it is well settled that the record of a judgment
rendered in another state may be contradicted as to the facts necessary to give
the court jurisdiction, and if the want of jurisdiction appears on the face of
the record or is shown either as to subject-matter or the person, the record
will be regarded as a nullity. ( Thompson v. Whitman, 85 U.S. 457 [21 L. Ed.
897].) The rule is certainly as strong if not stronger, when applied to a court
of a foreign country. It would be unfair to the courts of Mexico to presume that
it would have been a party to such a proceeding if it had known that neither
plaintiff nor defendant therein had ever been in Mexico during the year 1933;
that during all of the time in question defendant maintained his residence and
his employment in California, and that plaintiff had never  consented to submit
to the jurisdiction of the Mexican courts.

     A foreign divorce obtained through simulated residence and not in good
faith is open to attack in the state of the real matrimonial domicile, and the
party sought to be bound by it may always impeach its validity and escape its
effect by showing that the court which rendered it had no jurisdiction over the
parties or the subject-matter, and the jurisdiction of such court may be
controverted by extraneous evidence. ( Kadello v. Kadello, 220 Cal. 1 [29 P.2d
171]; Delanoy v. Delanoy, 216 Cal. 27 [13 P.2d 719, 86 A.L.R. 1321]; Galloway v.
Galloway, 116 Cal. App. 478 [2 P.2d 842]; Broder v. Broder, 122 Cal. App. 296
[10 P.2d 182]; Warren v. Warren, 127 Cal. App. 231 [15 P.2d 556]; Steinbroner v.
Steinbroner, 30 Cal. App. 673 [159 P. 235]; Fox v. Mick, 20 Cal. App. 599 [129
P. 972]; Thompson v. Whitman, supra; Hanley v. Donoghue, 116 U.S. 1 [6 S. Ct.
242, 29 L. Ed. 535].)

   As was said in the case of Warren v. Warren, supra: "A bona fide residence is
essential to jurisdiction and a valid decree of divorce cannot be founded upon a
simulated domicile, nor a residence undertaken for the purpose of securing such
a decree."

   However, in the instant case it is apparent from the face of the record that
a fraud had been perpetrated upon the courts of Mexico, for it is recited in the
decree itself that "said plaintiff had established his domicile in compliance
with the existing laws", and "that the court's jurisdiction was established by
the certificate of the plaintiff's domicile duly registered in the Public
Registry".

   There is nothing in the record to indicate what the law of Mexico is
concerning divorce. We have been directed to no statute or code or other law of
that country governing the subject of divorce.  If, however, it be assumed that
the laws of that country require no residence nor the presence of the parties
within its territory as a basis of jurisdiction, and that the formal
requirements established by Mexican law were met, then the divorce cannot be
recognized under the laws of this state. A decree of divorce rendered by any
jurisdiction in which neither of  the parties have domicile is not entitled to
full faith and credit and will not be recognized and enforced in California.

     It also appears that the divorce was granted upon the grounds of
incompatibility, which is not a ground for divorce in California. The
matrimonial domicile of the parties having at all times been in the state of
California, any case for divorce urged by defendant in the courts of Mexico must
necessarily have occurred within the state of California. Under the laws of
California no cause of action having been set forth, this state cannot recognize
a divorce upon the grounds alleged.

   The recent case of Bergeron v. Bergeron, (Mass.) 287 Mass. 524, 192 N.E. 86,
decided by the Supreme Court of Massachusetts, is quite similar to the present
case, and reaches the conclusion that "to recognize Mexican divorces as valid
under the circumstances here declared would frustrate and make vain all state
laws regulating and limiting divorces. By such recognition state control over
the marriage relation would be destroyed."

     Appellant herein also contends that having established the fact of his
second marriage the presumption is that such marriage is valid and the burden of
proving the contrary is on plaintiff. Such is the rule. The burden of proof is
on the party assailing the marriage, to show not only the former marriage but
also that it has not been dissolved by death or judicial decree. In this case,
however, we have ample evidence to support the burden of proof resting upon
plaintiff. Both parties to the first marriage were before the court. Plaintiff
testified positively to its continuous existence, and the failure of defendant,
being present, to introduce evidence showing its termination created a
presumption  which supported the contention of plaintiff that the first marriage
between the parties hereto was still in full force and effect. ( Code Civ.
Proc., sec. 2061.)   Appellant also contends that by reason of the written
submission by plaintiff to the jurisdiction of the courts of Mexico and the
subsequent marriage of defendant, plaintiff is now estopped from claiming the
existence of the marriage relation between the parties hereto.   It has been
repeatedly held that any contract between the parties having for its object the
dissolution of the marriage contract, is void as against public policy. (9 Cal.
Jur. 636;  Roberts v. Roberts, 83 Cal. App. 345 [256 P. 826]; Whiting v. Whiting
, 62 Cal. App. 157 [216 P. 92].) In Rehfuss v. Rehfuss, 169 Cal. 86 [145 P.
1020], our Supreme Court has defined the position of the state as a party in a
divorce action, where it says:

   "Where an attempt is made through the courts to undo a marriage the state
becomes in a sense a party to the proceedings, not necessarily to oppose, but to
make sure that the attempt will not prevail without sufficient and lawful cause
shown by the real facts of the case, nor unless these conditions are found to
exist at the time the decree is made upon which the state permits a divorce to
be granted. The state has an interest in the maintenance of the marriage tie,
which neither the collusion nor the negligence of the parties can impair."

   It requires the citation of no authority that the consent of the wife could
not confer jurisdiction to grant the husband a decree of divorce within the
United States, and the same rule extends to a foreign jurisdiction. It would be
a strange situation if the court where the parties reside were bound by the
rules of public policy and the parties could, by subterfuge or evasion, by
correspondence,  obtain a decree in another forum.

   It also should be noted that the instrument hereinbefore set forth purporting
to consent to the jurisdiction, is merely a blanket authorization and directed
to no particular court or tribunal and does not appear even to have been
presented or recorded by any tribunal, and judging from the tense of the
document, did not refer to the proceedings here involved. The purported consent
being void however, as against public policy, cannot in any event create an
estoppel.

     Lastly, it is urged that in view of the financial condition of the
defendant, the amounts allowed by the court for support and for counsel fees and
costs on appeal, are excessive. This is a matter almost entirely within the
discretion of the trial court which has already passed upon the matter and
determined in its opinion the proper amount to be allowed for maintenance, court
costs and attorney fees. While the amounts appear to be somewhat liberal there
is nothing before us to justify our substituting our opinion in the place of
that of the trial court.

    For the reason as stated before, the judgment and orders are hereby
affirmed.

   Plummer, J., and Thompson,  J., concurred.


                              15 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             SAM H. RUDNICK, Respondent, v. BEULAH LORETTA RUDNICK,
                                   Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 4694

            Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District

          131 Cal. App. 2d 227; 280 P.2d 96; 1955 Cal. App. LEXIS 2039


                                 March 2, 1955

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied March 22, 1955,
and Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court was Denied April 27,
1955.  Traynor, J., was of the Opinion that the Petition Should be Granted.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Kern County
and from an order denying attorneys' fees and support money pending
determination of motion for new trial.  Warren Stockton, Judge.

   Proceeding to annual a marriage.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Marriage--Annulment--Evidence.  --Findings in annulment suit as to
invalidity of marriage were sustained by evidence indicating, among other
things, that no valid divorce decree had been secured by defendant from prior
husband, that plaintiff had not participated in attempt to secure a Mexican
divorce, that neither he nor prior husband knew of such proceeding, and that
prior husband continued to support defendant and at times cohabited with her
since date of Mexican decree.

(2) Divorce--Foreign Decrees--Collateral Attack.  --A Mexican divorce decree
relied on by defendant in annulment suit could properly be attacked by plaintiff
where defendant and her alleged divorced husband were residents of California
and, having been in Tijuana only two days, she claimed to have secured divorce
decree just 13 days later in another city and district about a thousand miles
from there; where experts on Mexican law testified that such purported decree
was void on its face; where there was much testimony that required facts were
not only nonexistent but their lack was disclosed by papers purportedly filed in
and issued by Mexican court; and where search of records of court in question
disclosed that such divorce proceedings had never been brought or acted on in
that court.

(3) Id.--Foreign Decrees--Collateral Attack.  --Plaintiff in annulment suit is
not estopped, as matter of law, to attack Mexican divorce decree relied on by
defendant where there is ample evidence to support findings that plaintiff took
no part in attempt to secure Mexican decree, that he did not rely on it, and
that he knew nothing about it until after annulment suit was filed.

(4) Id.--Foreign Decrees--Collateral Attack.  --Plaintiff in annulment suit was
not estopped to attack Mexican divorce decree relied on by defendant, though
authenticated copy of such decree and copy of purported complaint and return of
service were offered in evidence by plaintiff, where papers were offered and
admitted for purpose of showing that they were not genuine papers issued by a
court or disclosing court proceedings, and where there was no evidence that
plaintiff vouched for them as being true.

(5) Illegitimacy -- Presumptions of Legitimacy.  -- Presumption of legtimacy
provided for in Civ. Code, § 194, declaring that child born within 10 months
after dissolution of marriage of mother is presumed to be legitimate, may be
overcome by other evidence.

(6) Id.--Issue of Void Marriages.  --If any presumption of legitimacy exists in
case of issue of marriage which is annulled (see Civ. Code, §§ 84, 85), it would
be rebuttable rather than conclusive.

(7) Id.--Issues of Paternity--Evidence.  --Where there is evidence in annulment
suit from which it can reasonably be inferred that defendant had sexual
relations with prior husband during time when child was probably conceived, and
also strong evidence indicating that she had such relations with another man not
plaintiff during period in question, and where there is evidence that plaintiff
had sexual relations with defendant about seven months prior to birth of child
but did not see defendant during eighth or ninth month, it is question of fact
whether plaintiff is father of child, and finding of trial court that he is not
is supported by evidence.

(8) Marriage--Annulment--Suit Money and Counsel Fees.  --Denial of support money
and attorneys' fees for defendant in annulment suit while her motion for new
trial was pending was not abuse of discretion where trial court had previously
allowed her $ 250 per month for support until trial of action and also ordered
plaintiff to pay her $ 1,500 for counsel fees and $ 250 for court costs, which
were paid, as was a further sum of $ 1,000 as costs; where judgment awarded
defendant's counsel $ 5,000 as additional attorneys' fees and $ 938.05 as
additional costs, which amounts were paid; and where court subsequently awarded
defendant $ 3,000 for attorneys' fees on appeal and $ 250 per month for her
support during determination of appeal.

COUNSEL: Ehrlich & Blonder, Mack, Bianco & King, D. Bianco and Richard H. Oshman
for Appellant.

Borton, Petrini, Conron & Brown for Respondent.

JUDGES: Barnard, P. J.  Griffin, J., and Mussell, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: BARNARD

OPINION

     The defendant has appealed from that part of a judgment which annuls a
marriage and decrees that there was no issue of said marriage, and from an order
denying an application for certain attorneys' fees and support money.

   The parties to the action were married in Las Vegas, Nevada, on August 11,
1951.  The plaintiff brought this action on October 5, 1951, alleging, among
other things, that at the time of this marriage the defendant had another
husband living; that this prior marriage had never been dissolved by divorce or
otherwise; that the defendant falsely represented to the plaintiff that she was
single; that plaintiff believed this representation to be true and relied upon
it; and that plaintiff, since ascertaining the facts, has not lived or cohabited
with the defendant.  In a supplement to the complaint it was alleged that a
child was born to the defendant on February 26, 1952; that the defendant named
him Samuel H. Rudnick, Jr.; and that plaintiff is not the father of said child.
The answer alleged among other things that the defendant was pregnant at the
time of the marriage on August 11, 1951; that this child was the issue of that
marriage; that the defendant had obtained a divorce in Mexico on March 3, 1951;
and that the  plaintiff requested her to obtain said divorce and assisted her in
obtaining the same.

   The court found, among other things, that the marriage of these parties was
null and void from its inception; that there was no  issue of said marriage and
the plaintiff is not the father of the child born to the defendant on February
26, 1952; that the defendant was married to one Gerald L.  Davis in Bakersfield
on July 28, 1944; and that such marriage has not been dissolved by divorce or
otherwise, and is still in full force and effect.  It was found that most of the
material allegations of the defendant's answer were untrue, it being further
found that the defendant filed an action for divorce against Davis in Kern
County on October 4, 1949, and later dismissed said action prior to the time any
decree was entered; that the action was not filed at the request of the
plaintiff; that plaintiff had not entreated the defendant to obtain a divorce
from Davis and had not informed Davis of his desire to marry the defendant; that
defendant did not take up her residence in Mexico, and her marriage to Davis was
not dissolved on March 3, 1951; that the plaintiff did not know that the
defendant had gone to Mexico for the purpose of obtaining a divorce and did not
encourage or assist her in procuring such a divorce; that the defendant did not
show a divorce decree to the plaintiff within a few days after she received it;
and that the plaintiff did not advise her that his attorney had informed him
that such decree was valid.

   It was further found that the plaintiff and defendant went through a marriage
ceremony in Las Vegas on August 11, 1951; that they lived together until
September 11, 1951, and have since lived separate and apart; that the defendant
went to Tijuana, Mexico, remaining there not exceeding two days, and engaging an
attorney to obtain a divorce from Davis; that she signed a power of attorney
authorizing one Mena to bring and prosecute a divorce proceeding against Davis
in the State of Guerrero, Mexico; that this power of attorney was not
acknowledged before any notary public as required by the laws of Mexico; that
the defendant was not at any time during 1951 in the State of Guerrero or in any
other part of Mexico except Tijuana; that immediately after signing this power
of attorney she returned to Bakersfield where she has resided for many years and
still resides; that on or about March 19, 1951, she received a writing
purporting to be a decree of divorce from Davis issued by the court of first
instance in the city of Tixtla, Guerrero, Mexico; that said decree was wholly
fictitious and void and not based upon any proceeding filed in the described
court or any other court having jurisdiction of such a proceeding; that said
decree was purely a "mail order" decree not based upon a court proceeding of any
nature and was one having no validity or effect in Mexico or in California; that
the defendant's husband, Davis, was domiciled in California at all times from
1944 until after September, 1951; that he was actually present and living in
this state from the beginning of 1951 until after the end of April, 1951; that
he was in the United States Air Force and was stationed near Sacramento from
January, 1951, to the end of April, 1951; that he and the defendant were
periodically together during the first four months of 1951; that they were
together on or about the end of April, 1951, and again from September 19, 1951,
to September 21, 1951, in Omaha, Nebraska; that Davis maintained a home for
himself and the defendant in Bakersfield from the date of their marriage until
July 28, 1951; that Davis was never a resident of Mexico and was not in Mexico
during the first four months of 1951; that he had never appointed any agent for
service of process in Mexico, was never served with any process of any court or
papers of any kind in connection with any divorce proceeding in Guerrero or
elsewhere in Mexico; that he did not authorize anyone to represent him and did
not appear either in person or by agent in any proceedings in any state in
Mexico; and that Davis did not have notice, actual or constructive, of any
Mexican divorce proceeding or any other divorce proceeding during 1951.

   It was further found that the defendant represented to the plaintiff that she
had obtained a divorce from Davis in Kern County near the end of the year 1949,
and that since that time she was a single woman; that the plaintiff believed
said representations, which were false; that the plaintiff did not participate
in the purported Mexican divorce proceeding directly or indirectly, did not
assist the plaintiff  in any way in that regard, and had no notice or knowledge
that defendant claimed such a divorce from Davis until after the separation of
the plaintiff and the defendant; that the defendant represented to the plaintiff
that she had not associated with her husband, Davis, or with any man other than
the plaintiff between February 1, 1951, and August 11, 1951, and such
representations were false; that a child was born to the defendant on February
26, 1952, which the defendant named Samuel H. Rudnick, Jr.; that such child was
not the result of any relationship of the defendant and the plaintiff; and  that
the plaintiff is not the father of said child and such child is not the issue of
the void marriage of the plaintiff and defendant.

   The court then made long findings as to what was necessary under the laws of
Mexico at that time in order to confer jurisdiction upon such a court of first
instance in Guerrero, Mexico, to grant a divorce in that state, and finding
various particulars in which these laws had not been complied with in connection
with this purported Mexican divorce decree and further finding that the court of
first instance in Guerrero, named in the decree, had no jurisdiction over either
Davis or the defendant to render any decree of divorce between them.  As
conclusions of law, it was found that the marriage between the plaintiff and
defendant was null and void and should be annulled on the ground that the
defendant had another husband living; that defendant's prior marriage was in
force and undissolved at the time of her purported marriage to the plaintiff;
that there was no issue of her marriage to plaintiff, and the plaintiff is not
the father of Samuel H. Rudnick, Jr.; and that there is no community property of
the parties.  Judgment was entered accordingly and this appeal followed.

     There is ample evidence to support the essential findings as to the
invalidity of the marriage in Las Vegas on August 11, 1951, if that evidence was
properly admitted and could be considered by the court.  There was evidence
clearly indicating that no valid decree of divorce from Davis had ever been
secured by the defendant, that the plaintiff had not participated in the attempt
to secure a Mexican divorce and knew nothing about such a proceeding, and that
the defendant represented to the plaintiff that she had secured a final divorce
in Kern County in the latter part of 1949.  The defendant was evasive and gave
many false answers in her testimony.  She testified that she had married one
Fuller in Mexico in December, 1941, and divorced him in Mexico on January 2,
1942.  She later admitted that she had never been married to Fuller nor divorced
from him.  A letter she wrote to Fuller while this action was pending was
received in evidence, in which she asked Fuller to perjure himself in this case
in order to assist her in prevailing in this action, telling him what she wanted
him to say and urging him to memorize it carefully.  Although she contended that
she had told the plaintiff about the Mexican divorce and he had assisted her in
such a proceeding she signed an affidavit of  application for a marriage license
at Las Vegas on August 11, 1951, in which it was stated she had been previously
married and had received a final decree of divorce on October 27, 1949, at
Bakersfield, California, on the ground of cruelty.  The plaintiff had knowledge
of that statement since he also signed the same application, which contained
matters relating to him.

   The defendant was married to Davis in 1944 at Bakersfield.  He was an officer
in the Air Force but he continued to maintain his residence in Bakersfield,
where the defendant resided.  He was stationed at Sacramento the first four
months of 1951 and on or after April 30, while on his way to an overseas
assignment, he went to Bakersfield where he stopped for a day or two, picking up
some things at their home, but leaving his automobile with the defendant.  He
did not know of any alleged Mexican divorce decree at that time.  She wrote
letters to him and called him long distance in London in July, 1951.  On a visit
to America in September, 1951, he arranged to meet her at Omaha and they
registered at a hotel as husband and wife, and stayed there three days.  She
continued  to receive support money from Davis and as late as September, 1951,
he directed a letter to her as "Mrs. G. L. Davis."

   As early as 1948, the defendant started going with one Fink, the manager of a
store in Bakersfield where she worked.  In January, 1951, Fink moved from
Bakersfield to Eureka.  The defendant followed him there and from then on
through May, 1951, she was with him in his apartment there a considerable part
of the time.  Over Washington's Birthday in 1951, she and Fink went to Mexico
supposedly to get married. Following that event she was introduced by Fink as
his wife in Eureka and lived with him in his apartment.  She later returned to
Bakersfield and said she did not like Eureka and was going to dissolve her
marriage to Fink.

   Shortly after Labor Day 1951, the plaintiff returned to Bakersfield.  A check
was made of the Kern County divorce action and plaintiff discovered for the
first time that that action had been dismissed in January 1950 without any
decree having been entered.  The plaintiff immediately separated from the
defendant.  After this action was started plaintiff learned for the first time
that the defendant claimed to have obtained a divorce decree from Davis in a
Mexican court.

   With respect to the annulment portion of the judgment the defendant contends
that the plaintiff could not attack the Mexican divorce decree because he was
not a party to  or interested in that proceeding.  It is argued that the case of
Mumma v. Mumma, 86 Cal.App.2d 133 [194 P.2d 24], and certain cases from other
jurisdictions, have established the rule that a second husband has no standing
to collaterally attack his wife's decree of divorce because of his lack of
interest at the time it was entered; that the court's finding that this Mexican
divorce decree was invalid and that jurisdiction had not been obtained could
only be based upon the ground that the defendant had misrepresented the
residence of Davis to the Mexican court; that the finding of lack of
jurisdiction was based upon a claim of fraud, and this case comes squarely
within the rule in the Mumma case; that the only one who can complain of this
fraud is Davis, who has not seen fit to do so; that this plaintiff, being a
stranger to that decree, has no standing to collaterally attack it for such
fraud; that the court's finding that the Mexican decree of divorce was
fictitious and void was not supported by admissible evidence; and that the
finding that the supposed decree was not based on any proceedings filed in the
Mexican court was improper since evidence of the nonexistence of court records
should not have been admitted.  In support of the last contention it is argued
that under sections 1855, 1904, 1906 and 1907 of the Code of Civil Procedure
such a judicial record can only be proved by a copy of the original or of the
record properly attested by the clerk of the court and by the testimony of a
witness that the copy has been compared with the original, is an exact
transcript thereof, that the original was in the custody of the clerk, that the
copy is duly attested by a seal proved to be the seal of the court where the
record remains; and that the plaintiff was permitted to prove the contents of a
judicial record of a foreign country contrary to these code provisions.

   While it was stated in the Mumma case that a stranger to a foreign divorce
decree can impeach it collaterally for fraud only when it injuriously affects
him, and further stated that when he subsequently marries one of the divorced
parties he has no such interest as will enable him to attack the decree (for
fraud), that language must be considered in light of the facts of that case.
That was an action for damages for fraud brought by a wife against her husband,
she having previously brought an action for divorce in this state in which she
had obtained an interlocutory decree establishing the validity of her marriage
to the defendant, which had become final.  It was further pointed out in that
case that the  jurisdictional grounds upon which a foreign divorce decree is
subject to collateral attack in this state are set forth in Cardinale v.
Cardinale, 8 Cal.2d 762 [68 P.2d 351], where it was held that a foreign divorce
decree is subject to collateral attack upon three jurisdictional grounds: (1)
that it was procured upon a fraudulent domicile or residence, (2) that the laws
of the state granting the decree  were not complied with, and (3) that the
spouse who procured the divorce was the wrongdoer whereas the other spouse was a
citizen of this state, was neither personally served nor appeared, and was the
innocent party; and that if any one of these jurisdictional defects is
established the foreign decree will not be recognized as valid in this state.
It was further held in Mumma v. Mumma that it is always open to the person
against whom a judgment of another state is attempted to be used to show by
extrinsic evidence, and even by evidence opposed to recitals contained in such a
record, that the court purporting to give the judgment was without jurisdiction
either of the cause or of the parties.  A similar holding is found in Crouch v.
Crouch, 28 Cal.2d 243 [169 P.2d 897], although it has been held that a foreign
decree cannot be attacked by a party who procured it, or a party who has
remarried in reliance thereon or by one who has aided another to procure the
decree in order that the latter will be free to remarry.  ( Rediker v. Rediker,
35 Cal.2d 796 [221 P.2d 1, 20 A.L.R.2d 1152].) It was held in Kegley v. Kegley,
16 Cal.App.2d 216 [60 P.2d 482], that a "mail order" divorce, where both parties
lived in California and neither was in Mexico at the time a petition was filed
in the Mexican court and at the time the decree was granted, could be attacked
for lack of jurisdiction.

     The court here found such a lack of jurisdiction in the Mexican court and
under these cases, and many others which might be cited, we think the plaintiff
could properly attack the validity of this Mexican divorce decree. The defendant
and her husband were residents of California and, having been in Tijuana only
two days, she claimed to have secured a divorce decree just 13 days later in
another city and district about a thousand miles from there.  There was ample
evidence that the jurisdictional facts to support that decree were lacking.  Two
experts on Mexican law testified to the effect that this purported decree was
void upon its face, and there was a large amount of testimony as to what was
required by Mexican law at that time, and that the  required facts were not only
nonexistent but their lack was disclosed by the papers purportedly filed in and
issued by the Mexican court.  It was further shown by the testimony of competent
witnesses that a search of the records of the court in question had disclosed
that there was no record in that court that any such divorce proceedings had
ever been brought or acted upon in that court.  The plaintiff was an interested
party with respect to the effect of the purported Mexican divorce decree, and
regardless of other considerations the court properly admitted evidence for the
purpose of showing that no such proceeding had been had in this Mexican court
and that no such decree had been issued by that court.  While the code sections
relied on by the defendant are designed to show how an existing court record may
be proved they are not applicable or controlling where there is no court record,
and cannot be held to deprive a party of the right to show that no such record,
in fact, exists.  The question as to whether a valid Mexican divorce decree
existed which had the effect of terminating the marriage of defendant Davis was
a question of fact for the trial court, and the court's findings in that
connection are supported by evidence which was properly admitted.

     The defendant next contends that the plaintiff was estopped to attack the
Mexican decree of divorce. It is argued that the public policy of this state
requires the preservation of the second marriage if possible, rather than its
annulment, citing Rediker v. Rediker, 35 Cal.2d 796 [221 P.2d 1, 20 A.L.R.2d
1152]; that the rule of estoppel applied against any party to a divorce decree
who either procured it, remarried in reliance thereon or who aided one of the
parties to procure it, was extended by Dietrich v. Dietrich, 41 Cal.2d 497 [261
P.2d 269], so as to apply to one who is neither a party to that proceeding nor
aided therein, but who married one of the parties with knowledge of the
circumstances under which the decree was obtained; that the plaintiff knew that
the defendant had been a married woman and never made any inquiry of her
regarding any divorce of that marriage; that although  he claimed that he had
married the defendant because she convinced him he was the father of the child,
he deliberated for approximately two months before marrying her and it was
apparent from his actions that he intended to mislead her at all times; that the
court's findings that the defendant represented to the plaintiff that she had
obtained a divorce from Davis in Kern County near the end of 1949 and  that the
plaintiff believed the same, are supported by no evidence other than the
defendant's statement to that effect in her marriage license in Las Vegas; and
that there is no evidence that the plaintiff saw that application.  Both parties
signed that application and the only reasonable inference is that the plaintiff
saw it and was acting on that statement.  There is evidence, which the court
believed, that the plaintiff took no part in the attempt to get a Mexican
divorce, that he did not rely upon it, and that he knew nothing about it until
after this action was filed.  While there is a conflict in the evidence, there
is ample evidence to support the findings in favor of the plaintiff and against
the defendant on the facts involved in this contention.  It cannot be held, as a
matter of law, that such an estoppel here appears.

     Some contention is made in the closing brief that the plaintiff could not
attack the Mexican decree because an authenticated copy of that decree and a
copy of the purported complaint and return of service was offered in evidence by
the plaintiff, and that the decree was thus vouched for by him as being true.
This contention is without merit.  In connection with the examination of the
defendant and of an expert witness on Mexican law there was a great deal of
argument about a copy of the decree which defendant's counsel had offered, and
plaintiff's counsel furnished a so-called authenticated copy which had been
obtained during the investigation of the matter.  It was apparently obtained
from the parties who had furnished the papers to the defendant, and the
plaintiff did not claim to have received it from the court itself.  These papers
were offered and admitted for the very purpose of, and in the process of,
showing that they were not genuine papers issued by a court or disclosing court
proceedings, and nothing in the record in any way indicates that the plaintiff
vouched for them as being true.  No estoppel or error in the admission of
evidence appears in this connection.

   With respect to the issue as to whether the plaintiff was the father of this
child the defendant contends that the child is conclusively presumed to be the
issue of her marriage to the plaintiff; and that even though a conclusive
presumption is inapplicable the evidence is insufficient to overcome a
rebuttable presumption to that effect.  It is argued that a conclusive
presumption exists because of sections 84, 85, 193 and 194 of the Civil Code.
These sections provide, respectively, that a judgment of nullity of marriage
does not affect the legitimacy of children conceived or born before the
judgment,  that the issue of a marriage which is void or annulled or dissolved
by divorce is legitimate, that all children born in wedlock are presumed to be
legitimate, and that all children of a married woman born within 10 months after
dissolution of the marriage are presumed to be legitimate children of that
marriage. In support of this contention the defendant relies on Dazey v. Dazey,
50 Cal.App.2d 15 [122 P.2d 308], Rivieccio v. Bothan, 27 Cal.2d 621 [165 P.2d
677], Estate of Walker, 180 Cal. 478 [181 P. 792], Estate of McNamara, 181 Cal.
82 [183 P. 552, 7 A.L.R. 313], Williams v. Moon, 98 Cal.App.2d 214 [219 P.2d
902], Estate of Lee, 200 Cal. 310 [253 P. 145], and Hill v. Johnson, 102
Cal.App.2d 94 [226 P.2d 655].

     Sections 193 and 194 of the Civil Code apparently refer to valid marriages
and it was held in Estate of McNamara, 181 Cal. 82 [183 P. 552, 7 A.L.R. 313],
that the prima facie presumption of legitimacy provided for in section 194 may
be overcome by other evidence.   The only code sections directly dealing with
the issue of a marriage which is annulled are sections 84 and 85 of the Civil
Code.  These sections do not specifically provide for any presumption but
apparently relate to children who are, in fact, the issue of such a  void
marriage. If any presumption exists in such a case it would naturally be a
rebuttable, rather than a conclusive, presumption.

   Most, if not all, of the cases relied on by the defendant were cases where
there was a valid marriage or where no issue of fact was presented as to whether
or not the child was the issue of the parties.  There is nothing in those cases
which would establish as a controlling rule, under the facts of this case, that
there was a conclusive presumption that plaintiff was the father of this child.
Any presumption which would be applicable here would be a disputable one, and
the issue as to whether the plaintiff was the father of this child was one of
fact to be determined by the trial court.

     The child was born on February 26, 1952.  There is evidence that the
plaintiff did not see the defendant from sometime in April, 1951 to June 1,
1951; that he had sexual intercourse with the defendant on June 1, 1951,  and on
the succeeding two days; that the defendant missed her first menstrual period on
June 1, 1951, and missed her menstrual period thereafter until the child was
born; and that within a week after June 1, she informed the plaintiff that she
was pregnant as a result of their intercourse on or about June 1.   The
plaintiff had not been with the defendant for nearly two months prior to June 1,
1951, and there was medical testimony that the defendant had become pregnant
prior to June 1, 1951, that the intercourse between these parties at that time
and thereafter had nothing to do with her pregnancy, and that their intercourse
on the first three days of June could not have caused the pregnancy leading to
the birth of this child.  During the trial the plaintiff moved for an order
directing the parties to this action, as well as the child, to submit to a blood
test by some qualified person to be designated by the court.  This motion was
opposed by the defendant and was denied by the court.  Evidence was received
from which it could be reasonably inferred that the defendant had sexual
relations with her husband, Davis, during the time when the child was probably
conceived, and there was strong evidence indicating that she had such relations
with Fink during the period in question.  As was said in Estate of McNamara, 181
Cal. 82 [183 P. 552, 7 A.L.R. 313], "Where she has had intercourse with more
than one man at or about the same time and a child has resulted, neither she nor
anyone else can say with reasonable certainty which is the father.  Any weighing
of probabilities under such circumstance is but guessing." The question of
whether or not the plaintiff was the father of this child was one of fact for
the trial court and in view of the evidence presented its decision thereon
cannot be said to be without support in the evidence.

     Finally, the defendant contends that the court erred in denying her support
money while a motion for a new trial was pending, and attorneys' fees for the
presentation of that motion.  This relates only to the period from January 1,
1953 to April 1, 1953.  It is argued that the court had power to provide for
such support and attorneys' fees ( Dunphy v. Dunphy, 161 Cal. 87 [118 P. 445]
and Harron v. Harron, 128 Cal. 303 [60 P. 932]); that while the granting or
denying of such support and maintenance is a discretionary matter the court may
not act arbitrarily; and that in view of the previous and subsequent orders
granting support money and attorneys' fees no good reason appears why defendant
should have been denied such support and attorneys' fees for this three months'
period.

   On February 21, 1952, the court ordered the plaintiff to pay the defendant $
250 per month for support until the trial of the action.  Such payments were
made up to December 31, 1952, when the judgment of annulment was entered.  The
court also ordered the plaintiff to pay the defendant $ 1,500 for counsel fees
and $ 250 for court costs, which were paid.  On August 26, 1952, the plaintiff
was ordered to and did pay a further sum of $ 1,000 for costs.  The judgment
entered on December 31, 1952, awarded the defendant's counsel $ 5,000 as
additional attorneys' fees and $ 938.05 as additional costs, which amounts were
paid.  While the motion here in question  was denied, on a subsequent motion the
court awarded the defendant $ 3,000 for attorneys' fees on the appeal, with $
1,450 for costs, and further ordered the plaintiff to pay the defendant $ 250
per month for her support commencing April 1, 1953 and continuing to the
determination of the appeal.  In view of the court's findings in this case, the
allowances previously and subsequently made, and the legal questions involved in
making the later allowances, it cannot reasonably be held that the court abused
its discretion in refusing to make the further allowances covering the short
period in question.

   The judgment and the order appealed from are affirmed.


                              16 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             LORAY PERINI, Plaintiff and Appellant, v. CLIFFORD C.
                        PERINI, Defendant and Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 10729

            Court of Appeal of California, Third Appellate District

            225 Cal. App. 2d 399; 37 Cal. Rptr. 354; 1964 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1389


                                 March 10, 1964

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied April 7, 1964, and
Respondent's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court was Denied May 6, 1964.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from an order of the Superior Court of Yolo County
denying motion to vacate default divorce judgment.  James C. McDermott, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Proceedings--Cross-complaint.  --Where a wife's divorce complaint
and the husband's answer thereto had already framed issues as to her right to
divorce for cruelty, child custody and support, alimony, and distribution of
community property when her husband filed a cross-complaint for divorce
reasserting issues as to child custody and support, alimony, and distribution of
community property, no responsive pleading was required as to the reasserted
issues and no default could properly be taken against the wife for her failure
to answer such allegations.

(2) Id. -- Proceedings -- Cross-complaint.  -- A cross-complaint for divorce
raises a new issue requiring answer.

(3) Id.--Proceedings--Default Judgments.  --Where a wife's divorce complaint
raised the issues of her right to divorce for cruelty, child custody and
support, alimony, and distribution of community property, and where the
husband's cross-complaint sought a divorce for cruelty and reasserted all issues
in the wife's complaint but her right to divorce for cruelty, the wife was in
default, in failing to plead responsively to the allegation of her cruelty, but
only as to that issue. This default did not constitute, ipso facto, a waiver of
the wife's right to a trial on the other issues already joined.

(4) Id.--Disposition of Community Property--Both Parties Guilty of Cruelty.
--Both spouses may be granted a divorce for extreme cruelty, in which event
there must be an equal distribution of community property and the wife may be
entitled to alimony depending on the facts.

(5) Id.--Proceedings--Issues.  --Where a wife filed a divorce complaint but did
not answer her husband's cross-complaint for divorce for extreme cruelty, her
default constituted only an admission that she was guilty of extreme cruelty to
the husband, entitling him to a divorce, but did not constitute an abandonment
of her complaint charging him with extreme cruelty; she was entitled to a trial
on that issue as well as other issues framed by the complaint and answer as to
child custody and support, alimony, and distribution of community property.

(6) Trial--Notice of Trial--Notice Under Code Civ. Proc., § 594.  --Where a wife
filed a divorce complaint for cruelty and sought child custody and support,
alimony, and distribution of community property but did not file an answer to
her husband's cross-complaint for divorce that reasserted all issues in the
wife's complaint except her right to a divorce, before a trial could be had on
the issues joined, the wife was entitled under Code Civ. Proc., § 594, subd. 1,
to notice of trial. Service of this notice and proof of service is mandatory.

(7) Id.--Notice of Trial--Notice Under Code Civ. Proc., § 594.  --Where the
issues have been joined, a judgment made after a trial held without notice under
Code Civ. Proc., § 594, subd. 1, is not merely error; the court acts in excess
of jurisdiction.

(8) Constitutional Law--Due Process--Notice and Hearing.  --Due process of law
requires that the party against whom a claim is asserted shall have the
opportunity to be present when the evidence to sustain the claim is introduced
and that judgment cannot be rendered in a trial held without notice.

(9) Divorce--Proceedings--Trial.  --In divorce actions, the requirements of
notice and opportunity for a hearing are those applicable to proceedings in rem.


(10) Waiver--Requisites.  --The primary essentials of the waiver of a right are
a clear expression made with the full knowledge of the facts and intent to waive
the right.

(11) Id.--Evidence.  --Doubtful cases will be decided against one claiming a
waiver.

(12) Divorce--Proceedings--Waiver.  --A wife's letter to her husband expressing
a knowledge (through her attorney) that her husband would be entitled to obtain
a default judgment of divorce on his cross-complaint was insufficient to
constitute her waiver of the right to have issues raised by her divorce
complaint tried or to constitute a waiver of notice where there was no evidence
that she was informed that an attempt would be made to adjudicate issues raised
by her own pending complaint and there was nothing to indicate that she knew
that both spouses can be awarded divorces, that the wife can be awarded alimony
though dual divorces are granted, and that in such case an equal distribution of
community property is mandatory.

(13) Waiver--Burden of Proof.  --One claiming waiver has the burden of proving
it.

(14) Divorce--Proceedings--Default Judgments.  --Where plaintiff wife in a
divorce suit did not file an answer to her husband's cross-complaint for divorce
, but the evidence was insufficient to establish her waiver of notice of trial
as to the issues joined concerning child custody and support, alimony, and
distribution of community property, a default judgment entered against the wife
after trial without notice as to the issues joined was in excess of the court's
jurisdiction and to that extent void.

(15) Id.--Proceedings--Judgments--Collateral Attack.  --Where plaintiff wife in
a divorce action had filed no answer to a cross-complaint for divorce and had no
notice of the trial on the cross-complaint, which reasserted issues as to child
custody and support, alimony and disposition of property, and the judgment taken
against the wife showed on its face that it was based wholly on default, the
invalidity, therefore, appeared not only on the face of the record, but on the
judgment itself and was subject to collateral attack at any time. Even had the
judgment's invalidity not appeared on its face, it was subject to attack on a
motion to vacate it made within a reasonable time.

(16) Judgments--Collateral Attack--Partial Invalidity.  --Where a judgment is
only partially void and the void part is severable, that part alone may be
collaterally attacked, and the balance will remain effective.

(17) Id.--Collateral Attack--Partial Invalidity.  --Where a judgment is not
severable, the whole may be attacked despite its partial validity.

(18) Divorce--Proceedings--Default Judgments.  --Where, without notice of trial,
a default judgment of divorce was entered against a wife on the husband's
cross-complaint, the award of a divorce to the husband could not be severed from
the other issues, one being the wife's right to a divorce. Where each spouse
claims extreme cruelty by the other, the interests of justice would be disserved
by such separation when interwoven with the issues of distribution of community
property, support of wife and children, and child custody; therefore, the
judgment should be vacated and the wife allowed to answer the cross-complaint,
and the cause then tried on the issues raised by all pleadings.

COUNSEL: A. M. Mull, Jr., and Cecil J. Bishop for Plaintiff and Appellant.

John A. Young for Defendant and Respondent.

JUDGES: Pierce, P. J.  Schottky, J., and Friedman, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: PIERCE

OPINION

     The wife in this divorce action appeals from an order denying her motion to
vacate a default judgment in favor of the husband on his cross-complaint. This
judgment granted the husband a divorce, awarded him child custody and also most
of the community property. It also denied the wife a divorce on her complaint.
We hold that all portions of the judgment are void and must be vacated.
Following are the facts:

   On December 20, 1961, the wife filed her divorce complaint after a 12-year
marriage.  She alleged in general terms her husband's extreme cruelty, she
sought custody of two children, asked money for their support and alimony for
herself.  She also alleged the existence of community property which she prayed
should be awarded to her.

   After the filing of the complaint, both parties sought temporary child
custody. Contested proceedings in this respect terminated when the parties
stipulated that the wife have temporary custody of the children pendente lite
and, on January 25, 1962, the court made its order pursuant to this stipulation.
Shortly after this order was made, however, the wife voluntarily surrendered the
custody of the children to the husband and left for Arizona.  Her explanation of
this will be stated below.

   On February 27, 1962, the husband filed his answer to this complaint.
Denials in the answer joined issue on the wife's right to a divorce, her fitness
to have child custody, her right to alimony or to share the community property.

   With this answer the husband filed a cross-complaint. He alleged cruelty on
the part of the wife (also in general terms), abandonment of the children by the
wife and his fitness to have them in his custody. He prayed that the community
property be awarded to him.  These pleadings were  served upon plaintiff's
attorney.  No answer to the husband's cross-complaint was ever filed.

   On March 27, 1962, an interlocutory decree of divorce was entered.  It
recited that the cross-complaint had not been answered and that a default
thereon had been entered, that evidence had been heard.  The court found that
all of the allegations of the cross-complaint were true.  The husband was
awarded an interlocutory decree of divorce on the ground of cruelty. He was also
awarded custody of the children.

   The decree awarded to the husband the home, household furnishings, bank
account, a pickup automobile and "all other community property belonging to the
parties hereto" excepting the wife's personal effects, a 1952 model automobile
and "any balance of travelers checks in the possession of" the wife.  The decree
also contained the following: "It is further ordered, adjudged and decreed that
the application of plaintiff Loray Perini for divorce be, and the same is,
hereby denied.  It is further ordered, adjudged and decreed that the
plaintiff's, Loray Perini, application for support, temporary or permanent, be
and the same is, hereby denied, and that the application of plaintiff, Loray
Perini, for counsel fees and court costs be, and the same is hereby denied."

    No notice of trial was ever served either upon the wife or upon her
attorneys of record.  Neither she nor her counsel was present in court when the
hearing on the cross-complaint was had.

   On July 25, 1962, the wife moved for an order vacating this judgment.  The
absence  of notice of trial was brought to the attention of the court, but the
motion purported to be under Code of Civil Procedure, section 473 (relief from
mistake, inadvertence, surprise or excusable neglect).

   On December 14, 1962, the court denied the wife's motion.

   Intermediate the filing of the wife's complaint and the husband's answer and
cross-complaint, and as a part of the proceedings for temporary child custody,
the court had requested and obtained reports from the probation officer.  One of
these reports expanded on the wife's fitness as a mother.  It included the
statement "she had the reputation of being a very good mother, spending her
entire time for the care of the children."

   The hearing was entirely upon affidavits (which are included in the record
before us).  The wife's excuse for her departure, leaving the children with the
husband, was that  she had become distraught and brought to the point of a
nervous breakdown by her husband's conduct which she characterized as a
deliberate effort to prejudice neighbors and friends by untrue imputations
against her character and mental condition.  She averred that she had been in
fear that her husband would try to have her committed to a mental institution
and that the children would then be sent to be raised in a foster home. She had
felt that to avoid this it would be better for her to surrender the children to
the husband and depart.  It appeared she had become stranded in Arizona without
funds to return.

   The husband's affidavit denied the wife's charges.

   It also was alleged in the wife's affidavit that a brother and sister with
whom she had lost contact approximately 30 years before had been recently
rediscovered living in Davis.  The wife had made frequent visits to the home of
the brother, his wife and children and it is clear from the affidavits of both
parties that the husband had become jealous of the attentions paid by the wife
to her brother.  He described their relationship as an unnatural one.  This the
wife vigorously denied.

   The husband's affidavit, in addition to denying any harassment, also averred
that the wife, on February 18, 1962, had phoned him from Tucson, Arizona, and
during the conversation had informed him she did not want a divorce but would
not contest his, nor would she contest the husband's right to child custody;
also that she didn't want any part of the property.  (This was nine days before
the husband had filed his cross-complaint.) The wife's affidavit admitted a
telephone conversation but denied the husband's statement of its terms.  The
husband also attached a copy of a letter dated March 15, 1962, which he had
received from the wife.  In this letter is a paragraph which the husband argues
constitutes a waiver.  This portion states: "I have a letter from my attorney
saying that soon you will be entitled to a default judgment against me on your
cross complaint which, of course, I've known for some time.  If this will insure
the safety of the child so that they won't ever be put in a foster home, then
nothing else matters.  What would I want with 'My share' of the property -- we
bought it and built the house for them (the children) and I wouldn't touch it in
a million years -- you know that."

   Read in context, however, the letter seems more a plaintive appeal than a
waiver, an appeal either for a reconciliation or for a restitution of her
contacts with her children, or both.   She asks, "When may I come to see the
children?" and after a bitter comment on the husband's treatment of her she
adds, "but the fact still remains that the children are safely with you and not
in a foster home." She reminds him that he had assured her "to take a month"
that the "door would always be open." She states: "You and the children were my
whole life," and she expresses puzzlement over "why or how the finding of my
brothers and sisters again has turned everything into the tragedy it has." She
mentions her inability  to work and thus earn money to return but states that a
check for past earnings was expected soon and the letter ends: "Please kiss the
children for me and give them my love -- and tell them if you can I will be home
soon.  Bless you all."

   Also relied upon by the husband is a letter dated March 16, 1962, by the
wife's attorney to the husband's attorney.  It read (in full): "I have finally
received explicit instructions from my client that I am not to proceed in this
matter, so I inform you that you are free to proceed as the law allows.
Needless to say, I am completely irritated, but . . . ."

   The attorney was not called, gave no affidavit and there is no explanation of
this somewhat cryptic letter, including the meaning of the phrase "as the law
allows." There was no showing made that the wife had authorized a dismissal of
her complaint nor that her instructions to the lawyer not to proceed had been
given with a full understanding of the extent of her rights, or the effect
thereon of her nonappearance in court.

   Since the wife's motion for an order to vacate the default judgment was heard
solely upon affidavits, we have all of the evidence before us which the trial
court had.  Appellant urges its order constituted an abuse of discretion. On
this appeal, however, we do not need to base our conclusion upon an answer to
the question of whether a denial of the motion was an abuse of discretion, 1
because the fact that the court acted  in excess of jurisdiction appears without
conflict and on the face of the record.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   If this
were a matter where the only attack upon the judgment could be for an abuse of
discretion, the following rules would be applicable: "In an action for divorce,
upon very slight showing the court will set aside a default." ( Rehfuss v.
Rehfuss, 169 Cal. 86, 92 [145 P. 1020].) "A harsh default judgment under which
there is a grossly disproportionate division of the community property,
inadequate support payments, and minor children taken away from a parent, should
be vacated without hesitation in order to allow the case to be heard and
determined on its merits." ( Necessary v. Necessary, 207 Cal.App.2d 780, 784 [24
Cal.Rptr. 713].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      When the husband filed his cross-complaint in the action, the following
issues had already been framed by the wife's complaint and the husband's answer:
(1) the wife's right to a divorce upon the ground of cruelty, (2) whether she or
the husband should have child custody, (3) her right to alimony, (4) her right
to an award for child support if custody was granted to her and (5) distribution
of the community property. The reassertion in the cross-complaint of issues (2),
(3), (4) and (5) required no responsive pleading from the wife and no default
could properly be taken for her failure to answer such allegations.  ( Crofton
v. Young, 48 Cal.App.2d 452, 457 [119 P.2d 1003]; 2 Chadbourn, Grossman and Van
Alstyne, Cal. Pleading, p. 659.)   The husband, of course, by pleading his own
right to a divorce, had raised a new issue, requiring answer.   For the failure
of the wife to plead responsively to the allegation of her cruelty she was in
default but only as to that issue.  This default did not constitute, ipso facto,
a waiver of the wife's right to a trial on the issues already joined.

     Both the husband and the wife may be granted a divorce, each against the
other, in which event there must be an equal distribution of the community
property, and the wife may, or may not, be entitled to alimony depending upon
the facts.  ( De Burgh v. De Burgh, 39 Cal.2d 858, 874 [250 P.2d 598].)

     Here, as we have shown, the wife's default to the husband's cross-complaint
constituted only an admission that she had been guilty of extreme cruelty to the
husband, entitling him to a divorce against her.  This did not constitute an
abandonment of her complaint charging that he had been guilty of extreme cruelty
to her, entitling her to a divorce. She was entitled to a trial on that issue;
also upon the other issues  framed by the complaint and answer as stated above.

     Before trial could be had on those issues she was entitled, under Code of
Civil Procedure section 594, subdivision 1, to a notice of trial. Service of
this notice and proof of service are mandatory. ( Payer v. Mercury Boat Co., 195
Cal.App.2d 659 [16 Cal.Rptr. 123].)   A judgment made after a trial held without
such notice is not merely error; the court acts in excess of jurisdiction.  It
is elementary that due process of law requires that the party against whom a
claim is asserted shall have opportunity to be present when  the evidence to
sustain the claim is introduced, and that a judgment cannot be rendered in a
"trial" held without notice. (Rest., Judgments, § 6, com. f; Griffin v. Griffin,
327 U.S. 220 [66 S.Ct. 556, 90 L.Ed. 635]; 1 Witkin, Cal. Procedure,
Jurisdiction, § 58, p. 328; id., § 102, p. 368.)   In divorce actions the
requirements of notice and opportunity for a hearing are those applicable to
proceedings in rem. (Id., § 108, p. 374.)

   The contention that the acts of the wife here constituted a waiver of her
right to a hearing and to notice of trial cannot be sustained.   The primary
essentials of a waiver of a right are a clear expression made with a full
knowledge of the facts and an intent to waive the right.  ( Henderson v. Drake,
42 Cal.2d 1, 5 [264 P.2d 921]; Record v. Indemnity Ins. Co., 103 Cal.App.2d 434,
445 [229 P.2d 851]; Cohen v. Metropolitan Life Ins. Co., 32 Cal.App.2d 337, 348
[89 P.2d 732]; Hacker etc. Co. v. Chapman Valve Mfg. Co., 17 Cal.App.2d 265, 274
[61 P.2d 944].)   Doubtful cases will be decided against the one who claims a
waiver.  ( Roberson v.  Industrial Acc. Com., 146 Cal.App.2d 627, 629 [304 P.2d
202].)

     The statements and acts of the wife as set forth above are insufficient to
constitute a waiver by the wife of her right to have the issues raised by her
complaint tried, nor do they constitute a waiver of notice of such trial.  Her
letter did express a knowledge (through her attorney) that her husband would be
entitled to obtain a default judgment on his cross-complaint, but there was no
evidence that she was informed that in this judgment an attempt would be made to
adjudicate the issues raised by her own pending complaint.  The letter implies
knowledge that the husband would obtain a divorce and that the children, placed
in his custody, would not "ever be put in a foster home." There is nothing to
indicate her awareness that both husband and wife can be awarded divorces, and
that a wife can be awarded alimony notwithstanding the granting of dual divorces
, and that in such case an equal distribution of community property is
mandatory, and there is no showing that she intended to waive those rights.
The burden is upon the party claiming a waiver to prove it.  ( In re Bishop, 201
Cal.App.2d 604, 609 [20 Cal.Rptr.  186]; Brewer v. Municipal Court, 193
Cal.App.2d 510, 515 [14 Cal.Rptr. 391.) This burden the husband did not sustain.

     Since the evidence was insufficient to establish a  waiver, the judgment
attacked was in excess of the court's jurisdiction, and to that extent void. (
Burtnett v. King, 33 Cal.2d 805, 807 [205 P.2d 657, 12 A.L.R.2d 333].) The wife
was not accorded due process and the portions of the judgment which purport to
adjudicate the wife's right to a divorce, and to child custody, to alimony, and
to child support if custody be granted to her, and to at least an equal share in
the community property cannot withstand attack.

     Was the attack by the wife's motion proper and timely?  The judgment shows
on its face that it was based wholly upon the default taken.  The invalidity,
therefore, appears not only on the face of the record, but on the judgment
itself and is subject to collateral attack at any time.  ( Craft v. Craft, 49
Cal.2d 189 [316 P.2d 345]; 3 Witkin, Cal. Procedure, Attack on Judgment in Trial
Court, § 65, p. 2117, and cases cited.) Even had the judgment's invalidity not
appeared on its face, it was subject to attack on this motion  made within a
reasonable time.  (Id., p. 2117.)

   Does the invalidity of portions of the judgment require that the whole be
vacated?  "If the judgment is only partially void, and the void part is
severable, that part alone may be collaterally attacked and the balance will
remain effective.  [Citations.]  But if the judgment is not severable the whole
may be attacked despite its partial validity.  [Citation.]" (3 Witkin, Cal.
Procedure, Attack on Judgment in Trial Court, § 6, p. 2050.)

   It has been held that that portion of a decree which grants the divorce is
severable from the rest of the decree. ( Gudelj v. Gudelj, 41 Cal.2d 202 [259
P.2d 656].) The opinion in that case (at p. 214), quoting from American
Enterprise, Inc. v. Van Winkle, 39 Cal.2d 210, 217 [246 P.2d 935], says: "'[The]
test of whether a portion of a judgment appealed from is so interwoven with its
other provisions as to preclude an independent examination of the part
challenged by the appellant is whether the matters or issues embraced are the
same as, or interdependent upon, the matters or issues which have not been
attacked.'"

     We have concluded that the award of a divorce to the husband cannot be
severed from the rest of the issues to be tried, one of which, as we have seen,
is the question of the right of the wife to a divorce from the husband.  It is
one thing to hold, where only one party seeks (or can be awarded) a divorce,
that such issue is not so inextricably interwoven with the other triable issues
as to be inseverable.  It is quite another thing to hold, where both parties
are, or may  be, entitled to a divorce that the issue as to the rights (or
guilt) of one can be tried separately from the rights (or guilt) of the other.
To try to do so is to attempt a feat having the sophistical overtones of a
Solomon-like childcleavage.  Where each spouse claims extreme cruelty by the
other we doubt if justice could be accomplished even if the sole issue to be
decided was the marriage dissolution.  We are certain the interests of justice
would be disserved by such separation when interwoven therewith are the issues
of distribution of the community property, support of the wife and children, and
child custody.

   And moreover, even were we to hold trial of the husband's right to a divorce
to be severable generally, we would still face the problem of having to find
that under the circumstances of this case, outlined above, there had been no
abuse of the trial court's discretion in its refusal to set aside the wife's
default, a finding which we seriously doubt could be made under the authorities
cited in footnote 1, supra.

   The order appealed from is reversed and the court is instructed to vacate the
judgment and allow the wife to file her answer to the husband's cross-complaint,
the cause thereafter to be tried on the issues raised by all the pleadings.


                              17 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            Estate of CLAYTON ASHLEY RAYNOR, Deceased.  KAY RAYNOR,
                Appellant, v. STOCKTON SAVINGS AND LOAN BANK (a
                            Corporation), Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 9428

            Court of Appeal of California, Third Appellate District

            165 Cal. App. 2d 715; 332 P.2d 416; 1958 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      1346


                                December 5, 1958

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court
was Denied January 28, 1959.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from an order of the Superior Court of San Joaquin
County appointing administrator of an estate.  George F. Buck, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1a) (1b) Divorce -- Foreign Divorces -- Validity.  --The trial court properly
gave full faith and credit to the divorce decree of a sister state where the
wife, with full knowledge of the effect of her act, signed an appearance and
waiver which was filed in the divorce action, since the wife, although not
participating in the divorce action in any other way, had the opportunity to
raise the question of domicile, and the fact that the appearance and waiver was
signed by the wife before the divorce action was commenced was not sufficient to
render it ineffective.

(2) Id.--Foreign Divorces--Collateral Attack.  --Although only the state of a
domicile has jurisdiction to grant a divorce, the requirements of full faith and
credit bar a defendant from collaterally attacking a divorce decree on
jurisdictional grounds in the court of another state where there was
participation by defendant in the divorce proceedings, where defendant was
accorded full opportunity to contest the jurisdictional issues, and where the
decree is not susceptible to such attack in courts of the state that rendered
the decree.

(3a) (3b) Decedents' Estates--Executors and Administrators--Proceedings--Contest
of Application.  --In a contest of letters of administration between two women
claiming to be the wife of decedent at the time of his death, it was not error
for the court to determine that one such woman, from whom decedent obtained a
divorce in another state, was not an heir, since in determining the validity of
the divorce the court had to pass on the question whether the woman had
knowledge of the divorce and its validity and if she had such knowledge and the
divorce was valid she would not be decedent's wife nor could she be a putative
wife and take as such; thus, in deciding that the divorce was valid the court
necessarily passed on the question whether the woman was an heir, the decision
that the divorce was valid determining that she was not an heir.

(4) Id.--Executors and Administrators--Proceedings--Contest of Application.
--In a contest of letters of administration, it is the duty of the court to
determine which contestant is entitled to letters, and in making such
determination the question of descent is necessarily involved.

COUNSEL: Walter McGovern and Wadsworth & Souza for Appellant.

Jacobs, Cavalero & Dietrich, D. R. Jacobs and Mark S. Bray for Respondent.

JUDGES: Warne, J. pro tem.  * Van Dyke, P. J., and Schottky, J., concurred.

*   Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: WARNE

OPINION

     This is an appeal from an order appointing Stockton Savings and Loan Bank,
the nominee of Cora Raynor, administrator of the estate of Clayton Ashley
Raynor, deceased.

   The actual contest in this matter is between two women, Kay Raynor,
hereinafter referred to as Kay, and Cora Raynor, hereinafter referred to as
Cora, each of whom claims to be the surviving spouse of the decedent,
hereinafter referred to as Cal.  Each sought letters of administration.

   Cal and Cora were married in 1927 and 18 years later on June 4, 1946, Cal
obtained a divorce from Cora in Nevada.  The following day, June 5, 1946, Cal
married Kay in Nevada and they then drove to California where on June 20th Cal
entered into a contract to purchase an apartment house in Tracy.  The purchase
of the apartment house was completed on July 6, 1946.  On June 21, 1946, Cal
returned to Nevada, where on June 27, 1946, just 22 days after marrying Kay, he
obtained a Nevada judgment of divorce from her.  He then returned to California
and continued to live with Kay, whom he held out as his wife until his death,
although he remarried Cora on November 30, 1946, which according to Kay was
unknown to her.  This latter marriage was never dissolved.  Kay contends that
the Nevada judgment of divorce dissolving her marriage to Cal was invalid.

   A few days after Cal returned to Nevada, Kay received a letter from Cal's
attorney enclosing a document entitled "Appearance and Waiver," which was later
filed in the divorce action. The document, after reciting the title of the court
and the cause, reads:

    "Appearance and Waiver

   "The undersigned, named as defendant in the above entitled action, hereby
consents that when a complaint is filed by the above named plaintiff seeking an
absolute divorce from the undersigned in the above named Court, this instrument
will constitute an appearance in that action by the undersigned, and that the
undersigned does hereby submit herself to the jurisdiction of the Sixth Judicial
District Court of the State of Nevada, in and for the County of Humboldt.

   "Said defendant hereby waives all time to demur, answer or otherwise plead in
any such action . . ."

   This document was signed and acknowledged by Kay before a notary public in
Stockton, California, and then mailed to Cal's attorney.  It was filed in the
divorce proceedings.

   In his deposition Sanford C. Bunce, Cal's attorney, who in 1946 maintained a
law office in Lovelock, Nevada, testified that he represented Cal in the divorce
proceedings filed in the month of June, 1946, and that said "Appearance and
Waiver" was mailed to Kay, with a one dollar bill to defray the expense of
notary fees and a self-addressed stamped envelope for the return of said
instrument after it had been executed by her.  A carbon copy of his letter was
produced and a photostat thereof is in evidence.  The letter, after advising Kay
that Cal had retained Attorney Bunce as his counsel in a divorce proceeding to
be instituted in the near future, and of the above mentioned enclosures,
requested her to sign the "Appearance and Waiver" before a notary public and
that she then have the notary public complete the acknowledgment, affix his or
her official seal thereto.  The letter then stated: "You may then return said
instrument to me and I will cause same to be filed at the time Mr. Raynor
institutes his divorce proceedings." While Kay claims she signed the "Appearance
and Waiver" without reading  the document and that her signature was procured by
the fraud of Cal, there is substantial evidence in the record from which a
reasonable inference may be drawn that Kay signed the Appearance and Waiver
knowingly and voluntarily with full understanding of the effect of her act.  She
testified that she received a "Letter" from Attorney Bunce from Lovelock,
Nevada; that she then took a bus from Tracy to Stockton, carrying the unopened
letter with her; that upon arrival in Stockton she found a notary public a short
distance from the bus depot; that the notary public showed her where to sign the
document, and upon her (Kay's) request, mailed the Appearance and  Waiver to
Attorney Bunce.  Kay denied reading the Appearance and Waiver.  Concerning the
transaction, Kay further testified:  "Q. Now, when you received the letter from
Mr. Bunce, or the envelope from Mr. Bunce, would you state that the original of
this letter definitely was not in that envelope? A. I don't know.  Q. You don't
know?  A. Because I didn't open it -- I opened it and she took -- she gave it to
me like this and she said 'Sign here' and she had it.  I don't remember how she
had it.  She said 'Sign here' and that was all.  She didn't say anything and I
didn't say anything.  And I said 'Would you mail this for me?' because I had to
take the next bus back." Her reason for going to Stockton to acknowledge the
instrument is not shown in the record.

   On cross-examination she denied seeing a dollar bill and envelope returned
self-addressed to Attorney Bunce or the letter of transmittal enclosed from
Attorney Bunce, all of which were contained in the envelope according to the
deposition of Attorney Bunce.  However, when she was confronted with the
envelope addressed to Attorney Bunce, she admitted that she personally crossed
out the words "Tracy, California" and had written the words "Stockton, Calif.,
Gen. Del." thereon as a return address.  The notary public before whom Kay
executed the Appearance and Waiver was deceased at the time of the trial and
this fact was known to Kay.  Obviously, the trial court did not believe Kay's
testimony concerning her claimed lack of knowledge of the contents of the letter
or that she did not know she was signing an Appearance and Waiver to be filed in
the divorce proceeding.

   Further, statements made to Wallace Raynor and Patricia Whittemore, the son
and daughter of Cal, a few days after Cal's death, are of some significance.
The record discloses that both children had known of the relationship between
their father and Kay for some time and out of concern for their mother had kept
this information from her.  After their father's death, Wallace and Patricia
traveled to Tracy to arrange to have their father's body sent to Utah for burial
and while there contacted Kay in reference to their mission.  Wallace testified:
"I mentioned to her once that I had intended to bring the body back to Utah, and
Kay acted a little reluctant.  And, I said 'Well, Kay, you know I can do it.'
And she said to me 'Yes.'" Further recognition of knowledge by Kay that Cora was
the wife of decedent is found in the testimony of Patricia: "I told Kay Raynor
that my mother had instructed me to bring home the income tax reports that my
father had ready because she had to file her Federal Income Tax and Kay told me,
she said 'Yes, I know, Pat, I have them and I will give them to you.' . . .  But
she said 'if you love a man as much as I love your father, Pat, you could live
with him no matter how it had to be.'"

     The weight of the evidence and the inferences to be drawn therefrom were
matters for the trial court to determine and we feel that the record amply
supports the trial court's conclusion that Kay had full knowledge of the effect
of her act when she signed the Appearance and Waiver.

   Appellant, Kay, contends that the Nevada decree severing her marital ties
with Cal was void because neither party was domiciled in Nevada at the time Cal
obtained the divorce.  While it is true that only the state of a domicile has
jurisdiction  to grant a divorce, the rule has been established that the
requirements of full faith and credit bar a defendant from collaterally
attacking a divorce decree on jurisdictional grounds in the court of another
state where there has been participation by the defendant in the divorce
proceedings, where the defendant has been accorded full opportunity to contest
the jurisdictional issues, and where the decree is not susceptible to such cause
or attack in courts of the state which rendered the decree. ( Sherrer v. Sherrer
, 334 U.S. 343 [68 S.Ct. 1087, 1097, 92 L.Ed. 1429, 1 A.L.R.2d 1355]; Coe v. Coe
, 334 U.S. 378 [68 S.Ct. 1094, 1097, 92 L.Ed. 1451, 1 A.L.R.2d 1378]; Johnson v.
Muelberger, 340 U.S. 581, 586 [71 S.Ct. 474, 95 L.Ed. 552].) The California
Supreme Court, in commenting on the Sherrer case, has said that the test is not
whether the issue of jurisdiction was actively litigated in the court rendering
the divorce decree, but whether the defendant has participated in the
proceedings and had full opportunity to litigate the issue.  ( Heuer v. Heuer,
33 Cal.2d 268 [201 P.2d 385].)

   In Sherrer v. Sherrer the wife went from Massachusetts to Florida and sued
for divorce. The husband appeared in the action personally and by counsel.  The
wife was granted a divorce. She received custody of the minor children pursuant
to the parties' stipulation read into the record.  The husband returned to
Massachusetts and sought a judicial declaration that the divorce and subsequent
remarriage of the wife were invalid. A decree in his favor was affirmed by the
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts.

   In Coe v. Coe the wife obtained an award of support in a Massachusetts court.
The husband journeyed to Nevada and  there instituted divorce proceedings.  The
wife went to Nevada to contest the husband's action and to obtain a divorce for
herself.  She filed an answer denying other allegations, but admitting the
allegation as to the husband's residence.  Both parties were present personally
and by counsel at the trial.  The wife was granted a divorce. She returned to
Massachusetts and brought contempt proceedings against the husband for failure
to comply with a prior support order.  A contempt order based on a holding of
the invalidity of the Nevada decree was affirmed on appeal.

   The Supreme Court of the United States reversed in each case.

   In the Sherrer case, page 351, the Supreme Court held that after the domicile
issue had been redetermined by the courts of another state, the Florida court
had jurisdiction to determine the question of its jurisdiction and "that the
requirements of full faith and credit bar a defendant from collaterally
attacking a divorce decree on jurisdictional grounds in the courts of a sister
State where there has been participation by the defendant in the divorce
proceedings, where the defendant has been accorded full opportunity to contest
the jurisdictional issues, and where the decree is not susceptible to such
collateral attack in the courts of the State which rendered the decree." In the
Coe case the question of domicile was also relitigated by the court of a sister
state and the Supreme Court held that as to the parties the issue was res
judicata and the courts of the second state were required to give full faith and
credit to the decree.

     In both the Coe and Sherrer cases, the parties participated and had an
opportunity to litigate the question of domicile. The question as to whether the
rule of the Sherrer and Coe cases includes a situation in which the nonresident
defendant merely entered his or her appearance in the divorce proceedings,
without any other participation therein, has not yet been squarely decided by
the Supreme Court of the United States.  However, the reasoning of the Sherrer
and Coe cases, which turns on the nonresident defendant's opportunity to raise
the issue of domicile, seems to indicate that entry of appearance, of itself,
satisfies the Sherrer and Coe rule.  (See Anno.  28 A.L.R.2d 1303, 1320-1321.)
In California it has been indicated, if not held, that the rule is the same and
we are also of that opinion.  In Haden v. Haden, 120 Cal.App.2d 722 [262 P.2d
73], the  husband, after entering into a property settlement with his wife, went
to Nevada where he filed for  divorce on April 30th.  On May 7th his wife filed
her general appearance and waiver of service of summons. The husband obtained a
divorce and then returned to California, and sued for divorce in California,
which was denied.  Two questions were presented on appeal.  The first question
was whether the filing of the general appearance and waiver of summons by the
wife was sufficient participation by her to validate the judgment.  The court
held that the decree was entitled to full faith and credit even though the wife
was not represented by counsel and no evidence was presented on her behalf in
the Nevada court.  The court said: "A judgment presumes jurisdiction over the
subject matter and over the persons.  It is only where the defendant spouse has
neither appeared nor been served in the other state that the California court
can reopen the issue of domicile." It held also that a person appears when he
"'gives the plaintiff written notice of his appearance' or answers or demurs,"
and that by appearing the wife submitted herself to the jurisdiction of the
court.  The only material fact that is different in the instant case is that Kay
signed and returned a waiver and appearance to the attorney for Cal prior to the
time any action had been filed.

   Appellant argues that the signing of the appearance and waiver before the
divorce action was commenced is alone sufficient to render it ineffective.
While we have been unable to find any California case wherein this question has
been determined, there is persuasive authority in other states holding contrary
to appellant's contention.

   In Drinkwater v. Drinkwater (D.C.), 111 F. Supp. 559, the court held that a
divorce decree was entitled to full faith and credit even though defendant had
signed her answer three months previous to the filing of the complaint.  In
Jacobs v. Ellet, 108 Utah 162 [158 P.2d 555], the court issued a writ of mandate
to compel the trial court to enter default in a divorce action wherein the trial
court had refused to enter the default on the grounds that the defendant's
appearance and waiver had been executed five days before the complaint was
filed, and in Vayette v. Myers, 303 Ill. 562 [136 N.E. 467], the court held that
the decree of divorce was valid even though defendant had signed appearance
before the filing of the complaint.  (See also cases collected in 159 A.L.R.
111.) We conclude that the trial court was correct in giving full faith and
credit to the Nevada decree.

   One recognized exception to the rule enunciated in the Sherrer and Coe cases
is where the appearance of the defendant  is induced by fraud or duress.  This
rule is recognized in California.  (See Gromeeko v. Gromeeko, 110 Cal.App.2d 117
[242 P.2d 41]; Hayden v. Hayden, supra.) Prior to receiving the letter from
Cal's attorney, as hereinabove mentioned, Kay received a letter from Cal which
contained the following: "Now, Honey, all will be O.K.  You get the papers
Monday or Tuesday sure, General Delivery, Tracy.  . . .  You can find a notary
public day or night.  . . .  He is making up the escrow to you of the property,
and we have to sign it together at the bank in Tracy." Kay testified, as
heretofore stated, that she never received the letter from the attorney, claimed
to have been enclosed with the document, and that she did not read the document;
that after she received the envelope containing the document she went to a
notary public where she opened the communication and gave it to the notary who
instructed her where to sign; and that she did not know what she signed.  As we
have already stated, the trial court was not required to believe her testimony
concerning that transaction or that she was induced through fraud to sign the
waiver.  Apparently Cal's letter was in reference to the escrow. The language,
"He is making up the escrow to you of the property, and we will have to sign it
together at the bank in Tracy" so indicates.

     The only remaining question is whether or not the trial court acted beyond
the issues when it determined that Kay was not an heir of Cal's in a contest for
letters of administration.   It is the duty of the court to determine which
contestant is entitled to letters of administration and in determining such
question, the question of descent is necessarily involved.  ( Estate of Paulsen,
179 Cal. 528 [178 P. 143]. See also Estate of Cover, 188 Cal. 133 [204 P. 583];
Estate of Schwartz, 79 Cal.App.2d 301 [179 P.2d 863]; Estate of Hensgen, 80
Cal.App.2d 78 [181 P.2d 69].)   In determining whether or not the Nevada decree
was entitled to full faith and credit or whether it was invalid because of
fraud, the trial court had to pass merely on the question whether Kay had
knowledge of the divorce and its validity.  If she had knowledge of the divorce
and it was valid, she would not be his wife nor could she be a putative wife.
The phrase "putative marriage" is applied to a matrimonial union which has been
solemnized in due form and celebrated in good faith, but which by reason of some
legal infirmity is void or voidable.  Here the divorce dissolved the bonds of
matrimony and she couldn't be a putative wife because she did not go through a
marriage ceremony after Cal received his divorce from her, and, therefore, could
not be an heir under the theory that a putative wife takes as an heir. ( Estate
of Krone, 83 Cal.App.2d 766 [189 P.2d 741].) In deciding the divorce was valid,
the trial court necessarily passed on the question whether Kay could inherit
Cal's estate, and once the court decided the divorce was valid it determined Kay
was not an heir. Therefore, we feel that the trial court did not err in
determining in these proceedings that she was not an heir.

   The order appealed from is affirmed.


                              18 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              MAE BLUMENTHAL, Respondent, v. ALEXANDER BLUMENTHAL,
                                   Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 6690

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FIRST APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION ONE

             97 Cal. App. 558; 275 P. 987; 1929 Cal. App. LEXIS 773


                            March 14, 1929, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:      APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of the City and
County of San Francisco. Thomas F. Graham, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Marriage--Eligibility of Parties--Time of Determination.  --Eligibility of a
person to contract marriage must be determined from conditions existing on the
date of solemnization of the marriage, and not from that which may happen
afterward.

(2) Divorce--Judgments--Interlocutory Decree--Status of Parties.
--Interlocutory decrees of divorce do not operate retrospectively so as to
remove the legal barrier which existed at the time the parties entered into the
marital state, before the expiration of one year from entry of the interlocutory
decree as required by section 61 of the Civil Code.

(3) Id.--Validity of Marriage--Res Judicata.  --As between strangers, or between
parties and strangers, a decree of divorce does not establish the previous
validity of the marriage, since the res involved and adjudicated is the
condition of the subsequent singleness of the parties and not the valid prior
existence of marital relations between them.

(4) Id.--Validity of Previous Marriage--Estoppel.  --One marrying a divorced
woman before the expiration of one year from entry of the interlocutory decree,
in violation of section 61 of the Civil Code, is not estopped from establishing
the fact that the wife's previous marriage was in fact void.

COUNSEL: A. S. Newburgh and William M. Malone for Appellant.

Heidelberg & Murasky and Joseph Edward Connolly for Respondent.

OPINION

     THE COURT. This is an appeal by the defendant, Alexander Blumenthal, from a
decree annulling his marriage to plaintiff upon the ground that at the time it
was solemnized plaintiff was the lawful wife of one Guidice. The decree provided
also for a property settlement and for the custody and maintenance of a minor
child, the issue of the Blumenthal marriage. Defendant contends, as one of the
several grounds urged for reversal, that plaintiff's marriage to Guidice was
void ab initio, and that consequently her marriage to him was valid.

   The state of the record is as follows: Originally the action was one for
divorce instituted by Mrs. Blumenthal upon the ground of extreme cruelty.
Answering, defendant denied the charges of cruelty and added a cross-complaint
setting forth four separate  causes of action, two for annulment of the marriage
and two for divorce. In his first cause of action for annulment it was in
substance alleged that at the time he married plaintiff she was the lawful wife
of Guidice. Plaintiff, in a verified answer to the cross-complaint, denied "that
at the time said plaintiff married said defendant herein she was the wife of
Edward I. Guidice or any other person," or that at said time she "was lawfully
married to said Edward I. Guidice or to any other person or at all."
Subsequently and on the day of the trial, however, she filed an amended answer
to the cross-complaint, which was also verified, expressly admitting "that at
the time said plaintiff married said defendant she was the wife of Edward I.
Guidice," and that at said time she "was lawfully married to said Edward I.
Guidice." At the trial she offered no proof to sustain the allegations of her
complaint for divorce, but introduced evidence to establish the charge set forth
in the first cause of action of defendant's cross-complaint,  namely, that her
marriage to defendant was bigamous. Before she had rested her case, defendant
moved the court to dismiss the two causes of action for annulment in his
cross-complaint, but the court denied his motion. After plaintiff had rested her
case, defendant, in apparent contradiction of the allegations set forth in his
first cause of action for annulment, sought to establish the validity of his
marriage to Mrs. Blumenthal by showing that her marriage to Guidice was
bigamous, and consequently void ab initio; and he claimed therefore that her
subsequent marriage to him was legal. However, as indicated, the trial court
found that at the time of the Blumenthal marriage plaintiff was the wife of
Guidice, who was then living; and upon that ground the marriage between
plaintiff and defendant was annulled.

   The evidence bearing upon the question of the marital status of Mrs.
Blumenthal at the time of her marriage to defendant consisted chiefly of the
decrees rendered in the previous divorce proceedings. The facts established
thereby are not disputed and summarized are as follows: Guidice, immediately
preceding his marriage to plaintiff, was the husband of one Maude Alice Guidice,
who, on January 9, 1905, obtained an interlocutory decree of divorce from him in
Los Angeles County. Approximately ten months thereafter and on November 1, 1905,
Guidice married plaintiff in the city of Napa. In 1910, he commenced divorce
proceedings against plaintiff in Alameda County and on April 5th of that year
obtained an interlocutory decree. Fifteen days after the entry of such decree,
to wit, on April 20, 1910, plaintiff married Blumenthal in Salt Lake City, Utah.

    Section 61 of the Civil Code provides: "A subsequent marriage contracted by
any person during the lifetime of a former husband or wife of such person, with
any person other than such former husband or wife, is illegal and void from the
beginning, unless: 1 -- The former marriage has been annulled or dissolved. In
no case can a marriage of either of the parties during the life of the other be
valid in this state if contracted within one year after the entry of an
interlocutory decree in a proceeding for divorce . . . ." Manifestly, therefore,
under the provisions of the foregoing code section, Guidice's marriage to
plaintiff was "illegal and void from the beginning," because the uncontradicted
evidence shows that at the time he married her he was still the lawful husband
of Maude Alice. That being  so, plaintiff never was the lawful wife of Guidice,
and, if she was not, her marriage to Blumenthal cannot be annulled upon the
ground that she was.

     Plaintiff calls attention to the fact that about two months after Guidice
married plaintiff his marriage to Maude Alice was dissolved by the entry of a
final decree; also that approximately eleven months following plaintiff's
marriage to Blumenthal her marriage to Guidice was dissolved by the entry of a
final decree. But the eligibility of a person to contract marriage must be
determined from the conditions existing on the date of the solemnization of the
marriage and not from that which may happen afterward.   Therefore, neither of
those decrees operated retrospectively so as to remove the legal barrier which
existed at the time the parties entered into the marital state.

   Plaintiff seeks to sustain the judgment of annulment upon the theory that,
regardless of the actual facts relating to plaintiff's previous marital status,
the interlocutory decree rendered in the divorce action between Guidice and
plaintiff, and the final decree which was entered more than eleven months
subsequent to the time she married Blumenthal, are conclusive against the whole
world as to the validity of plaintiff's marriage to Guidice, and that
consequently defendant is estopped from asserting or proving to the contrary.

     If the present controversy were one existing between the original parties
to the divorce proceeding prosecuted by Guidice against plaintiff, or between
parties claiming under them, and it be assumed that as to the question of
finality, an interlocutory decree of divorce shall be treated on an equality
with a final decree, there would be much force in plaintiff's position, for it
seems to be the general rule, with respect to final decrees of divorce at least,
that as between the parties and privies a decree granting a divorce is
conclusive of the existence of the marriage dissolved thereby (9 Ruling Case
Law, 459, 460). Such was the situation existing in Estate of Lee, 200 Cal. 310
[253 P. 145], upon which plaintiff mainly relies. Here, however, the action is
not between the original parties  to the Guidice-plaintiff divorce proceeding,
nor their privies, but is between one of the parties thereto and a stranger to
it, and under such circumstances a different rule prevails. It is stated in
Freeman on Judgments (vol. 2, 5th ed., p. 1913) as follows: "While the  decree
in a divorce suit as a decree in rem binds the whole world as to the status of
the parties, to the extent that their status is the res adjudicata, with that
limitation it is subject to the usual rule that estoppels must be mutual and is
therefore not conclusive for or against any third person in reference to the
facts which it necessarily affirms or denies . . . . As between strangers or
between parties and strangers, a decree of divorce does not establish the
previous validity of the marriage, since the res involved and adjudicated is the
condition of subsequent singleness of the parties and not the valid prior
existence of marital relations between them." (Citing Oborn v. State, 143 Wis.
249 [31 L. R. A. (N. S.) 966, 126 N.W. 737]; Williams v. Williams, 63 Wis. 58
[53 Am. Rep. 253, 23 N.W. 110].) The rule is given substantially the same in
Ruling Case Law (vol. 9, pp. 460, 461), as follows: "As to third persons the
decree of divorce is conclusive as to the subsequent status of the parties,
viz., that from the time of the divorce they are single as to each other (citing
Belknap v. Stewart, 38 Neb. 304 [41 Am. St. Rep. 729, 56 N.W. 881]; Oborn v.
State, supra), but the divorce does not settle the status of their prior
relations so as to render them valid or invalid as against the whole world
regardless of whether they were so or not." (Citing Hunter v. Hunter, 111 Cal.
261 [52 Am. St. Rep. 180, 31 L. R. A. 411, 43 P. 756]; Williams v. Williams,
supra; Oborn v. State, supra.) Further on the text reads: "The judgment or
decree in divorce or annulment proceedings, aside from establishing as against
all the world that from the time of the divorce or annulment the parties are
single as regards each other, cannot be invoked by a third person in a
subsequent action against one of the spouses as establishing facts which may
have been or were adjudicated in the divorce proceedings. Thus, as between the
party securing the divorce and a third person, the divorce is not conclusive
that a marriage actually existed at the time of the divorce between the parties
to the action in which the divorce was granted. (Citing Hunter v. Hunter, supra,
and Williams v. Williams, supra.) . . . So also, where a woman married a man who
had a wife living, and then married another man, after which she secured a
divorce from the man she first married, she was held not estopped by reason of
such divorce from showing that the first marriage was void and that she was a
lawful wife under her second  marriage so as to be entitled to dower in her
second husband's estate" (Citing Williams v. Williams, supra). In the Hunter
case the facts show that Mrs. Hunter, after having been previously married and
deserted by her husband, married Hunter, and that twenty years or more
thereafter she sued for and obtained a divorce from her first husband, named
Milam, who had disappeared. Thereupon an action was commenced by Hunter to annul
his marriage to Mrs. Hunter, and it was held that neither the complaint Mrs.
Hunter filed in her divorce action against Milam, nor the decree of divorce she
had obtained therein was conclusive against her as to the existence of a valid
marriage with Milam. As to the legal effect of such decree the court said, in
quoting from Burlen v. Shannon, 69 Mass. 387, 3 Gray (Mass.), 387: "It did not
establish but recognized and presupposed the relation of husband and wife as
previously existing," and then added: "It was conclusive against the world that
the plaintiff in that suit was no longer the wife of Joseph Milam and it was an
adjudication of nothing else." The case of Oborn v. State, supra, was to the
same effect, it being there held that the divorce action, and the result thereof
dissolving any marital relation between the parties, did not, as to the public
generally, establish the relation of husband and wife as claimed by the parties
in said action; that so far as the action was in rem, the res was the condition
of subsequent singleness as to each other, and not the prior existence of a
valid marital relationship.

   In passing upon the point the court in the latter case used this language: ".
. . The mere treatment of the parties as man and wife in the divorce action, and
judicial dissolution of their purported relations, did not make the void
marriage valid. It merely established the status of the parties toward each
other as judicially separated and absolved from all obligations of a marital
nature existing between them." In other words, as said in the Williams case,
there is no more inconsistency in speaking of two persons being divorced from
the bonds of matrimony when in law no such bonds ever existed between them, than
there is in speaking of such persons being married, when in law there could be
no such marriage. The facts of the latter case relating to the marital status of
the parties closely resemble those of the present one. There Mrs. Williams
married a man named Jones, who at that time had a wife. Subsequently  she
married Williams, after which she obtained a divorce from Jones. In her divorce
complaint against Jones she alleged that they were lawfully married. The decree
found the allegations of the complaint to be true, and she was granted a divorce
. Later Williams died and Mrs. Williams brought suit to establish and recover
her dower interest in the Williams estate. It was held that notwithstanding the
adjudication in the Jones divorce decree that she was the wife of Jones, she was
not estopped thereby from establishing that such marriage was in fact void, and
that, therefore, her marriage to Williams was valid.

     From the foregoing we conclude that Blumenthal, being a stranger to the
divorce action between Guidice and plaintiff, was not estopped by either of the
decrees rendered therein from establishing the fact that plaintiff's marriage to
Guidice was in fact void; and having so established such fact by uncontradicted
evidence, it follows that plaintiff's marriage to Blumenthal was not bigamous
and that, therefore, the decree annulling the same upon that ground is not
supported by the evidence and consequently is erroneous. The conclusion we have
reached on the foregoing issues makes it unnecessary to consider or determine
the other points presented.

   Judgment reversed.


                              19 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              ROBERT M. NEWELL, Respondent, v. WILLIAM H. BRAWNER,
                                   Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 21572

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division One

            146 Cal. App. 2d 337; 303 P.2d 850; 1956 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      1467


                               November 28, 1956

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied December 14, 1956,
and Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court was Denied January
23, 1957.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  John Gee Clark, Judge.

   Action to quiet title to real property.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Husband and Wife--Property--Determination of Character--Evidence.  --A
finding in a quiet title action that certain realty deeded by plaintiff's former
wife to defendant, her father, was community was sustained by her sworn
complaint in her foreign divorce action alleging the property to be community,
and by a judgment determining it to be community in the husband's California
divorce action in which she failed to deny his allegation that the property was
community.

(2) Divorce--Judgment--Res Judicata.  --An interlocutory divorce decree's
determination of status of the parties' property is res judicata.

(3) Judgments -- Collateral Attack -- Insufficiency of Pleading.  --Generally,
an insufficient description of real estate in a pleading does not subject a
resulting judgment affecting title to or an interest in such property to
collateral attack.

(4) Divorce--Judgment--Res Judicata.  --An immediate disposal of property on an
interlocutory divorce decree is within the court's jurisdiction, and such decree
becomes a conclusive adjudication and is res judicata with respect to all issues
determined, though a final decree is not entered.

COUNSEL: Glenn A. Lane, Ernest W. Pitney and Paul Barksdale d'Orr for Appellant.


Ernest J. Zack for Respondent.

JUDGES: Fourt, J.  White, P. J., and Doran, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: FOURT

OPINION

     This is an appeal from a judgment in favor of the plaintiff wherein the
title to certain real property in the county of Los Angeles was quieted in the
plaintiff.

   A fair resume of the facts of the case is hereinafter set forth.  The
respondent herein was married on or about November 1, 1942, to Gertrude Newell,
now known as Gertrude Ralphs, the daughter of the appellant.  The property which
is the subject of this action was the place formerly occupied by Mr. and Mrs.
Newell as a home.  Each of the parties to this action is a practicing attorney
at law.  About May 20, 1948, respondent and his then wife acquired a parcel of
real property which was then vacant.  The deed recited that they were husband
and wife and they took title to the said property as joint tenants.  In about
1950, Mr. and Mrs. Newell caused a house to be constructed upon the lot.  They
had approximately $ 9,000 in community funds.  A construction loan was secured
for the major part of the balance of the cost of the building.  The
mother-in-law, Mrs. Brawner, assisted in providing funds for the completion of
the house.

   About June 30, 1953, the respondent and his wife separated.  She left the
state of California with their three children and, among other places, went to
the state of  Idaho (where a final decree of divorce can be secured upon six
weeks residence).  The appellant herein conferred with an attorney in Idaho who
subsequently represented his daughter in the Idaho divorce proceedings.

   On August 17, 1953, the respondent filed a divorce action in Pasadena, Case
Number Pasadena D-11260.  In that complaint he alleged that, "The community
property of the parties consists of the following: (1) The house and lot
situated at 1300 Virginia Road, San Marino, California.  (2) The furniture and
furnishings in the family home." The prayer of that complaint prayed for
judgment against the defendant, "that the community property of the parties be
distributed pursuant to law, and in such manner as the court deems proper." The
then Mrs. Newell was served in the state of Idaho with a copy of the complaint
and a copy of the summons on August 24, 1953.  On August 22, 1953, the then Mrs.
Newell filed an action in divorce in Gooding County, Idaho, the complaint
therein being verified on August 15, 1953, wherein, among other things, she
alleged that she was a resident of the state of Idaho and that, "there is . . .
community property comprising . . . an equity in the house." This apparently
referred to the house in Los Angeles county, the real property involved in this
case.   On August 28, 1953, the appellant recorded in the office of the county
recorder of Los Angeles county a grant deed executed by his daughter, the
respondent's wife, wherein she purported to convey her interest in the property
to her father, the appellant.  The deed set forth on its face that it was made
on the 14th day of August, 1953.

   The then Mrs. Newell appeared in the divorce action in California on
September 25, 1953, but did not answer the complaint, and on that date findings
of fact and conclusions of law were made and filed, wherein the court, upon good
and sufficient evidence, found that the plaintiff was a resident of Los Angeles
county and that the defendant in that action had been for six years prior to the
filing of the case, and was on the date of the commencement of such action, a
resident of the county of Los Angeles, state of California, and further, that
the parties had accumulated certain community property consisting of the house
and lot in question and other property.  An interlocutory decree of divorce was
granted the respondent herein on September 25, 1953, and said decree was entered
on September 29, 1953.  The decree provided, among other things, that the
property described as "[the] house and lot situated at 1300 Virginia Road, in
the City of San Marino, County of Los Angeles, State of California," and then
more particularly described, was awarded to the respondent herein as his sole
and separate property.

   No appeal was taken from that interlocutory judgment and no proceedings were
had under section 473 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

   The appellant never informed the respondent of the existence of the deed from
his daughter to him, he paid no taxes on the property and the records of the
company which had the loan against the property indicated that they had received
no communication from the appellant as the new owner, or otherwise.  The
respondent had no actual knowledge of the existence of the deed until April,
1954, and shortly thereafter started this action to quiet title against the
appellant.  The appellant filed a cross-complaint to enforce a resulting trust
in the real property and for an accounting and partition.  The name of Ernest W.
Pitney appeared in the cross-complaint as counsel for appellant.  It further
appears, from various documents, that appellant and Pitney are officed at the
same address.

   The appellant testified that the deed from his daughter, the  former Mrs.
Newell, was prepared by the Idaho attorney who was representing the daughter in
her Idaho divorce proceedings, and that he, the appellant, had nothing to do
with its preparation.  It should perhaps be noted here that it was eight days
after the supposed execution of the deed that the then Mrs. Newell brought her
action for a divorce in Idaho, wherein she alleged that the property in question
was the community property of herself and her husband.  It should further be
noted  that the lawyer who supposedly prepared and acknowledged the deed as a
notary public was the same person who prepared the divorce complaint for Mrs.
Newell, and as a notary, took the verification of Mrs. Newell on the divorce
complaint.

   David Black, who qualified as an expert on questioned documents testified
that he examined the deed and the cross-complaint of the appellant filed in this
cause on May 21, 1954, that he made a study of the typewriting on the documents
and that it was his opinion that the portion of the deed which contained the
particular description of the property, namely, paragraphs two and three of the
deed, and the words "William H. Brawner, 621 South Spring Street, Los Angeles
14, Calif.," on the reverse side of the deed were typed on the same individual
typewriter as typed the typewriting in the cross-complaint in the present
lawsuit.  He further testified that the first part of the deed was typed on an
Underwood typewriter, pica type, and the part containing the particular
description in the deed in paragraphs two and three, and the cross-complaint
were typed on an I.B.M.  electric typewriter bearing pica type.  The deed was a
printed form titled at the top "613 -- Warranty Deed," and obviously was
prepared for general usage in the state of Idaho, as the words "State of Idaho"
were printed on the face of the document, and on the reverse side in the
acknowledgment form the words "State of Idaho" are printed twice.  In the
preparation of the deed in the first instance the word "Idaho" was not crossed
out on the face of the deed, so that it then read "all of the following
described real estate, situated in the, County of Los Angeles, State of Idaho."
This was later corrected in October of 1953.

   The appellant contends that the judgment is unsupported by and contrary to
the evidence.  It is his theory that the funds which went into the purchase and
improvement of the property were the separate property of his daughter, the
respondent's wife, or joint tenancy property of the respondent  and his then
wife.   As heretofore set forth, the court in the California divorce proceeding
found the property to be the community property of Mr. and Mrs. Newell and made
a judgment accordingly.  In our opinion that judgment was properly received in
evidence in this case.  There was further evidence in the case which, if
believed, and the trial court did obviously believe such testimony, that the
property was the community property of the respondent and his wife.

   Furthermore, Mrs. Newell, in her Idaho divorce action alleged under oath that
the property was community property. The respondent, in his divorce complaint,
alleged that it was community property, and Mrs. Newell failed to answer such
allegation.  It was appropriately said in Cairo v. Cairo, 87 Cal.App.2d 558, at
page 562 [197 P.2d 208]: "Since the complaint alleged the real property to be
community and there is no denial of that fact no additional proof of that fact
is necessary.  ( Code Civ. Proc., § 462; Beatty v. Pacific States S. & L. Co., 4
Cal.App.2d 692, 698 [41 P.2d 378]. . . .)" And in Christiana v. Rose, 100
Cal.App.2d 46, at page 50 [222 P.2d 891], the court said: "Under the decided
cases, it is the law of this state, at least where a defendant is personally
served in a divorce action and defaults, that, by such default, he admits all of
the allegations of the complaint, and is estopped from thereafter challenging
them."

   In Brown  v. Brown, 170 Cal. 1, at page 5 [147 P. 1168], the court said:
"Where a defendant is served with a summons and complaint stating the facts upon
which he is required to act, and he makes default, he is presumed to admit all
the facts which are well pleaded in the complaint.  The judgment which follows
upon this sort of admission is, in contemplation of law, a complete adjudication
of all the rights of the parties embraced in the prayer for relief and arising
from the facts stated in the complaint, including the facts in his favor as well
as those against him.  The defendant here is presumed to have acceded to the
proposition embraced in the complaint and to have consented that plaintiff
should  obtain the relief therein prayed for, upon the conditions and facts set
forth in the complaint.  The proceeding is equivalent to a statement by Brown to
the plaintiff that he did not object to a divorce for the cause alleged, based
upon the theory that there was no community property existing at the time the
action was begun.  When judgment is rendered upon such a complaint and default,
it becomes, in effect, a contract  between the parties that the judgment shall
be final with respect to everything properly embraced within the allegations of
the complaint and in the prayer for relief.  (Citing cases.)"

   Appellant next contends that the trial court relied upon the default divorce
decree and that it was error for the court so to do.  Appellant sets forth that
the judgment in divorce was not pleaded as res judicata, that he was not a party
to the divorce action and therefore his title was not adjudicated in that
action.

    Code of Civil Procedure, section 1908, subdivision 2, provides as follows:

   "2.  In other cases, the judgment or order is, in respect to the matter
directly adjudged, conclusive between the parties and their successors in
interest by title subsequent to the commencement of the action or special
proceeding, litigating for the same thing under the same title and in the same
capacity, provided they have notice, actual or constructive, of the pendency of
the action or proceeding." (Emphasis added.)

   The court found in the instant action that: "Gertrude B. Newell executed a
deed to the above described real property to William H. Brawner, said deed being
dated August 14, 1953, but in truth and in fact said deed was executed and
delivered about August 26, 1953, after Gertrude B. Newell and William H. Brawner
each had actual notice of the pendency of the hereinabove mentioned divorce
action, being Los Angeles Superior Court case Number Pasadena D.-11260, and
after each had actual notice that Robert M. Newell claimed the above described
real property as community property in said divorce action."

   There was ample evidence to sustain the finding made by the court.  The court
could easily have inferred that it was Mrs. Newell's original intent to litigate
all of the matters between the parties in her Idaho action, including the
question of their community property, for she set forth under oath on August 15,
1953, that the property was community property and she prayed that all of the
same be decreed to her as her sole and separate property.

   The respondent filed his divorce action in California on August 17, 1953, and
served the wife with a copy of the complaint and summons on August 24, 1953.  He
alleged the matters heretofore considered.  The appellant in this case and his
daughter, Mrs. Newell, could well have been in a  quandary as to what to do
about the property.  Appellant knew that to litigate in California might result
in the very thing Mr. Newell had prayed for in his complaint.  Respondent has
suggested that on or about August 25th or 26th, 1953, immediately following Mrs.
Newell's being served with a copy of the California divorce proceedings, that
Eberle, the Idaho lawyer for Mrs. Newell, prepared so much of the deed in
question as he was able to do with the information he had at hand, namely, the
name of the grantor and grantee and the general address of the former home of
Mr. and Mrs. Newell; that he then mailed such document to appellant herein, who
completed it by typing in the legal description, using the same typewriter in
his office that he used to type his cross-complaint in this action; that by
arrangement between appellant and the Idaho attorney the deed was antedated to
August 14th, and the acknowledgment taken accordingly.  Respondents points out
that any such conspiracy was necessarily frustrated from the beginning because
Mrs. Newell's Idaho divorce action was on file August 22, 1953.

   Appellant, in attempting to explain the situation and in testifying after the
questioned document expert had testified, stated that he might have possibly
picked up a blank form of an Idaho deed when he was in Idaho with his daughter
and had typed  in the legal description and mailed the same back to her in Idaho
for signature.  Respondent, quite properly, put the query that if such be the
case, why did appellant omit the first paragraph of the description which was
written on a different typewriter (apparently in Idaho), or if he did omit the
first paragraph, how was he able to tell in advance exactly the right amount of
space to leave to the end that the second paragraph would appear to follow the
first uninterruptedly?  We have carefully examined the deed in question, and
from a casual or ordinary inspection it appears to be an ordinary, usual deed on
a printed form.  However, upon a minute inspection, it is apparent that the
testimony of the expert could well be and probably is correct.  In any event,
the trial court apparently considered that the expert was telling the truth, and
that the testimony of the appellant was thoroughly impeached, and from the
record we believe that the trial court had good cause therefor.

   The facts herein are similar to those in Karlein v. Karlein, 122 Cal.App.2d
113 [264 P.2d 221], wherein Viola Karlein filed a complaint for divorce against
her husband, in which she alleged that the family house on a certain lot owned
by  them in joint tenancy was community property. A default judgment was entered
on January 12, 1950, and subsequently set aside upon motion of the husband.
While the divorce was still pending the husband quitclaimed his interest in the
property to the appellant, Hilda Greis, his sister.  The deed was recorded
October 22, 1951.  A second interlocutory decree of divorce, based upon the
finding that the residential property was community property, awarded it to the
wife.  No appeal was taken.  The wife sued to quiet title to the property.  The
court quoted section 1908, subdivision 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure and said
(at page 114): "This statute is applicable to the case at bar and is conclusive
of the questions on appeal." It further said (at pages 114-115): "The status of
the title of the property was placed in issue by the complaint in the divorce
action. The interlocutory decree adjudged the home place to be community
property and awarded it to the wife.  Since no appeal was taken from the decree,
the award of the property to Viola is final.  (Citing case.) The authorities
relied on by appellant which hold that the disposition of property by
interlocutory decree is not final ( Slavich v. Slavich, 108 Cal.App.2d 451, 460
[239 P.2d 100] . . . , and Wilson v. Wilson, 76 Cal.App.2d 119, 129 [172 P.2d
568] . . .) are actions in which an appeal was taken from the interlocutory
decree." (Also see Spahn v. Spahn, 70 Cal.App.2d 791 [162 P.2d 53].)

     Furthermore, the determination of the interlocutory decree is res judicata.
( Klebora v. Klebora, 118 Cal.App. 613 [5 P.2d 965].)

     Appellant next contends, in effect, that the judgment in the California
divorce action is void because the description of the real property is
insufficient.  In Henderson v. Henderson, 85 Cal.App.2d 476, at pages 479 and
480 [193 P.2d 135], the court said: "The description of the real property in the
complaint, 'equity in real . . . property, situated in Shasta County,
California, and standing in the joint names of the plaintiff and defendant,'
would be a sufficient description for a deed. (9 Cal.Jur. 306.) It complies with
the requirements of section 455, Code of Civil Procedure in that it is described
with such certainty as to enable an officer, upon execution, to identify it.  So
far as pleading is concerned the description is sufficiently certain to give the
court jurisdiction over it.  'It is generally held that an insufficient
description of real estate in a pleading does not subject the resulting judgment
affecting the title to or an interest in such  property to collateral attack,
even though the description may have been too general, or uncertain, and indeed,
even though the petition may not have stated a sufficient cause of action to be
good on demurrer.' (31 Am.Jur. 187; and cf., Scarf v. Aldrich, 97 Cal. 360, 368
[32 P. 324].)"

   In this connection the appellant relies upon Burtnett v. King, 33 Cal.2d 805
[205 P.2d 657, 12 A.L.R.2d 333]. In Christiana v. Rose, supra, 100 Cal.App.2d
46,  at page 52, there is an appropriate reference to the Burtnett case wherein
it is said: "Appellant places considerable reliance on Burtnett v. King, 33
Cal.2d 805 [205 P.2d 657, 12 A.L.R.2d 333]. . . .  There the complaint in a
divorce action had alleged that there was certain specified community property,
but the prayer of the complaint asked for no relief in reference to such
property.  Defendant defaulted.  The decree awarded the property to plaintiff.
The Supreme Court properly reversed, holding that the trial court, in a default
case, cannot award a plaintiff greater relief than that demanded in the
complaint.  (See Code Civ. Proc., § 580.)

   "That case involved a different problem than that here involved.  In the
instant case, the court did not, as in the Burtnett case, give the plaintiff in
the divorce action relief not prayed for.  Here, the divorce decree gave the
plaintiff relief that was in exact accord with the prayer of the complaint."

   In appellant's closing brief new matters are raised that are not set forth in
the opening brief.  Under rule 14, Rules on Appeal, appellate courts are not
disposed to consider points raised for the first time in an appellant's closing
brief, and it has been generally understood that it is not proper practice in
the reply brief on appeal to raise a question for the first time.  In spite of
such failure to properly raise such matters in the first instance, we have
deemed it proper to consider some of the contentions raised in the reply brief.

   It is contended that at the time of the trial of this action the
interlocutory decree of divorce of the respondent had become final in that the
time for appeal and time for attack under Code of Civil Procedure, section 473,
had elapsed, but that no decree of divorce a vinculo had been entered.  (A
vinculo matrimonii is defined in Bouvier's Law Dictionary [8th ed., p. 2] as "A
kind of divorce which is a dissolution of the marriage contract or relation.",
and in Black's Law Dictionary, 3d ed., "Lat. from the bond of matrimony: A term
descriptive of a kind of divorce, which effects a complete  dissolution of the
marriage contract.") In other words, it is contended that Newell did not have a
title by virtue of the interlocutory decree of divorce which could be quieted;
that all Newell got by the divorce decree was an adjudication that he would be
entitled to have the whole interest in the property put over to him as community
property in a final decree dissolving the marriage, and that all he could get
was the provisional contingent, defeasible right to have the property vest in
interest and enjoyment if, eventually, the bonds of matrimony should be severed.

   Before the system of interlocutory decrees was established in this state, the
property rights and the marriage relation were completely disposed by in a
single judgment.  ( Grannis v. Superior Court, 146 Cal. 245 [79 P. 891, 106
Am.St.Rep. 23].) Some of the history and background of the legislation is set
forth in Pereira v. Pereira, 156 Cal. 1, at pages 9 and 10 [103 P. 488, 134
Am.St.Rep. 107, 23 L.R.A.N.S. 880], where the court stated: "From these
provisions it is argued by the appellant that the court's power to make a
disposition of the property rights of the parties exists only at the time when
the divorce judgment becomes final and that any act attempted to be accomplished
before that, in the way of a trial or interlocutory judgment declaring the
property rights or the rights to the custody of children, is coram non judice
and void.

   "We do not think that the code provision requires such a narrow construction.
When the history of legislation on the subject and the conditions existing at
the time of the adoption of the amendment of 1903 are considered, the purpose,
meaning, and effect of that amendment are not difficult to discover.  While the
law deems it necessary to provide that a divorce may be granted when conditions
are such as to make the marriage relation intolerable, it is nevertheless true
that the policy of the law does not favor the dissolution of marriages. It has
been generally believed that many divorces were sought, not in good faith, but
because a roving fancy had found another affinity more attractive,  and that a
dissolution was often desired solely for the purpose of forming a new marital
connection.  With the design of providing conditions under which it would be
understood that ardent passions of this character must perforce have time to
cool before a new marriage relation could be actually formed, the Legislature,
in 1897, enacted a law in effect providing that no marriage should be entered
into by any divorced person, until at least  one year had elapsed after the
decree of divorce was rendered.  (Stats. 1897, p. 34.) It had become customary
to avoid the provisions of this act by the expedient of going to an adjacent
state for the purpose of entering into a new marital relation.  This court was
compelled to hold that marriages contracted in another state were valid in this
state, although they were entered into within less than a year after a divorce
had been granted in this state to one of the parties.  ( Estate of Wood, 137
Cal. 129 [69 P. 900], . . .) The purpose of the amendment of 1903 was to carry
into effect the object attempted to be attained by the statute of 1897.  To do
this the expedient was adopted of delaying the final judgment in divorce cases
for the period of one year after it was judicially ascertained that a divorce
should be granted.  By thus making the right to a divorce ineffective for the
period of one year, it became impossible for the parties to contract a valid new
marriage anywhere until at least a year after the trial of the action of divorce
had taken place.  Except so far as was necessary to accomplish this object, it
was not the intent of the statute to change in any respect the practice and
procedure in actions for divorce. We do not doubt that the court has the same
power now that it has always had to try and determine the issues between the
parties in a divorce action with respect to property and custody of children,
and that this may, and generally should, be done at the same time as the issues
with respect to the cause for divorce are tried and determined."

   In many instances, the trial court has been directed to dispose of the
property in the final decree as determined in the interlocutory decree. ( Gould
v. Superior Court, 47 Cal.App. 197 [191 P. 56]; Remley v. Remley, 49 Cal.App.
489 [193 P. 604]; Strupelle v. Strupelle, 59 Cal.App. 526 [211 P. 248]; Radich
v. Radich, 64 Cal.App. 605 [222 P. 182].)

   In Abbott v. Superior Court, 69 Cal.App. 660, 664, 665, 666, 667 [232 P. 154]
, the court said: "But when each and every period has expired within which an
attack could have been made by motion or by appeal, then and in that event the
so-called interlocutory decree, in so far as it adjudges the property rights of
the parties, becomes a conclusive decree. (Citing cases.) In the latter case [
Huneke v. Huneke, 12 Cal.App. 199 (107 P. 131)], at page 203, the court said:
'The primary contention of appellant is that, under the statutes of this state,
the court had no jurisdiction to enter a judgment establishing the rights of the
parties to the property involved until the  expiration of one year from the date
of the interlocutory judgment decreeing the divorce, or until such time as the
entry of a final judgment came on to be heard.  This contention has been met and
determined adversely to appellant by this court in John v. Superior Court, 5
Cal.App. [262] 264 [90 P. 53], and subsequently by the Supreme Court in Pereira
v. Pereira, 156 Cal. 1 [103 P. 488], in both of which cases it is determined
that, in the absence of an order continuing the hearing as to the property
rights involved, the opportune time for hearing and final determination of the
rights of the parties as to the property is at the time and place of the trial
of the principal issue involved in the divorce. . . .  In so far, then, as the
action involving the conflicting claims to real property is concerned, the
judgment of the court thereon became final as to all parties six months after
the entry thereof, in the absence of appeal.'

   . . . .

   "It is claimed that interlocutory decrees, no matter how worded, should be
held as merely interlocutory as to property rights and not conclusive until
adopted and inserted in a final decree. If so, it must follow that, in the vast
majority of cases that have heretofore been decided, the property rights  of
those litigants have not been disposed of because the final decrees were silent
on the subject and that such parties are tenants in common.  ( Brown v. Brown,
supra [170 Cal. 1 (147 P. 1168)].) Every principle involved in the rule of stare
decisis constrains us not to make such a ruling unless compelled to do so.  (
Sacramento Bank v. Alcon, 121 Cal. 379, 382 [53 P. 813].) For the reasons
hereinabove stated we think the principle applied in the Gould case applies to
this case and we are not disposed to depart therefrom."

     In the case of Leupe v. Leupe, 21 Cal.2d 145, the court said, at pages 148
and 149 [130 P.2d 697]: "Even though a final decree is not entered, the
interlocutory decree becomes a conclusive adjudication and is res judicata with
respect to all issues determined.  (Citing cases.)

   "Language may be found in certain decisions which cannot be reconciled with
the foregoing cases.  In Estate of Boeson, 201 Cal. 36, 40 [255 P. 800], relied
upon by respondent, it was said that the entry of an interlocutory decree does
not sever the marital relation, and that any disposition of property made
thereby becomes effective only upon entry of the final decree, until which time
property rights remain as before the interlocutory decree. The court cited
Estate of Dargie, 162 Cal. 51  [121 P. 320], and Estate of Seiler, 164 Cal. 181
[128 P. 334, Ann.Cas. 1914B 1093], but these support only the reference to
severance of marital relations.  Further, the language in Estate of Boeson,
supra, is dictum, for although the appellant therein was said not to be barred
by the decree, she was held barred upon other grounds.  Roberts v. Wehmeyer, 191
Cal. 601, 615 [218 P. 22], suggests the law to be that 'community property may
be divided only upon a dissolution of the marriage and . . . an interlocutory
decree is not such a dissolution.' This statement of the law has not been
followed and has also been characterized as dictum. ( Klebora v. Klebora, supra
[118 Cal.App. 613 (5 P.2d 965), p. 621].) Similarly, in Radich v. Radich, 64
Cal.App. 605, 607 [222 P 182], it was said by way of dictum that the court could
not dispose of community property or a homestead until the final decree. Insofar
as the language of these cases suggests that a court is without jurisdiction to
make an unqualified disposition of property in an interlocutory decree of
divorce, it is in opposition to the cases previously cited and must be
disapproved.

   "An immediate disposal of property upon an interlocutory decree of divorce is
thus within the jurisdiction of the trial court.  It has been held in certain
cases that the trial court should not assign and dispose of the community or
homestead property immediately by an interlocutory decree of divorce, but should
wait until such time as the marriage is absolutely dissolved.  (Citing cases.)
These cases, however, dealth with direct appeals from interlocutory decrees in
which error only was claimed and do not involve questions of jurisdiction or the
effect of such decrees after the time for appeal has passed.  Furthermore, it
has been said that the court generally should determine the property issues at
the same time it determines the issues with respect to the divorce, although the
court may specify that its determination should not become effective or final
until the entry of the final decree. (Citing cases.)"

   The Leupe case has been consistently followed by the appellate courts of this
state.  ( Estate of Teel, 34 Cal.2d 349, 353-354 [210 P.2d 1];  Warburton v.
Kieferle, 135 Cal.App.2d 278, 284-285 [287 P.2d 1].)

   Judgment affirmed.


                              20 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            JOE RAMON MANZANARES, Appellant, v. ANGELINA MANZANARES,
                                   Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 6534

            Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District

            190 Cal. App. 2d 771; 12 Cal. Rptr. 239; 1961 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2367


                                 April 3, 1961

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Fresno
County.  Matt Goldstein, Judge.

   Husband's action for divorce.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Witnesses--Determination of Credibility--Witnesses Wilfully False in Part.
--On his appeal from a judgment denying him a divorce, plaintiff husband was not
entitled to rely on the rule that the court cannot arbitrarily disregard
uncontradicted and unimpeached testimony where it was part of his testimony that
the parties had lived apart continuously for about two years, but the wife
denied this and testified that they had lived together for two weeks during the
previous year, the court being entitled, under such circumstances, to conclude
that plaintiff had wilfully testified falsely and to reject the whole of his
testimony. (Code Civ. Proc., § 2061, subd. 3.)

(2) Divorce--Proceedings--Evidence.  --In a divorce action brought by the
husband, the fact that the wife, after her default had been entered, was
required by the court to attend and testify because of the judge's concern for
the custody of the minor child, did not foreclose the court from considering
this testimony in determining other issues.

(3) Id. -- Wilful Desertion.  -- To establish a cause of action for divorce on
the ground of desertion, it must be proved that defendant voluntarily separated
from plaintiff with intent to desert, and that such separation continued for one
year.

(4a) (4b) Id. -- Wilful Desertion -- Evidence.  -- The testimony of plaintiff
husband that his wife refused to live with him "as a wife would," that they had
lived apart from one another continuously for about two years, and that he
objected to her "living alone and apart" from him "during all this time," did
not establish a cause of action for divorce on the ground of desertion, since
the evidence did not satisfactorily establish whether defendant deserted
plaintiff or vice versa, there was no evidence as to when the act of separation
took place, and it was not clear what plaintiff meant by "as a wife would" or
whether this took place at the beginning or end of the two-year period,
especially where the evidence would also support an inference that the
separation was due to the fact that plaintiff had been overseas for two years as
a member of the armed forces and not to any wilful act of desertion on the part
of defendant.

(5) Appeal -- Questions of Law and Fact -- Evidence Subject to Different
Inferences.  --When one of two conflicting inferences reasonably may be drawn
from the evidence and the sufficiency of a finding based thereon is attacked on
appeal, the inference in support of the questioned finding must be taken as
true.

(6) Divorce--Wilful Desertion--Evidence.  --In a divorce action, testimony of
plaintiff husband that his wife refused to live with him "as a wife would" does
not, standing unexplained, establish desertion, since his concept of the manner
in which a wife should live with her husband might differ from that of the law
and her refusal to conform or submit to a standard not required by law would not
constitute desertion.

(7a) (7b) Divorce--Extreme Cruelty--Evidence.  --Where the alleged acts of
cruelty by defendant of which plaintiff husband complained in a divorce action,
and which he testified disturbed him mentally, were her living with another man
and her statement that she was in love with this person and wanted a divorce,
but plaintiff's testimony with respect to the alleged adultery was mere hearsay
and was unequivocally contradicted by defendant, plaintiff's attorney admitting
that the proof established no more than a suspicion of adultery, and there was
no sufficient corroborative evidence, the evidence did not establish a cause of
action for divorce on the ground of extreme cruelty.

(8) Id.--Proceedings--Appeal--Presumptions.  --On appeal from a judgment in a
divorce action, as in other actions, every intendment is in favor of the
findings made by the trial court.

(9a) (9b) Id. -- Proceedings -- Appeal -- Review of Evidence as to Cruelty.
--In a divorce action, the trial court has considerable latitude in determining
what constitutes extreme cruelty and a negative determination may be upheld on
appeal even where defendant's acts were admittedly wrong and unjustifiable.

(10) Id.--Proceedings--Evidence--Corroboration.  --The testimony of defendant in
a default divorce proceeding may not be taken as corroborative of testimony
given by plaintiff.

(11) Id.--Collusion.  --Where a husband in his divorce complaint charges his
wife with extreme cruelty, but alleges that she is a fit and proper person to
have custody of his minor child, and prays that custody of his child be given to
her, obtains his wife's default on the basis of these allegations, and in the
course of the subsequent hearing, upon examination by the judge, testifies that
the basis for his charge of cruelty is the reported adultery of his wife, and
that she continues to live in adultery, but that he is willing that his son
should remain with her, and where the wife denies the adultery when given
opportunity to testify on the issue of custody of her child, but is willing that
her husband obtain a divorce, the court is entitled to suspect that husband and
wife are in collusion.

(12) Id.--Proceedings--Evidence--Corroboration--Purpose.  --The main purpose of
the rule requiring corroboration of the testimony of the parties in a divorce
proceeding is to prevent collusion.

(13) Id.--Proceedings--Evidence--Corroboration--Sufficiency.  --Though only
slight additional proof is necessary as corroborative evidence in a divorce
action where it is clear that no collusion exists, a greater amount of proof may
be required where the probability of collusion is present.

(14) Id.--Proceedings--Evidence--Corroboration--Sufficiency.  --The sufficiency
of corroborative evidence in a default divorce action should be considered in
the light of the fact that prevention of collusion is the reason for the rule
which requires it.

(15) Id.--Proceedings--Evidence--Corroboration--Sufficiency.  --The sufficiency
of corroborative evidence in a default divorce action is largely for the trial
court's determination, which is binding on appeal where the question is one of
fact.

(16) Id.--Extreme Cruelty--Corroboration.  --In a divorce action brought by the
husband, the testimony of plaintiff's aunt that she had seen defendant with
another man is not corroboration of conduct entitling the plaintiff to a divorce
on the ground of extreme cruelty.

(17) Id.--Wilful Desertion--Corroboration.  --In a divorce action on the ground
of desertion, corroborative testimony to the fact of separation without any
bearing on the reason or the intent of the parties is not sufficient.

(18a) (18b) Id.--State as Quasi Party.  --The court should not be a mere
instrument of convenience in dissolution of marriages. A divorce action concerns
the state, as well as the parties immediately interested, and it is the court's
duty, representing the state, in accordance with the letter and policy of the
law, to guard strictly against fraud, collusion or imposition.

(19) Id.--State as Quasi Party.  --The marriage relation cannot be destroyed by
the mere consent, whim or caprice of the parties, nor stipulated away in
judicial proceedings; it can be dissolved only by consent of the state, and on
statutory grounds, presented in good faith to a court of competent jurisdiction.


(20) Id.--Proceedings--Trial.  --In a default divorce action between parties
having a minor child, where there were circumstances giving rise to a suspicion
of collusion, the trial court had a three-fold duty: to give primary
consideration to the protection and best interests of the minor child in making
an appropriate custody order, to represent the state, and to afford the parties
every right to which they were entitled under the law.

COUNSEL: Morris Futlick for Appellant.

Angelina Manzanares, in pro. per., for Respondent.

JUDGES: Coughlin, J.  Griffin, P. J., and Shepard, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: COUGHLIN

OPINION

     This is an appeal from a judgment denying a default divorce decree.

   The complaint herein alleges two causes of action for divorce; one on the
ground of extreme cruelty and the other on the ground of wilful desertion. The
complaint alleges that the 2-year-old son of the parties was in the custody of
his mother, the defendant, who was a fit and proper person to have his custody,
and prayed that she be awarded custody subject to the plaintiff's right of
reasonable visitation.  The default of the defendant was entered.  Thereupon the
plaintiff presented evidence in support of the allegations of his complaint;
testified preliminarily that his son was living with the defendant and it was
his desire that she continue to have custody; then, as proof of extreme cruelty,
testified that it had come to his attention that the defendant was living with
another man and the child was living in the same household with them.  This
disclosure and the plaintiff's expressed desire that his child should remain
with an adulterous mother  shocked the trial judge who forthwith declared his
intention to require the mother to appear in court and permit her to be heard,
before ruling on the issue of custody or the granting of a divorce. Further
testimony by the plaintiff at this time developed that he was a member of the
armed forces of the United States; that he had been overseas for the past two
years; that his wife indicated to him that she wanted a divorce; that she
refused to live with him "as a wife would"; that they had lived apart from one
another continuously for about two years; and that he objected to her "living
alone and apart" from him "during all this time." As a corroborating witness,
the plaintiff produced his aunt whose attention was directed to the plaintiff's
testimony respecting his living apart from his wife for two years, and in reply
to an inquiry whether this testimony was true or false stated that it was true;
she also testified that she had seen the defendant with another man but did not
know whether the defendant was "committing adultery or carrying on any immoral
acts."

   After presentation of the foregoing testimony the court reiterated his
intention to require the defendant to appear before him in order that she might
have an opportunity to be heard on the child custody issue; stated that there
was enough prima facie proof to grant a divorce decree; continued the hearing;
and advised the plaintiff that he did not have to return for the purpose of
obtaining a decree.

   At a subsequent date the defendant appeared, accompanied by the plaintiff's
attorney, and testified that since her marriage she never had lived with any man
other than her husband; that the man her husband spoke of was a friend of hers;
that she had kissed this man; that he never had been in her house; that she
attended dances with her husband's aunt while he was away; and that she danced
with a lot of boys at these dances.  During the course of this hearing the
plaintiff's attorney admitted that the evidence did not prove adultery; that the
plaintiff's testimony raised only a suspicion of adultery. The court observed
that under the then state of the evidence the plaintiff's testimony did not
prove extreme cruelty. Thereupon plaintiff's attorney reminded the trial judge
of the latter's previous declaration that the plaintiff's testimony established
a prima facie case for divorce. In reply the trial judge indicated that the
state of the record had changed.  The plaintiff's testimony respecting what he
had heard about his wife's conduct, which his attorney admitted established no
more than a suspicion of adultery, was wholly  insufficient to support the
charge of extreme cruelty. After considerable discussion with respect to the
sufficiency of the evidence to justify granting a divorce, the attorney for the
plaintiff stated: "Your Honor, you heard all the testimony, and I think I am not
going to bring in witnesses to enlarge upon it." Thereafter, on a number of
occasions, the trial court advised the attorney that the evidence was not
sufficient to warrant granting a divorce, but offered to continue the hearing in
order to give the plaintiff an opportunity to present additional evidence.  This
offer was declined.  However, the attorney asked the defendant some additional
questions which elicited the information that her husband had been overseas
since March 1958 but had been back, although "not very long"; that he had been
home the year previously when they lived together for two weeks. This testimony
was in contradiction of the plaintiff's testimony that he had not lived with his
wife for two years.  When the court again indicated his intention to deny a
decree of divorce on the record as presented, the defendant volunteered that she
and her husband were not happy together; were always fighting; and could not
live together.  Thereupon the trial judge again expressed the opinion that the
evidence did not justify granting a divorce and suggested that the hearing be
continued to enable the plaintiff to present additional proof; the suggestion
was rejected; the matter was submitted; and the court denied a decree "for
failure of proof, and failure of proper corroboration." The appeal now under
consideration was taken from the judgment which followed.

     The plaintiff claims that he was entitled as a matter of law to a judgment
of divorce on the evidence presented.  In support of his position he relies upon
the general rule that the uncontradicted and unimpeached testimony of a witness
tending to establish an issuable fact may not be arbitrarily  disregarded by the
trial court ( Hayward v. Rogers, 62 Cal. 348, 372; Shepard v. Shepard, 65
Cal.App. 310, 314 [223 P. 1012]), and contends that the plaintiff's testimony
establishes extreme cruelty and wilful desertion. However, there was evidence
before the trial court which contradicted and impeached the plaintiff's
testimony.  The defendant testified that she and the plaintiff had not been
separated for two years; that they had lived together for two weeks during the
previous year; and thus contradicted the plaintiff's testimony.  Under
established principles the court was entitled to conclude that the plaintiff had
wilfully testified falsely and reject the  whole of his testimony.  ( Code Civ.
Proc., § 2061, subd. 3.)  The fact that the defendant was required by the court
to attend and testify because of the trial judge's concern for the custody of
the minor child, did not foreclose the court from considering this testimony in
determining other issues presented for decision.  ( Hammond v. Hammond, 92
Cal.App. 212, 215 [267 P. 893].)

     To establish a cause of action for desertion it must be proven that the
defendant voluntarily separated from the plaintiff with intent to desert, and
that such separation continued for a period of one year.  ( Civ. Code, §§ 95,
107; Fallon v. Fallon, 83 Cal.App.2d 798, 803 [189 P.2d 766].)  The evidence on
this issue did not satisfactorily establish whether the defendant deserted
plaintiff or the plaintiff deserted the defendant.  There is no evidence as to
when the act of separation took place.  Testimony that the parties lived apart
for two years does not require the conclusion that the defendant's refusal to
live with the plaintiff "as a wife would" occurred at the beginning or at the
end of this period.  Furthermore, the evidence supported the inference that the
separation of the parties was due to the overseas assignment of the plaintiff
and not to any willful act of desertion on the part of defendant.   When one of
two conflicting inferences reasonably may be drawn from the evidence and the
sufficiency of a finding based thereon is attacked on appeal, the inference in
support of the questioned finding must be accepted as true.  ( Primm v. Primm,
46 Cal.2d 690, 694 [299 P.2d 231].)   In addition, there is no explanation of
the plaintiff's testimony that the defendant refused to live with him "as a wife
would." His concept of the manner in which a wife should live with her husband
and the law's concept thereof might very well differ.  Her refusal to conform or
submit to a standard not required by law would not constitute a desertion. (
Hutton v. Hutton, 109 Cal.App.2d 567, 568 [241 P.2d 53]; Gray v. Gray, 125
Cal.App. 203, 205 [13 P.2d 862].)   The elements of voluntary separation, intent
to desert and the period of desertion are not satisfactorily established by the
evidence in this case.

     The alleged acts of cruelty by the defendant of which the plaintiff
complained and which he testified disturbed him mentally were her living with
another man and her statement that she was in love with this person and wanted a
divorce. The plaintiff's testimony with respect to the alleged adultery was mere
hearsay.  His attorney, when confronted  with the defendant's testimony,
admitted that the plaintiff's proof established no more than a suspicion of
adultery. The defendant's testimony unequivocally contradicted that of the
plaintiff.  The court observed that adultery had not been proven. Relying upon
this observation, the plaintiff claims that the court erred in denying a divorce
because its denial was based on a cause of action not pleaded or relied upon by
him, i.e., adultery. However, the trial judge made it very clear that he denied
the divorce because the proof was insufficient to sustain either cause of action
stated in the complaint.  The remaining testimony of the plaintiff did not
establish cruelty as a matter of law.    On appeal from a judgment in a divorce
action, as in other actions, every intendment is in favor of the findings made
by the trial court; and "although it be admitted that the defendant's acts were
wrong and unjustifiable, nevertheless considerable latitude is allowed to the
court in determining whether such acts  constituted extreme cruelty of the
nature and kind as to make mandatory a severance of the marital bonds." ( Polk
v. Polk, 50 Cal.App.2d 653, 656 [123 P.2d 550].)

     In the case at bar the trial judge also made it clear that the
corroborative evidence was insufficient.  This was an additional reason for
denying the divorce.

   "No divorce can be granted upon . . . the uncorroborated statement,
admission, or testimony of the parties.  . . ." ( Civ. Code, § 130.)

     The testimony of a defendant in a default divorce proceeding may not be
taken as corroborative of testimony given by the plaintiff.  ( Howard v. Howard,
105 Cal.App.2d 126, 128 [232 P.2d 530]; Dean v. Dean, 97 Cal.App.2d 455, 456
[218 P.2d 54]; Truax v. Truax, 62 Cal.App.2d 441, 444 [145 P.2d 88]; Ritter v.
Ritter, 103 Cal.App. 583, 590 [284 P. 950].) As a consequence, the testimony of
the defendant in the case at bar is not acceptable corroboration of the
plaintiff's testimony that his wife told him she loved another man and wanted a
divorce.

     Where a husband in his complaint charges his wife with extreme cruelty, but
alleges that she is a fit and proper person to have custody of his minor child,
and prays that custody of his child be given to her; obtains his wife's default
on the basis of these allegations; and in the course of the subsequent hearing,
upon examination by the judge, testifies that the basis for his charge of
cruelty is the reported adultery of his wife and that she continues to live in
adultery but he is  willing that his son should remain with her; and where the
wife denies the adultery when given the opportunity to testify on the issue of
the custody of her child, but is willing that her husband obtain a divorce, the
court is entitled to suspect that the husband and wife are in collusion.   The
main purpose of the rule requiring the corroboration of the testimony of the
parties in a divorce proceeding is to prevent collusion. ( Ruggles v. Ruggles,
43 Cal.2d 547, 548 [275 P.2d 42]; MacDonald v. MacDonald, 155 Cal. 665, 671 [102
P. 927, 25 L.R.A. N.S. 45]; Gleason v. Gleason, 13 Cal.App.2d 231, 232 [56 P.2d
973].) The evidence in the instant case presents a classic illustration of the
reason for the rule.   Although only slight additional proof is necessary as
corroborative evidence where it is clear that no collusion exists ( Ruggles v.
Ruggles, supra, 43 Cal.2d 547, 548; Cone v. Cone, 131 Cal.App.2d 424, 429 [280
P.2d 871]), a greater amount of proof may be required where, as here, the
probability of collusion is present.    The sufficiency of corroborative
evidence in a default action should be considered in the light of the reason for
the rule which requires it ( Dowd v. Dowd, 111 Cal.App.2d 760, 763 [245 P.2d
339]), and is largely a matter for determination by the trial court.  ( Price v.
Price, 71 Cal.App.2d 734, 736 [163 P.2d 501]; Ungemach v. Ungemach, 61
Cal.App.2d 29, 36 [142 P.2d 99].) Whether the required degree of corroboration
was present in the instant case was a question of fact, and the determination
thereof by the trial court is binding on appeal.   The testimony of the
plaintiff's aunt that she had seen the defendant with another man is not
corroboration of conduct entitling the plaintiff to a divorce on the ground of
extreme cruelty ( Dean v. Dean, supra, 97 Cal.App.2d 455, 456), yet this is the
only alleged corroborative testimony on that issue.   Considerable latitude is
allowed the trial court in determining what constitutes extreme cruelty. ( Polk
v. Polk, supra, 50 Cal.App.2d 653, 656.) The corroborative proof on the issue of
desertion was limited to attesting to the truth of the testimony given by the
plaintiff, the inadequacy of which heretofore has been noted.   Corroborative
testimony to the fact of separation without any bearing on the reason therefor
or the intent of the parties is not sufficient.  ( Sweet v. Sweet , 64 Cal.App.
786, 788 [222 P. 634]; Fallon v. Fallon, supra, 83 Cal.App.2d 798, 803.)

   The trial judge on several occasions during the course of the hearing, after
advising counsel for the plaintiff that the  evidence  was not sufficient to
sustain the granting of a divorce, offered to continue the hearing and permit
the plaintiff to present additional testimony in support of his complaint;
counsel rejected this offer; asked and received permission to cross-examine the
defendant; refused to present any additional testimony; and requested that the
matter be submitted on the evidence adduced.  The judgment which followed was
inevitable and proper.

     The court should not be "a mere instrument of convenience in the
dissolution of marriages." ( Julson v. Julson, 110 Cal.App.2d 797, 800 [243 P.2d
558].)

   "The law is at all times very solicitous to preserve the integrity of the
marriage relation.  That relation is the basis of the family, the foundation of
society.   It cannot be destroyed by the mere consent, whim, or caprice of the
parties to the marriage, nor can it be stipulated away in judicial proceedings.
The relation can be dissolved only by consent of the state, and upon statutory
grounds, presented in good faith to a court of competent jurisdiction.   An
action for divorce concerns not only the parties immediately interested, but
also the state.  The attorneys in the case represent the respective parties --
the court in a sense represents the state.  It is the duty of the court,
representing the state, in accordance with the letter and policy of the law, to
guard strictly against fraud, collusion, or imposition when the husband or wife
seeks to dissolve the bonds that bind them together." ( Rehfuss v. Rehfuss, 169
Cal. 86, 92 [145 P. 1020].)

     The circumstances in the instant case imposed upon the court a three-fold
duty, i.e., to give primary consideration to the protection and best interests
of the minor child in making an appropriate custody order; to represent the
state; and to afford the parties every right to which they were entitled under
the law.  The record before us attests the conscientious awareness and faithful
discharge of these obligations by the trial judge who conducted the hearing in
this matter.

   The judgment is affirmed.


                              21 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             FRANCES AUGUSTA SOHNLEIN, Plaintiff and Respondent, v.
                NOVELLA MARIE WINCHELL, Defendant and Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 7331

            Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District

            230 Cal. App. 2d 508; 41 Cal. Rptr. 145; 1964 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 899


                                November 6, 1964

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEALS from a judgment of the Superior Court of San
Bernardino County and from an order denying a new trial.  Joseph T. Ciano,
Judge.

   Action for declaratory relief as to validity of a Mexican divorce and as to
which of the parties has status as lawful surviving widow of decedent who
obtained such divorce; and cross-action by defendant for a lump-sum benefit
allegedly due her from a retirement fund as a death benefit.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1a) (1b) Divorce--Foreign Divorces--Domicile.  --In an action by a first wife
for a declaration that her deceased husband's Mexican divorce was invalid and
that she, not the second wife, was the lawful widow of deceased, a finding that
at the time of the Mexican divorce both the first wife and decedent were
domiciled in California was supported by evidence that she and decedent were
married in Michigan in 1928, moved to California in 1933 and continuously
resided within California until decedent's death, except that decedent, after
obtaining an interlocutory decree of divorce in 1959 spent a few days in Mexico,
obtained a decree of divorce there, married the second wife in Arizona and
returned to his residence in California, and by the presumption created by Civ.
Code, § 150.2, that if a person domiciled within California leaves the state,
within a year obtains a divorce elsewhere and within 18 months returns to
California, or during his absence maintains a residence within the state, he is
prima facie domiciled within the state.

(2a) (2b) Id.--Foreign Divorces--Domicile.  --A divorce obtained in Mexico is of
no force and effect in California when both parties to the marriage were
domiciled in California at the time the Mexican proceeding for divorce was
commenced. (Civ. Code, § 150.1.)

(3) Id.--Foreign Divorces--Bona Fides of Residence or Domicile.  --A foreign
divorce decree that is procured on a fraudulent domicile or residence is
invalid.

(4a) (4b) Id.--Foreign Divorces--Divorces Secured in Foreign Countries.  --When
an individual domiciled in California seeks a Mexican divorce for the sole
purpose of evading the policy of this state requiring a year to elapse after an
interlocutory decree of divorce before remarriage, the decree so obtained will
not be recognized.

(5) Id.--Foreign Divorces--Lack of Jurisdiction.  --A two or three-day stay in
Mexico by one of the parties to a marriage does not give Mexico sufficient
legitimate interest in his status to justify its courts in granting a divorce,
and a judgment granted under such circumstances will not be recognized.

(6) Id.--Right to Remarry.  --In an action brought in California to determine
the impact of a Mexican divorce on the marital status of parties who were
domiciled in California before, at the time of, and after the decree, the law of
California applied, and where it was determined that the parties were not
divorced, the husband was not free to marry another.

(7) Courts--Jurisdiction--Subjects of Jurisdiction.  --The right to death
benefits payable by the United States Civil Service Retirement Fund having been
created by a statute which gave jurisdiction to the United States Civil Service
Commission to adjudicate all claims arising thereunder, state courts will not
determine the rights of the parties in respect thereto; they are left to the
remedies given by the statute which created the right.

COUNSEL: C. E. Crowley for Defendant and Appellant.

Herlihy & Herlihy and K. S. Burns for Plaintiff and Respondent.

JUDGES: Griffin, P. J.  Coughlin, J., and Brown (Gerald), J., concurred.

OPINION BY: GRIFFIN

OPINION

     Plaintiff Frances Augusta Sohnlein filed this action for declaratory relief
against defendant Novella Marie Winchell, also known as Novella Marie Sohnlein,
seeking to have a Mexican divorce obtained by Fred W. Sohnlein declared invalid,
to be declared his lawful surviving widow, and to obtain a declaration that the
defendant had no status as his widow. Novella cross-complained for a certain
lump-sum benefit which she claimed was due her from the United States Civil
Service Retirement Fund.  From a judgment favoring the plaintiff, the defendant
appeals.

     Fred and Frances Sohnlein were married in Michigan  in 1928.  They moved to
California in 1933 where they resided together until their separation in June
1957.  Frances Sohnlein continued living in California at least through the
trial in the instant case.  Except for a brief stay in Mexico, as set out below,
Fred continued living in California until his death on April 11, 1960.  Fred
filed suit for divorce in Los Angeles County in May 1958.  An interlocutory
decree was entered in his favor on April 17, 1959, but no final decree was ever
entered.  In May 1959, he went to the State of Chihuahua, Mexico for two or
three days.  On or about July 3, 1959, the First Civil Court of the District of
Bravos, Chihuahua, Mexico issued a decree of divorce in a suit filed by Fred,
Frances having been personally served.  On July 14, 1959, Fred Sohnlein and the
defendant went through a marriage ceremony in Arizona.

   The trial court found that both Fred and Frances were domiciled in the State
of California at the time the Mexican divorce proceedings were commenced.   The
court concluded that the Mexican divorce decree was invalid, apparently applying
Civil Code, section 150.1, which provides: "A divorce obtained in another
jurisdiction shall be of no force or effect in this State, if both parties to
the marriage were domiciled in this State at the time the proceeding for the
divorce was commenced."

   Having determined that the Mexican divorce decree was invalid, the court
further determined that Fred's marriage to Novella in Arizona was not valid and
consequently Frances was his surviving spouse.

     There is ample evidence to support the court's finding that Fred and
Frances were domiciled in California at the time the Mexican divorce proceedings
were commenced.  Their daughter testified to their continuous residence in
California from 1933 until Fred's death in 1960, as set forth above.   Civil
Code, section 150.2, provides: "Proof that a person hereafter obtaining a
divorce from the bonds of matrimony in another jurisdiction was (a) domiciled in
this State within twelve months prior to the commencement of the proceeding
therefor, and resumed residence in this State within eighteen months after the
date of his departure therefrom, or (b) at all times after his departure from
this State and until his return maintained a place of residence within this
State, shall be prima facie evidence that the person was domiciled in this State
when the divorce proceeding was commenced."

     The direct evidence supplied through the daughter's testimony, coupled with
the indirect evidence afforded by the presumption of Civil Code, section 150.2 (
Code Civ. Proc., § 1957), amply support the finding.   This finding being
supported, the conclusion reached by the trial court necessarily follows under
Civil Code, section 150.1.  Since a Mexican divorce decree is not entitled to
full faith and credit ( Ryder v. Ryder, 2 Cal.App.2d 426, 430 [37 P.2d 1069]),
there is nothing in Civil Code, section 150.4, which limits the application of
Civil Code, section 150.1, to the instant case.

   In any event, there would appear to be a fatal lack of jurisdiction in the
Mexican court to dissolve the marriage.  A foreign divorce decree that is
procured on a fraudulent domicile or residence is invalid ( Schotte v. Schotte,
203 Cal.App.2d 28, 31 [21 Cal.Rptr. 220], and cases there cited).  Conscious of
Justice Traynor's admonition in his concurring opinion in Scott v. Scott, 51
Cal.2d 249, 255 [331 P.2d 641], we need not rely on authorities holding or
assuming that domicile in a foreign jurisdiction is prerequisite to recognition
in this state of a divorce decree rendered in a foreign jurisdiction.   Thus,
where the foreign jurisdiction has no legitimate interest in the status of the
parties, or where the sole purpose of seeking the divorce in the foreign
jurisdiction is to evade the policy of this state, the judgment should not be
recognized, despite the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure, section 1915.  (
Scott v. Scott, supra, 51 Cal.2d 249, 256; Harlan v. Harlan, 70 Cal.App.2d 657,
661 [161 P.2d 490].)   Certainly, Fred's two or three-day stay in Mexico did not
give the Mexican court sufficient interest in his marital status to justify its
decree. ( Estate of Edgett, 188 Cal.App.2d 700, 701 [10 Cal.Rptr. 552].)   In
light of the fact that Fred had already been awarded an interlocutory decree by
the Los Angeles court, and the fact that he remarried within 11 days after
receiving the Mexican decree, it would appear that his sole purpose in seeking
the Mexican decree was the evasion of the one-year limitation set forth in Civil
Code, section 61, subdivision 1, and section 132.  Under the rule set forth
above, this is an additional basis upon which to deny recognition to the Mexican
decree.

   The defendant contends, however, that the plaintiff has failed to show that
the State of Arizona would not recognize the Mexican decree. This contention
implies that there is some conflict between Arizona and California law in this
area, and that Arizona would recognize the Mexican decree in the  instant case.
Counsel has cited no authority to this effect, and our research indicates there
is no conflict.  ( Brandt v. Brandt, 76 Ariz. 154 [261 P.2d 978]; In re Hughes,
73 Ariz. 97 [237 P.2d 1009]; Unruh v. Industrial Commission, 81 Ariz. 118 [301
P.2d 1029].)

     Furthermore, Frances and Fred Sohnlein were domiciled in California before,
at the time of, and after the Mexican decree. In an action brought in California
to determine the impact of that decree on their marital status, there is no
occasion to apply the law of Arizona.  Arizona law would be applicable to
determine the validity of the marriage of the defendant and Fred Sohnlein, but
since Fred was not divorced from Frances he was not free to marry the defendant
under Arizona law or the law of any other American jurisdiction.

     The defendant also contends that the court erred in failing to take
jurisdiction under her cross-complaint to determine the rights of the parties to
a death benefit payable by the United States Civil Service Retirement Fund.  In
5 United States Code Annotated section 2266(b), the United States Civil Service
Commission is given jurisdiction to adjudicate all such claims.  The right to
the death benefit having been created by a statute providing for its enforcement
before a special tribunal, the aggrieved party should be left to the remedy
given by the statute which created the right.  ( Higa v. Transocean Airlines,
230 F.2d 780, quoted with approval in Gordon v. Reynolds, 187 Cal.App.2d 472,
478 [10 Cal.Rptr. 73].)

    The other matters raised in the briefs are without merit, without the record
or both, and will not be discussed.

   Judgment affirmed.  Attempted appeal from order denying new trial dismissed.


                              22 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           ARTHUR B. DAVIDSON, Respondent, v. GLENN MARTIN DAVIDSON,
                                   Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 13952

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                  Division One

          90 Cal. App. 2d 809; 204 P.2d 71; 1949 Cal. App. LEXIS 1054


                                 March 25, 1949

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from an order of the Superior Court of Contra Costa
County refusing to set aside an interlocutory divorce judgment and property
settlement agreement.  Harold Jacoby, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Judgment--Vacation of Decree.  --In a husband's action for divorce,
it was not an abuse of discretion to deny the wife's motion under Code Civ.
Proc., § 473, to set aside an uncontested interlocutory divorce judgment and a
property settlement agreement where there was evidence that the husband
determined to get a divorce, contested or uncontested; that he offered a fair
property settlement; that the wife agreed to it; that she did not desire to
contest the action; that although she had available funds to hire an attorney,
and although the husband's attorney advised her to hire one, she refused to do
so; and that she understood everything that she was doing.

(2) Id.--Disposition of Property--Effect of Agreement of Parties.  --Without
regard to the fact that an interlocutory divorce judgment was awarded to the
husband for the wife's extreme cruelty, a property settlement adopted thereby
was fair to the wife where it gave her a joint tenancy in a $ 30,000 home with
right to possession for life clear of indebtedness, taxes and repairs, all the
furniture, and a division of community property bonds and insurance policies,
and where the husband got bank accounts, automobile, and stock in the company he
worked for, and agreed to pay to the wife $ 400 per month until her death or
remarriage and to a daughter $ 100 per month until she finished college from an
income of $ 12,600 a year plus bonuses and dividends.

(3) Id.--Judgment--Relief from Fraudulent Decrees.  --An attorney for one of the
parties to a divorce proceeding may discuss a proposed property settlement with
the other party who has refused to retain separate counsel, and such conduct
does not in itself constitute extrinsic fraud as will warrant setting a divorce
judgment aside, although in such case the attorney is under a most strict duty
to deal with the other party fairly and objectively, and the agreement will be
carefully scrutinized to insure against overreaching.

(4) Id.--Judgment--Vacation of Decree.  --It is not unethical as a matter of law
for an attorney for plaintiff in a divorce proceeding to tell defendant that she
can either default or answer and waive notice, and to have prepared for her an
answer and waiver, and a divorce decree will not be set aside for such conduct
where defendant has definitely and positively stated that she did not wish to
and would not contest the divorce.

COUNSEL: Lucille F. Athearn and Fred G. Athearn for Appellant.

R. P. Wisecarver and James F. Hoey for Respondent.

JUDGES: Peters, P. J.  Ward, J., and Bray, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: PETERS

OPINION

     On August 12, 1947, respondent secured an uncontested interlocutory decree
of divorce from his wife on the ground of extreme cruelty. About five and
one-half months later, on January 27, 1948, appellant filed a notice of motion
under section 473 of the Code of Civil Procedure to set aside the interlocutory
decree and the property settlement agreement, which had been approved by the
court in the divorce action, contending that the decree was taken against her
through her mistake, inadvertence, surprise or excusable neglect; that it was
secured by means of extrinsic fraud, threats, coercion, duress and undue
influence; that the property settlement agreement was secured by threats, fraud,
duress and undue influence, and requesting that, upon setting aside the
interlocutory decree,  she be permitted to file a verified amended answer and
cross-complaint.  Various affidavits were filed, a hearing had, and briefs
filed.  The trial court denied the motion, and from that order of denial the
wife appeals.

   These parties have been married for over 25 years.  They have two children,
an adult married son, and a daughter, aged 20, attending the University.

   The divorce action was filed by respondent on August 9, 1947.  On August 11,
1947, the appellant signed an answer in propria persona, generally denying all
of the allegations of the complaint.  This answer was drafted by the attorney
for the respondent.  On this same date the appellant also signed a waiver of
notice of the time and place of trial which had been prepared by respondent's
attorney.  The answer was filed on August 12, 1947, and on that same day the
divorce action was heard and decided by the same judge that decided the motion
here involved.  At the divorce hearing the appellant did not appear.  The
divorce was granted on the testimony of the respondent and of the adult son of
the parties.

   The property settlement agreement, which was drafted by respondent's attorney
after several conferences with the respondent and appellant and the children,
provided that the home of the parties, valued at over $ 30,000, is to remain in
joint tenancy, with appellant having the right of possession for life.
Respondent agreed to pay off the existing indebtedness on the house, which he
has since done.  He also agreed to pay all taxes on the house and to pay for all
needed repairs.  With certain minor exceptions, the furniture and personal
effects, valued at $ 8,000, were awarded to appellant.  Respondent  received the
family automobile, valued at $ 2,000.  Appellant received $ 4,700 in bonds,
which includes a little over $ 2,000 of bonds that were her separate property,
all other bonds being community property. The husband received $ 2,250 in bonds.
There were two life insurance policies. The agreement provided that appellant
was to remain beneficiary of a $ 5,000 policy that had no cash value, and the
respondent was to have full  title to the other policy which he has since cashed
in for $ 2,856.65.  Five thousand shares of stock in the company with which he
was associated, which had been given respondent by the president of that company
and endorsed back to the company pursuant to an agreement that the company
should retain them if respondent died or left the firm, the company agreeing to
pay $ 1.50 a share in the event of the happening of either contingency, were
retained by the respondent.  The bank accounts in an undisclosed sum went to
respondent.  Respondent further agreed to pay to appellant $ 400 per month
alimony during the life of appellant or until she remarries, and, in addition,
to pay his daughter not less than $ 100 per month to enable her to finish her
college education.

     The theory of appellant is that, because of a prior illness, she was
emotionally unbalanced at the time of the divorce and when she signed the waiver
and answer; that she was misled by respondent and his attorney into the belief
that she could not prevent the divorce; that she was told that the entire assets
of the parties would be consumed by the expenses of litigation if she contested
the divorce; that she was discouraged from securing the services of an attorney
and had no independent legal advice during the negotiations; that the divorce
proceedings were rushed through so rapidly that she was unable to secure legal
advice as to her rights; that respondent closed out their joint bank account so
that she was without funds to employ an attorney; that respondent threatened her
with publicity and notoriety unless she consented to the granting of the divorce
; that respondent's attorney represented both parties to the action; that this
was unethical and fraudulent; that for these reasons she is entitled to have the
divorce decree and property settlement set aside.

   Respondent contends, and his evidence supports the contentions, that
appellant was in full possession of her faculties at the time of the divorce and
fully understood and agreed to everything that was done; that she was not
represented by counsel because she did not want an attorney; that she did  not
want to discuss the matter with anyone but respondent's attorney and the family;
that his attorney repeatedly requested her to employ independent counsel, but
that she refused to do so; that at all times prior to the entry of the decree
the joint bank account of the parties was available to appellant for the hiring
of counsel; that the rapidity of the divorce was occasioned by his desire to
return to Los Angeles where he is manager of the office; that at no time did he
threaten or coerce his wife, but merely told her that he intended to have a
divorce even if he had to go to Reno to get it; that appellant was completely
satisfied with the entire transaction until she learned he was keeping company
with another woman, when she decided to start this proceeding to punish and
harass him.

   As might be expected in such a proceeding, the evidence is highly
conflicting.  There can be no doubt that the evidence introduced at the time of
the divorce proceeding and the evidence introduced on this proceeding amply
support the conclusion that respondent was entitled to a divorce. The evidence
of respondent and his witnesses is to the effect that, from almost the very
inception of the marriage, appellant has been a nagging and fault-finding wife,
has refused to permit members of respondent's family to visit the home, and
since 1937 has refused to have marital relations with her husband.  In both
proceedings there is ample evidence to support the finding of extreme cruelty.
That is, of course, not the issue here presented.  In the instant proceeding we
are solely interested in whether the trial court abused its discretion in
refusing to set the divorce decree aside.  The real issues are whether appellant
knew what was happening at the time of the divorce, or whether she was so
emotionally upset that she was unable to comprehend what was going on, whether
respondent and his attorney took unfair advantage of appellant, and whether the
divorce was secured by fraud.  These are all factual matters on which the
evidence was conflicting.  The trial judge saw these parties and heard them
testify.  He has seen fit to believe respondent and his  witnesses and to
disbelieve appellant.  This being so, there was no abuse of discretion in
denying the motion.

   The evidence was directly conflicting as to the health and mental condition
of appellant in August, 1947.  In 1945, she had had a stroke which, for a short
time, rendered her unable to walk or to speak.  She claimed that, as a result of
this condition,  she is subject to great emotional disturbances and is easily
upset mentally and emotionally; that she is frequently unable to understand the
significance of matters presented to her, and that she was in such a condition
in August, 1947, and did not then understand the effect of the property
settlement and other papers signed by her.  This evidence is directly refuted by
respondent, his attorney and by the surrounding circumstances.  In June and July
of 1947 appellant and her daughter took a five-week trip to the East and to
Canada.  On this trip she was most active, far more so than her 20-year-old
daughter. Respondent and his attorney both testified that she was in good
physical and mental condition during the time in question.

   That she fully understood the property settlement is evidenced by the fact
that it was she who suggested the $ 400 per month alimony allowance and the $
100 allowance for the daughter, and that at her request the tentative agreement
was changed in several material respects.

   Nor was any coercion, fraud or undue influence practiced by respondent or his
attorney.  On July 29, 1947, respondent told appellant that he wanted a divorce.
After an unsuccessful attempt by appellant to dissuade respondent from seeking a
divorce, respondent told appellant that he was going to invite his attorney, an
old friend of the family, to the house to discuss the property settlement and
other matters.  Such a meeting was held shortly thereafter.  It was attended by
the respondent, appellant, the attorney, and by the two children.  The evidence
was highly conflicting as to what there occurred.  We are, of course, bound by
any substantial evidence that supports the implied findings of the trial court.
Respondent and his attorney testified that appellant had computed her estimated
expenses and suggested $ 400 a month alimony. After this had been agreed upon,
respondent agreed to pay an additional $ 100 a month to the daughter while she
is in college.  That this was a reasonable and fair allowance is apparent.
Respondent's salary is about $ 12,600 a year, which, after taxes, leaves him
with about $ 835 a month take-home pay.  In 1947, he received about $ 6,000 in
bonuses and dividends on which the tax was about 35 per cent.  The other
provisions of the property settlement have already been summarized.  They are
obviously fair to appellant.

   Appellant suggested various material changes in the tentative agreement, and
these were made.  Appellant, nevertheless, contends that she was not consulted
about anything, but  merely was told what she would get.  This conflict has been
resolved against her, and is binding on this court.

   Appellant testified that she was coerced into agreeing to an uncontested
divorce by respondent's threats that a contested divorce would ruin the family
financially, and that, in that event, she would get nothing.  She also testified
that she told respondent and his attorney that she wanted to see the judge and
talk the matter over with him, but was told by both that this could not be done.
She also testified that she was told by respondent that the joint checking
account was closed, and that she therefore believed she had no money to hire an
attorney, and that the attorney told her that it would be futile to get
independent counsel. In almost every particular this evidence was directly
contradicted by respondent and his attorney.  Respondent admitted that he told
appellant that he was determined to get a divorce even if he had to go to Reno.
He denied telling her that the joint bank account was closed, testifying that he
did not tell her that until after the interlocutory decree was secured.  The
joint account was available to her and she could have drawn on it had she so
desired.  Both respondent and the attorney testified that the attorney
repeatedly requested appellant to get an attorney, but that she refused, stating
that she did not want to talk to anyone outside the family about the divorce.
All of these conflicts have been  resolved against appellant by the trial court,
and its determination is binding on this court.

   After these conferences, the attorney drew up the property settlement, and
delivered it to the Davidsons.  Appellant testified that on the morning of
August 8th her husband simply told her to sign it and that she did so without
reading it or knowing its contents.  Her daughter witnessed her signature.  Both
the daughter and appellant testified that the attorney was not then present.
Appellant testified that she was under a great emotional strain, and signed
simply because "it seemed the easiest way out." She was positive that the
settlement agreement was not read to or by her before she signed it.  This
evidence was directly contradicted by respondent and his attorney.  Both
testified that it was read to or by appellant before she signed it.  The
attorney testified in detail as to the circumstances of this meeting.  This
conflict was resolved against appellant by the trial court, and its
determination is binding on this court.

   The attorney likewise, at this meeting, discussed with appellant the
differences between a default, and answering and  waiving notice of time and
place of the hearing.  Appellant quite definitely indicated that she did not
desire to contest the divorce, and when the attorney left it was definitely
understood by all concerned that he should draw up the papers so that the decree
could be secured as quickly and quietly as possible.

   On August 9, 1947, the complaint, charging cruelty and desertion was filed.
On August 11, 1947, pursuant to an appointment made prior thereto, the attorney
called upon appellant and served her with the complaint and summons.  At the
same interview he presented to her a proposed answer, in propria persona, and a
waiver of notice of time and place of trial.  These documents, according to the
attorney, were read through by appellant and some of the provisions discussed
and explained.  Again he suggested that she get an attorney, but again she was
positive in her refusal.  At this same meeting, according to the attorney,
appellant suggested certain further changes in the property settlement, and they
were made.  Appellant then expressed a willingness to sign the answer and
waiver, and the attorney telephoned to make arrangements with a notary.

   Appellant contradicted this testimony.  She denied that the attorney
suggested that she get counsel of her own choice.  She testified that she was
"emotionally upset" and "hurried all the time," and that she did not read the
papers and did not understand them.

   The attorney then took the appellant to the home of the notary where
appellant admittedly signed the answer and waiver.  The attorney testified that,
in the presence of appellant, he told the notary that appellant did not wish to
contest the divorce and did not want an attorney, and requested the notary not
to mention the matter to anyone.  This was corroborated by the affidavit of the
notary. Appellant contradicted most of this testimony, but this conflict again
was resolved against appellant by the trial court.

   It is also urged that the adult married son of the parties, who was
respondent's corroborating witness at the divorce hearing, was coerced into
testifying.  He testified that he was falsely informed by respondent and the
attorney that his mother knew that he was going to testify at the divorce
hearing, and that he would not have testified had he known she was unaware of
his appearance; that he certainly would not have testified had he known his
father was keeping company with another woman; that the attorney presented him
with a list of questions and told him to answer "yes" or "no," and to offer no
explanations; that the attorney told him that any attempt to explain his answers
would result in his being held in contempt of court.  He admitted, however, that
every word of his testimony given on the divorce hearing was true "as far as it
went." An examination of the transcript of that hearing shows that most of the
important questions were asked by the trial judge, and were not answered "yes"
or "no," explanations being given by the witness to most of them.  The attorney
testified that he told the son that he should not take sides in the  case; that
his mother did not desire publicity and wanted to keep the entire matter within
the family, so far as possible; that if the son could testify as to the facts it
would be unnecessary to call in any outside witness; that he did not tell the
son that the mother knew he was to testify, and did not tell him to answer "yes"
or "no," or how to answer the questions; that he did not threaten that the judge
would hold the son in contempt if he tried to explain his answers.  These
conflicts have been resolved against appellant by the trial court, and cannot be
retried in this court.

   Immediately after the decree was entered appellant received a copy.  She made
no objections of any kind for about five and one-half months.  She testified
that she became dissatisfied with the divorce decree and property settlement
after talking to a San Francisco judge; that the judge had heard about the case
from a neighbor and telephoned to her; that the judge told her that the case
constituted a most glaring miscarriage of justice, and recommended that she get
a lawyer; that the judge told her that she was not protected, and that it was
her duty to protect herself and her children.  The affidavit of the judge
contradicts this story in several material respects.  It is there averred that,
while attending a dinner party, the hostess stated that she had a friend who was
disturbed about her divorce; that the hostess then telephoned this friend and
asked the judge to talk to her; that the judge, who had no knowledge of any of
the facts, and so avers, then simply told the appellant that if she was
dissatisfied she should seek the advice of an attorney who could tell her
whether or not the interlocutory decree had been properly secured.

   It is quite apparent that the problems here involved are primarily factual,
and that in nearly every material respect the trial court has seen fit to
believe respondent and his witnesses  and to disbelieve appellant and her
witnesses.  Insofar as the case involves conflicts in the evidence, this court
has no power to interfere.  So far as the facts are concerned, we are faced with
a record that shows that over the years this appellant has been guilty of
extreme cruelty to her husband; that he finally determined to get a divorce,
contested or uncontested; that he made an offer of a fair property settlement;
that she agreed to it; that she did not desire to contest the divorce; that
although she had available funds to hire an attorney, and although the attorney
for the respondent repeatedly urged her to get an attorney, she refused to get
one; and that she understood everything she was doing.   This is not a case
where one party to a divorce has been deprived of a fair share of community
property by a property agreement, a factor that would be most important in
determining whether to set aside an uncontested decree and property settlement.
Without regard to the fact that the divorce decree establishes that appellant
was guilty of cruelty, an examination of the property settlement demonstrates
its fairness.  Appellant secured a joint tenancy interest in the home, the right
to possession for life, and respondent agreed to assume the indebtedness against
the house, and to pay all the taxes and repairs.  The wife got all the
furniture.  The community property bonds were about evenly divided.  The
insurance policies were divided, the respondent getting the one with a cash
value, and also getting the automobile, the bank accounts and the stock.  But he
has agreed to pay appellant $ 400 a month for life or until she remarries, plus
$ 100 a month to his daughter while she is in college.  The agreement was quite
fair to appellant.

     Faced with the fact that on every major issue made there is a substantial
conflict in the evidence, appellant urges that it was extrinsic fraud and
unethical conduct, as a matter of law, for the attorney for respondent to have
discussed the divorce with appellant, and to have prepared the answer and waiver
for her.  In the briefs, and at the oral argument, the attorney for appellant
has bitterly assailed and condemned the attorney for respondent for what she
terms his unethical and fraudulent conduct.  Such conduct, she asserts,
prohibited appellant from presenting her case and prohibited a fair hearing of
the issues.  After asserting that such conduct  constitutes extrinsic fraud, the
frequently cited case of United States v. Throckmorton, 98 U.S. 61 [25 L.Ed. 93]
, is relied upon, to establish the point that such extrinsic fraud warrants
setting a judgment aside.  Of course it is not and should not be the law that
conduct such as is here involved, as a matter of law, constitutes extrinsic
fraud. It is not the law that an attorney for one of the parties in a divorce
proceeding may not discuss a proposed property settlement with the other party
to the action, where that other party is advised that she should get an
attorney, but is adamant in her refusal to do so.  It is, of course, much better
for all concerned if both sides have independent counsel, but there is no way by
which a litigant can be compelled to secure an attorney.  Where the attorney for
one of the parties is compelled to deal directly with the other litigant he is
under a most strict duty to deal with such litigant fairly and objectively, and
the agreement will be scrutinized most carefully to be sure that there has been
no overreaching.  The evidence in the present case supports the trial court's
implied finding that counsel for respondent scrupulously observed the
proprieties in all respects, and in no way took advantage of the fact that
appellant was unrepresented by counsel.  Appellant received as much, or more,
out of the agreement as she would have received had she had an attorney.   Nor
was it unethical conduct, as a matter of law, for the attorney for respondent,
after the property settlement had been agreed upon, and after appellant had
definitely and positively stated on several occasions that she did not wish to
contest the divorce and would not contest it, to tell her that she could either
default or answer and waive notice, and to have prepared for her the answer and
waiver.  This attorney was an old friend of the family.  At the time, appellant
was desirous of keeping the entire proceedings quiet and within the knowledge of
as few people as possible.  The evidence supports the implied finding that what
was done by the attorney was done in exact accord with appellant's desires and
with a full understanding on her part of what she was doing.  Judicial decrees
cannot and should not be set aside simply because one of the litigants changes
her mind.  The attack made upon counsel for respondent by the counsel for
appellant is unjustified and legally unsound.

   The order appealed from is affirmed.


                              23 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          HENRY McGUINNESS, as Executor, etc., et al., Petitioners, v.
           THE SUPERIOR COURT OF THE CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO
                              et al., Respondents

                                S. F. No. 11159

                          Supreme Court of California

          196 Cal. 222; 237 P. 42; 1925 Cal. LEXIS 307; 40 A.L.R. 1110


                                  May 29, 1925

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPLICATION for a Writ of Prohibition to prevent proceeding
in a suit for divorce to vacate the final decree.

COUNSEL: Chenoweth & Leininger and Maxwell McNutt for Petitioners.

R. A. Rogers for Respondents.

JUDGES: In Bank. Richards, J.  Shenk, J., Waste, J., Lennon, J., Seawell, J.,
and Lawlor, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: RICHARDS

OPINION

     The petitioners seek by this proceeding to have this court issue a writ of
prohibition which will have the effect of restraining the respondents, Superior
Court in and for the City and County of San Francisco and the judge thereof,
from taking further proceedings in a certain action entitled "Josie White,
Plaintiff, versus James S. White, Defendant," and numbered therein 69960, and
which had theretofore been pending in said court.  The matter came on for
hearing upon a demurrer and also an answer to the petition, the denials in which
were not insisted upon at the hearing or upon the rehearing, the only matters
presented being the questions of law raised by the demurrer.  The conceded facts
in the case are that in the year 1915 Josie White commenced an action in said
Superior Court wherein she sought a divorce upon the ground of extreme cruelty.
In the complaint therein there was no allegation as to property rights nor did
the answer of the defendant raise any such issue.  Upon the trial and submission
of the cause the court, on December 14, 1915, duly gave, made, and entered its
interlocutory decree in favor of the plaintiff, adjudging her to be entitled to
a divorce upon the specified ground, but being silent upon the subject of the
property rights, if any, of the parties to the action.  Succeeding that date and
decree the record in the case was silent until the third day of July, 1923, when
it appears that upon motion of the defendant a final decree was entered
dissolving the marriage relation between the parties to said action, but which
final decree was also silent as to any mention or adjudication of property
rights. Thereafter, and on the seventeenth day of October, 1923, James S. White,
the defendant in said action, died leaving a last will and testament in which
Josie White, his divorced wife, was omitted from any mention or bequest.  Said
will was offered for and admitted to probate in the probate department of said
court and the petitioner herein, who was named in said will as the executor
thereof, was duly appointed to serve and is serving as such executor. Thereafter
and on January 24, 1924, Josie White filed in said Superior Court and in said
divorce action a notice of motion to set aside said final decree of divorce,
wherein she set forth as the basis of said motion the alleged fact that during
the several years elapsing between the making and entry of the interlocutory
decree and the aforesaid final decree the parties to said action had lived
together as husband and wife and were so living at the time of the making and
entry of said final decree of  divorce upon the defendant's motion; and that
said final decree had been so entered without her knowledge or consent.  The
petitioner herein, Henry McGuinness, in his capacity as executor of said will
and also as a legatee thereunder, and the petitioner herein, John Maher, also as
a legatee under said will, appeared specially in response to said notice of
motion and objected to the hearing or granting of the same upon the ground that
the said Superior Court had lost jurisdiction therein and in said action and
that it had no jurisdiction over said action other than to decline to hear and
either to grant or deny said motion.  Upon the hearing upon said motion and
these special appearances and objections thereto, the said Superior Court
through the judge thereof, who is also respondent herein, decided that it had
and has jurisdiction to entertain said motion and set the hearing thereon for
the twenty-second day of May, 1924.  Thereupon and on May 20, 1924, the
petitioners herein applied to this court for and were granted an alternative
writ of prohibition restraining said Superior Court from further proceeding in
said action and upon said motion except to dismiss or deny the same until the
hearing upon said writ.  Upon said hearing the petitioners insisted, and still
insist, that the respondent Superior Court and the judge thereof is without any
jurisdiction to hear or pass upon the said motion of Josie White for an order
setting aside the final decree in said divorce action for the reasons set forth
in their said petition.  The respondents, on the other hand, insist that since
it appears upon the face of the notice of motion to set aside said final decree,
as the ground thereof, that the entry of said final decree in said action was
procured by extrinsic fraud on the part of said James S. White, the defendant
therein, consisting in his concealment of the asserted fact that for the several
years elapsing between the making and entry of the interlocutory decree in said
action and the date of said final decree the said parties to said action had
been and still were living together in the relation of husband and wife; and
that the said court, being deceived  and misled by such concealment, had been
fraudulently induced to sign and enter said final decree, the said court,
notwithstanding the intermediate death of said James S. White, had and has power
and jurisdiction either upon motion of the plaintiff in said divorce action or
upon  its own motion to act in the matter of investigating said alleged acts of
extrinsic fraud; and, in the event of finding its existence to purge its records
of the decree obtained through its exercise.  The respondents herein, the said
Superior Court and the judge thereof, in their answer herein allege the fact to
be that the said court is engaged upon its own motion in conducting an
investigation as to whether or not such fraud was committed upon said court in
the procurement of said final decree and that it has not yet directly or
indirectly intimated what the judgment of the court will be as a result of such
investigation.

     The first contention which the respondents herein make upon the threshold
of this proceeding is that the petitioner Henry McGuinness in his capacity as
executor of the will of James S. White, deceased, and that both of the
petitioners herein in their capacity as legatees under said will have no legal
capacity to appear either in said divorce action or in this proceeding in
opposition of the effort of Josie White to have set aside the final decree of
divorce therein.  We think this contention is without merit since, assuming that
the power and duty of an executor to intervene in an action which involved only
the personal status of his testator in a divorce action has been doubted in the
case of Kirschner v. Dietrich, 110 Cal. 502 [42 Pac. 1064], the executor and
petitioner herein appears not alone in the capacity of executor, but he and his
associate petitioner Maher herein also appear in the capacity of legatees under
the will of the deceased defendant in the divorce action; and since whatever the
purpose which the plaintiff has in that proceeding the obvious effect of her
success therein would be that of re-establishing the status existing between
herself and her deceased husband prior to the entry of said final decree as the
undivorced wife of said deceased; and since the reestablishment of this status
would entitle her to assert certain wifely rights in relation to the property of
said estate in which as legatees they each have an interest and which, if so
asserted, they would admittedly have a right to resist, they claim to have an
equal right to appear at the very inception of the plaintiff's effort to obtain
standing ground for the assertion of such rights and to oppose such effort.  No
authorities are cited contravening this reasoning and we are satisfied none
exist.

     This brings us to the only remaining inquiry herein, which is as to whether
the trial court in the divorce action, or the judge thereof, the respondents
herein, retains or has any jurisdiction either upon the motion of the plaintiff
in said action or upon its own motion to consider or decide the question as to
whether the final decree of divorce therein was caused to be made and entered by
the fraud of the defendant in said action practiced upon it and whereby it was
misled into granting and entering said final decree. The petitioners herein
assert that the trial court in said action retains and has no such jurisdiction,
basing their contention in that regard upon two several reasons:

   First -- That said final decree of divorce being valid upon its face the
trial court has no jurisdiction to set it aside either upon the plaintiff's
motion or upon its own motion after the expiration of the six months' period
prescribed in section 473 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Second -- That the
defendant in said divorce action having died subsequent to the entry of said
final decree, the action was thereby abated and is no longer pending in said
court for the reason that the marriage relation between the parties has been
dissolved by the defendant's decease.  For the purpose of passing upon each of
these objections it must be assumed in the state of the record before us that
the averments made by the wife as to the basis of her application for the relief
in the divorce court are true; that a reconciliation had taken place between the
parties to said divorce action shortly after the entry of the interlocutory
decree therein; that they had reassumed their marital relations and thereafter
continued living together as husband and wife for several years and were so
living together in that relation when the husband, unknown to the wife, procured
the entry of the final decree of divorce; that in so doing he had committed a
fraud upon her and upon the court through his action in procuring said decree
and through his fraudulent concealment from the court, at the time of his
application for and of the entry of said final decree, of the fact of such
reconciliation and consequent resumption and existence of marital relations
between himself and his wife; and that the court by such concealment was
deceived and misled into granting and entering said final decree of divorce.
These facts being thus, for the purposes of this  proceeding taken to be true,
the primary question arises as to whether they constitute intrinsic or extrinsic
fraud. If the former, it would seem to be settled under the authorities, that,
the time for appeal from said decree having expired, and the time for seeking
relief under section 473 of the Code of Civil Procedure having elapsed prior to
the application of the plaintiff in that action to have said decree set aside,
the trial court had lost jurisdiction over said action to grant  relief under
said section ( People v. Mooney, 178 Cal. 525-530 [174 Pac. 325]).

   We do not think, however, that the facts of this case as above outlined
constitute this a case of intrinsic fraud as that term is defined in the case of
People v. Mooney, supra, or in the case of Pico v. Cohn, 91 Cal. 129 [25 Am. St.
Rep. 159, 13 L. R. A. 336, 25 Pac. 970, 27 Pac. 537], or in the case of Flood v.
Templeton, 152 Cal. 148 [13 L. R. A. (N. S.) 579, 92 Pac. 78], or in the case of
United States v. Throckmorton, 98 U.S. 61, 66 [25 L. Ed. 93, see, also, Rose's
U. S. Notes], upon the reasoning in which latter case the former three cases
were decided.  In each of the three former cases the fraud which was held to be
or defined as intrinsic fraud was such as occurred in the course of an adversary
proceeding; such as the production of perjured testimony or forged documents
during a trial wherein the adversary party had the opportunity to make the truth
appear.  In the case of United States v.  Throckmorton, supra, the supreme court
of the United States after instancing situations in which the fraud practiced
upon the adversary party or the court would be intrinsic fraud points out the
line of demarcation between these instances and those wherein by reason of
something done by the successful party to a suit there was in fact no adversary
trial or decision of the issue in the case; as "where the unsuccessful party has
been prevented from fully exhibiting his case by fraud or deception practiced
upon him by his opponent, as by keeping him away from court by a false promise
of a compromise; or where the defendant never had knowledge of the suit, being
kept in ignorance by the acts of the plaintiff; or where an attorney
fraudulently or without authority assumes to represent a party and connives at
his defeat; or where an attorney regularly employed corruptly sells out his
client's interest to the other side, -- these and similar cases which  show that
there has never been a real contest in the trial or hearing of the case"; such
are, in the view of that tribunal, instances of extrinsic fraud. In the recent
case of Simonton v. Los Angeles Trust & Sav. Bank , 192 Cal. 651 [221 Pac. 368]
it was held by this court that the fraudulent concealment or omission through
mistake of an executrix to account for personal property belonging to the estate
of the decedent with the result that such property was appropriated by such
executrix for her own personal use and benefit constituted extrinsic fraud and
this court in that case cited numerous other cases in this and other courts
supporting the principle illustrated in the Throckmorton case.  It seems to us
that the facts of this case bring it by clear analogy within the doctrines thus
laid down defining cases of extrinsic fraud. In the case in hand there was no
adversary proceeding attending or embracing the action of the court in the
divorce action at the time of the application for and entry of the final decree.
Section 132 of the Civil Code provides that when one year has expired after the
entry of an interlocutory judgment in a divorce action the court "on motion of
either party, or upon its own motion may enter the final judgment granting the
divorce." Such final decree may be entered ex parte and its entry by the court
is in the nature of a ministerial act which the court must, on motion of either
party, perform whenever the facts are shown entitling the movant to such final
decree and which mandamus may be invoked to compel the court to perform in a
proper case.  It was so held by this court in the case of Olson v. Superior
Court, 175 Cal. 250 [1 A. L. R. 1589, 165 Pac. 706]. In the instant case the
wife not only had no knowledge of her husband's action in seeking and obtaining
the entry of such final decree and hence no opportunity to appear and resist
such action, but by the reconciliation and resumption of marital relations
between herself and her husband and by long years of cohabitation she had
apparently been led to regard the divorce proceedings between them as
obliterated and their marital union as completely restored.  That her husband
having resumed and while occupying these relations toward her should have
covertly sought the divorce court, ex parte, and without any notice or knowledge
imparted to her, have there caused to be entered a decree of final divorce
apparently  in her favor, but which would have the effect of rendering the
relations between himself and his former wife meretricious was, upon the face of
the showing thus far made in this proceeding, a fraud of the most despicable
quality and was a fraud which was essentially extrinsic in character since it
was such a fraud as she had no opportunity to combat or protect herself against
in the proceeding by which ex parte and through an imposition practiced upon the
court he obtained the entry of said final decree. It was also extrinsic fraud in
so far as the court itself granting such decree was concerned since it was
effected through concealment from the court in an ex parte proceeding of facts
which the defendant in said action was bound to disclose and which if disclosed
would have rendered improper the granting and impossible the procurement of such
final decree. In the case of Olson v. Superior Court, supra, it was pointed out
that one of the great purposes of the law enforcing the delay of one year before
the absolute severance of marriage ties was to provide a period during which the
parties might become reconciled and thus avoid the unhappy consequence of a
final decree of divorce; and that where such reconciliation had occurred  and
the parties were living together in their restored marital relationship it would
be a grave reproach upon our jurisprudence that a final decree of divorce could
be forced upon a blameless and nonconsenting wife after such reconciliation. Yet
this is precisely what would be accomplished in this case if the fraud practiced
upon both the plaintiff and the court were held to be intrinsic and thus beyond
the power of the court to avoid its consequence after the time for appeal and
for application under section 473 of the Code of Civil Procedure had expired.

     The petitioners, however, contend that whether the fraud be extrinsic or
intrinsic is immaterial, since the final decree is valid upon its face and that
a judgment, no matter how much tinctured with either form of fraud, if not void
upon its face is only assailable in the court in which it is rendered under and
within the time provided in section 473 of the Code of Civil Procedure. The
cases cited by the petitioners in support of this contention do not support it.
In the case of People v. Dodge, 104 Cal. 487 [38 Pac. 203], the ground for the
relief sought was not fraud but was an  alleged defective service of summons.
The case of People v. Davis, 143 Cal. 673 [77 Pac. 651], was a similar case
involving no question of fraud in the procurement sought to be set aside.  The
case of Suttman v. Superior Court, 174 Cal. 243 [162 Pac. 1032], while it arose
out of an action for divorce and involved the erroneous action of the trial
court in setting aside an interlocutory decree without notice to the adversary
party thereto, involved no issue of fraud.  The case of Bancroft v. Bancroft,
178 Cal. 359 [173 Pac. 579], was a proceeding wherein one of the parties to a
previous action for divorce was seeking relief in an independent action in
equity from a decree of divorce obtained through a collusive agreement between
the parties to such divorce action, and the language of the court cited by
counsel was used in commenting upon certain other cases wherein relief had been
sought under section 473 of the Code of Civil Procedure and is to be confined in
its application to the particular cases to which it referred.  On the other
hand, this court in the case of Ex-Mission L. & W. Co. v. Flash, 97 Cal. 610 [32
Pac. 600], has held that a motion to set aside a judgment upon the ground of
fraud in its procurement is not subject to the six-months' limitation provided
in section 473 of the Code of Civil Procedure; and in the opinion in that case
it is pointed out by the court that said section of the code while providing for
relief in cases of "Mistake, inadvertence, surprise or excusable neglect" does
not include "fraud" among the grounds upon which relief from a void or voidable
judgment may be sought under its terms.  In the case of Williams v. Reed, 43
Cal. App. 425 [185 Pac. 515], it was held that the trial court has inherent
power to set aside a judgment obtained through a fraud upon the court and that
its right to so act or grant relief is not derived from section 473 of the Code
of Civil Procedure. It is true as the petitioners assert that this holding may
have been obiter in that case.  It is also true that it rests for its authority
upon the case of Stierlen v. Stierlen, 18 Cal. App. 609 [124 Pac. 226, 228],
wherein similar language is employed, and that certain broad language in the
latter case was disapproved by this court upon its denial of a petition for
rehearing therein, but the Stierlen case was, as to its facts, a case wherein
the motion made in the trial court was one to set aside   a judgment in an
action for divorce obtained through fraud committed both upon the court and the
adverse party; and while certain language of the appellate court in dealing with
this phase of the case was so broad as to apply to all void judgments and hence
was properly subject to the criticism made upon rehearing, the unmodified
portion of the opinion in that case correctly states the rule to be that "the
power to vacate upon motion a judgment obtained by fraud is inherent in courts
of general jurisdiction, and that the same may be exercised after the lapse of
the statutory time which limits the entertainment of applications based upon
surprise, inadvertence and so forth, provided that such motions are made within
a reasonable time.  What is a reasonable time is a matter of sound legal
discretion in the court in which the motion is made." We are, therefore, of the
opinion that there is no merit in the petitioners' contention that the plaintiff
in the divorce action had lost the right to make her motion to set aside said
final decree in the trial court upon the ground of fraud committed upon herself
and upon the court in its procurement because her said motion was not made
within the time prescribed in section 473 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

     This brings us to the second and most serious contention of the petitioners
herein, which is that the divorce action being one brought solely to sever the
marriage relation between the parties thereto and in which no property rights of
the parties were involved, and both the interlocutory and final decrees in said
action being confined to such purpose, the said action abated upon the death of
the party defendant subsequent to the entry of said final decree and the trial
court thereby lost jurisdiction to take any action whatever in said case.  The
petitioners in making this contention rely strongly upon the cases of Begbie v.
Begbie, 128 Cal. 154 [49 L. R. A. 141, 60 Pac. 667] and of Kirschner v. Dietrich
, 110 Cal. 502 [42 Pac. 1064], as fully sustaining their said contention.   The
case of Begbie v. Begbie, supra, was one in which the court dismissed an appeal
taken in a divorce action upon the ground that the defendant having died after
the entry of the decree of divorce and the divorce action being one brought
solely for the purpose of establishing her personal status as the wife of the
plaintiff, the action had abated upon her death and  this court had thereby
become deprived of the right to review the action of the trial court upon
appeal.  No question as to the right of the trial court to entertain a
proceeding to purge its record of a decree of divorce fraudulently obtained was
presented in that case.  The court in its ruling relied upon its earlier
decision in the case of Kirschner v. Dietrich, supra. The facts of the latter
case and the relief sought therein differ, however, essentially from those of
the case at bar.  In that case there had been a judgment of divorce obtained by
the wife upon service of summons by publication.  The judgment in the
plaintiff's favor was entered July 13, 1893.  The plaintiff died February 22,
1894.  An administrator was appointed in her estate.  On June 8, 1894, the trial
court made an order on motion of the defendant in the divorce action directing
the substitution of the administrator of the deceased wife as a party plaintiff
in her stead and directing that the action be continued in the name of such
administrator. Thereafter the defendant, on notice to such administrator, moved
the court under section 473 of the Code of Civil Procedure to vacate the
judgment of divorce and that he be allowed to answer the complaint upon the
ground that the summons had not been personally served upon him and that the
judgment was void because procured by false testimony.  The court denied his
said motion.  The defendant appealed.  Under the foregoing state of facts this
court held, and we think properly, that since the purpose of the defendant in
making his said motion was to reopen and litigate the question as to whether the
plaintiff was entitled to a decree of divorce, the plaintiff's death by severing
the marital relation between the parties had abated the action which had that as
its sole purpose and hence deprived the court in which said action had been
pending of all power to review its action and determine her right to a divorce.
But the case at bar presents an essentially different situation.  The plaintiff
by her motion made in the divorce action is not seeking to reopen said action
for the purpose of further litigating the question as to whether she, or the
defendant either, is entitled to a divorce. That question has been settled by
the defendant's death and as to it or any further litigation regarding it in
said action, it has been abated. But the plaintiff, notwithstanding the
abatement  of the action in so far as the issues therein are involved, is
seeking to invoke the power of the court over its own records, by suggesting and
offering to show to the court that it has been imposed upon by the extrinsically
fraudulent acts and concealments of the defendant while living with the
plaintiff as his wife into the making and entry of a decree which it had neither
the right nor power to make.  This is the principal purpose of her said motion;
and if the declared purpose of the trial court as affirmed in its response to
this writ, is to be taken as true, this is the purpose which the said court and
the judge thereof has in view in proceeding to the hearing upon the plaintiff's
said motion which the petitioners by their application for this writ seek to
prohibit.  To such a purpose the death of the defendant in said action is merely
incidental and is in nowise controlling upon the power of the court to purge its
records of orders and decrees which the court has been wrongfully misled into
making through the fraudulent imposition of a party to an action pending, at the
time of such imposition, before it.  To hold that the party having accomplished
such imposition could by dying deprive the court of the right when properly
advised to so purge its own records would be to abridge to the point of denial
one of the most salutary of the inherent powers of the court.

   In the case of Rehfuss v. Rehfuss, 169 Cal. 86 [145 Pac. 1020], this court
directed attention to the fact that actions for divorce differ from ordinary
suits between private parties in the degree of solicitude which the law as well
as public policy imposes upon the courts in the interest of preserving the
integrity of the marriage relation. The court says: "That relation is the basis
of the family, the foundation of society.  It cannot be destroyed by the mere
consent, whim, or caprice of the parties to the marriage, nor can it be
stipulated away in judicial proceedings.  The relation can be dissolved only by
consent of the state, and upon statutory grounds, presented in good faith to a
court of competent jurisdiction.  . . .  It is the duty of the court,
representing the state, in accordance with the letter and policy of the law, to
guard strictly against fraud,  collusion, or imposition when the husband or wife
seeks to dissolve the bonds that bind them together.  . . .  Where it becomes
manifest to the court before it loses jurisdiction of the case,  that a judgment
decreeing a divorce has been obtained by collusive agreement between the
parties, or through fraud practiced upon the court, the court has the inherent
power to set aside the judgment.  This it may do on its own motion." (Citing
many cases.) The petitioners lay, we think, undue stress upon the phrase in the
foregoing quotation "before it loses jurisdiction of the case" as indicating
that the court had in mind either  the limitation of time imposed by section 473
of the Code of Civil Procedure or the loss of jurisdiction caused by the death
of one of the parties to the divorce action; but that the court did not refer to
a loss of jurisdiction in the trial court from either of these causes would seem
to be made clear, not only by reference to its earlier decision in the case of
Williams v. Reed, supra, holding that applications for this form of relief were
not governed by section 473 of said code, but also by reference to certain of
the cases cited in support of its above ruling in the Rehfuss case; as in the
Matter of Boyd's Appeal, 38 Pa. St. 241, wherein it was held that the court of
common pleas had power to vacate and annul a decree of divorce obtained through
fraud and imposition on the court after the death of one of the parties to the
action.  In Long on Domestic Relations, section 141, page 289, the rule is
stated that a decree of divorce, which has been obtained by either party to the
marriage by fraud may be set aside by the court in which the decree was rendered
upon application of the party aggrieved; and the fact that the party who
procured the divorce is dead does not necessarily defeat a proceeding to vacate
the decree. The author cites in support of this doctrine Lawrence v. Nelson, 113
Iowa, 277 [57 L. R. A. 583, 85 N. W. 84], and Johnson v. Coleman, 23 Wis. 453
[99 Am. Dec. 193], and also cites 2 Bishop on Marriage, Divorce and Separation,
sections 1549, 1554 and 1556, wherein it is stated that the death of the
defrauding party, without unreasonable delay by the other, will not prevent the
vacating of a decree of divorce in cases where a fraud has been practiced on the
court by one of the parties to the action to the injury of another who is
innocent, and that in such cases the proceeding for annulling the decree must be
in the same court and cause wherein it was rendered and where remains the record
which is to be vacated.

    We are therefore satisfied that notwithstanding the fact that the divorce
action had abated in so far as any further trial or determination of the issue
as to the marital relations of the parties to it is concerned, the court
retained its inherent power and jurisdiction to conduct the investigation into
the integrity of its records which the plaintiff's motion suggests and which the
court of its own motion is proposing to undertake.  What was said by this court
in the case of Kirschner v. Dietrich, supra, while correct in its application to
that case, has no application to the proceeding which the petitioners herein
seek to prohibit.

   The application for a writ of prohibition is denied


                              24 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           DOROTHY von BEROLDINGEN et al., Plaintiffs and Appellants,
            v. LINTON PAUL von BEROLDINGEN, Defendant and Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 20314

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                  Division One

          210 Cal. App. 2d 1; 26 Cal. Rptr. 202; 1962 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      1536


                               November 21, 1962

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from orders of the Superior Court of the City and
County of San Francisco dismissing plaintiffs' complaint and amended complaint.
Joseph Karesh, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Pleading--Amendment -- Effect -- As Superseding Pleading.  --Where, without
asking leave of court, plaintiff filed an amended complaint, the original
complaint became legally defunct; hence, the court's order dismissing the
original complaint was proper because it had been superseded by the amended
complaint though the court did not dismiss the original complaint on that
ground.

(2) Dismissal--Involuntary Termination--Effect.  -- Ordinarily an appellate
court is not called on to consider whether a complaint, superseded by an amended
complaint filed without asking leave of court, stated a cause of action; where,
however, the order dismissing the original complaint was with prejudice, the
appellate court is required to examine the complaint to determine if the portion
of the court's order, "with prejudice," should stand.

(3) Divorce -- Support of Children -- Enforcement.  --Where, in a divorce
decree, an order is made for payment to one having custody of a minor child of
the divorced couple, such person may sue for the enforcement of that order.
Where the payment is to be made to the mother for the child's benefit, her
action to enforce the payment is for the child's benefit.

(4) Id.--Support of Children--Enforcement.  --Where an order in a divorce action
provides that payment for medical expenses for the couple's minor child be made
by the father to the mother, the mother may sue on the order made in the divorce
court; there is no authority for the minor to bring such a suit.

(5) Id.--Support of Children--Enforcement.  --Where no order is made in divorce
court for the support and other necessaries of life of the couple's minor child,
a cause of action for the minor's support and other necessaries is based on the
operation of statutory law.

(6) Id.--Support of Children--Orders Subsequent to Decree.  --Once a divorce
court has taken jurisdiction of the matter of support and maintenance of the
minor child of a divorced couple, suit to recover support and maintenance for
that minor will lie only on the divorce court's order. Where the divorce court
awarded custody of a minor to the mother and ordered the father to pay to her
the minor's medical expenses but made no order for support and necessaries, the
mother's remedy was to apply to the divorce court for an order requiring the
father to pay support and necessaries.

(7) Parent and Child--Actions Between Parents and Children.  --A complaint in
which a minor seeks payment of medical expenses ordered by the divorce court to
be paid by his father to his mother does not state a cause of action.

(8) Id.--Support--Actions to Compel Support.  --Where a divorce decree ordered
the father to pay to the mother the medical expenses of the couple's minor child
but made no provision for the payment of support and necessaries, a complaint
against the father by the minor seeking payment for necessaries does not state a
cause of action.

(9) Divorce--Support of Children--Enforcement.  --Where a divorce decree ordered
the father to pay to the mother the medical expenses of the couple's minor
child, a complaint brought by the mother seeking recovery of the medical
expenses ordered by the divorce court states a cause of action.

(10) Id.--Support of Children--Enforcement.  --Where a divorce decree ordered
the father to pay to the mother the medical expenses of the couple's minor child
but made no provision for support and necessaries, a complaint against the
father in which the mother seeks recovery of necessaries does not state a cause
of action.

(11) Id.--Support of Children--Enforcement.  --Where a cause of action
incorporated allegations relating to defendant's refusal to pay a minor's
medical expenses to plaintiff as ordered by the divorce court and alleged
plaintiff's inability to pay costs and attorneys' fees and defendant's ability
to pay them, Civ. Code, § 137.3, permitting the court to order the father to pay
attorneys' fees in an action for the support of a child if such relief is
requested, was applicable. Although it was unnecessary to make a separate count
of the request for attorneys' fees, setting forth the request in a separate
count did not justify a dismissal thereof.

COUNSEL: Dorothy von Beroldingen, in pro. per., and George R. Moscone for
Plaintiffs and Appellants.

Sullivan, Roche, Johnson & Farraher, Vincent J. Mullins and Daniel H. Dibert for
Defendant and Respondent.

JUDGES: Bray, P. J.  Sullivan, J., and Molinari, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: BRAY

OPINION

     Plaintiffs appeal from orders dismissing with prejudice plaintiff Dorothy
von Beroldingen's complaint and plaintiffs' amended complaint.

   Question Presented

   The fundamental question is whether an independent action will lie for child
support, including medical expenses, where a divorce court with continuing
jurisdiction had made its order for medical expenses only.

   Record

   Plaintiff Dorothy von Beroldingen individually filed against defendant a
"Complaint for Money." Defendant filed a demurrer and a notice of motion to
dismiss the complaint.  The hearing on both was set for February 15, 1961, and
on that date continued to March 1.  On February 28, plaintiff Dorothy, without
asking leave of court,  filed an amended complaint for "Child Support." The
plaintiffs therein were Dorothy, and "Paul von Beroldingen, a minor, by and
through Dorothy von Beroldingen, his mother and guardian ad litem." On March 3
the court made an order, entered March 6, dismissing with prejudice plaintiff's
1 original  complaint.  (The court at no time acted upon the demurrer to this
complaint.) Defendant then moved for a dismissal of the amended complaint.  On
April 6, the court dismissed that complaint with prejudice.  Thereafter
plaintiff moved to correct the order dismissing the amended complaint by
striking therefrom the words "with prejudice." This motion the court denied.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Unless
otherwise noted, "plaintiff" will refer to Dorothy von Beroldingen.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The Amended Complaint

   The court dismissed the amended complaint on the ground that none of its
counts state a cause of action.  When plaintiff filed the amended complaint, the
original complaint became functus officio.  Hence, the court's order dismissing
it was proper for the reason that it had been superseded by the amended
complaint, even though the court did not dismiss it on that ground.
Ordinarily, therefore, we would not be called upon to consider whether the
complaint, thus superseded, stated a cause of action. However, here the court's
order dismissing the complaint was with prejudice.  Hence we are required to
examine the complaint to determine if that portion of the court's order should
stand.  The complaint was by plaintiff individually and contained practically
the same allegations as count 2 of the amended complaint.  As we hereinafter
hold that that count states a cause of action, it follows that the complaint
stated a cause of action and therefore the court should not have made the
dismissal of that complaint "with prejudice."

   The amended complaint, as before stated, is on behalf of plaintiff and the
minor.  There are five counts.  The first count alleges that the minor resides
with plaintiff and is completely dependent for his support, maintenance,
education, medical and dental attention, upon the persons charged by law with
the duty to pay the reasonable value of such expenses to him, the primary duty
resting on defendant, his father.  From June 1948, until August 19, 1960,
defendant contributed nothing for Paul's support, medical expenses, etc.  The
final decree of divorce incorporated and made final the provision of the
interlocutory decree under which defendant was ordered to pay for the support of
Paul.  Then follow allegations as to defendant's ability to pay. From 1948 to
1961 defendant became obligated to pay the minor for necessaries of life, to
wit, extraordinary medical expenses, the sum of approximately $ 7,000, which, on
demand, defendant refused to pay.  Defendant "became obligated to  pay minor
plaintiff for necessaries of life, to wit, extraordinary medical expenses and
incidentals to the same" in the sum of approximately $ 7,000; "that such
obligation of said defendant arose by virtue of the order [theretofore]
contained in the aforesaid decree of divorce . . . as well as by operation of
statutory law; . . ." "[In] lieu of such payment . . . [plaintiff] became
obligated for such payment . . ." 2  Minor plaintiff alleges that he ought to be
able to reimburse plaintiff, his mother, to the extent of said obligation and to
that end defendant ought to be compelled to "repay" to minor plaintiff said $
7,000.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   This
first count is uncertain in this (the uncertainty is carried by reference
through the other counts): that it first recites that the final decree of
divorce "incorporated and made final the provisions of the interlocutory decree
of divorce under which defendant was ordered to pay for the support of said
minor child; . . ." (Emphasis added.) It later alleges: ". . . defendant above
named, became obligated to pay minor plaintiff for necessaries of life, to wit,
extraordinary medical expenses and incidentals . . .; that such obligation of
said defendant arose by virtue of the order therefore [sic] contained in the
aforesaid decree of divorce. . . ." (Emphasis added.) In the briefs and on oral
argument plaintiffs concede that there was no order for support.  They contend
that by reason of the stipulation made between the parties in the divorce
action, in which it was agreed that defendant need not make any payments for the
minor's support but would pay for "all extraordinary medical bills incurred for
the benefit of said child" the court ordered such payment.  Defendant denies
that any order was made either for support or medical expenses.  However, he
annexes to his brief a copy of the said stipulation, at the bottom of which
appears "It is so ordered this 13th day of December, 1949.  Thos. J. Cunningham,
Judge of the Superior Court." Thus the amended complaint is not clear whether it
is based on an order in the divorce decrees for support or for medical expenses
only, or whether it is based on the later order of December, 1949.  For the
purposes of this appeal we are required to accept the allegations of the
complaint as true.  The record does not show whether any demurrer to the amended
complaint was filed.  The uncertainty shown on the face of count 2 may be
cleared up in the court below.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Thus, the gravamen of the first count seems to be that by reason of the
divorce decree order and by operation of law defendant is obligated to pay the
minor for repayment to his mother of the sums paid by her for the minor's
medical expenses.  Count 2 differs from count 1 in that it alleges that
defendant is obligated by the decree and by operation of law to repay the $
7,000 to plaintiff, rather than to the minor plaintiff.

   The third count incorporates the allegations of the first count except as to
the allegations concerning the paying out by plaintiff of the approximately $
7,000 for medical expenses.  It then alleges that defendant became obligated
under the divorce decree as well as by operation of law to pay minor  plaintiff
approximately $ 30,000 advanced by plaintiff for the support, maintenance,
education and recreation of minor plaintiff; that minor plaintiff ought to be
able to reimburse plaintiff to the extent of the obligations incurred by her for
said purpose "and/or to have such sums held, under authority of this Court, for
future disposition . . ."

   This count apparently is for payment to minor plaintiff to be by him paid to
the mother, of such sums as she has obligated or will obligate herself to pay,
-- not for medical expenses as in the preceding counts, but for support,
maintenance, education and recreation.

   The fourth count differs from the third count in that it is alleged that the
defendant is obligated by the decree and by operation of law to repay plaintiff
the $ 30,000 advanced by her for the necessaries of life of the minor.

   The fifth count seeks attorneys' fees and costs for prosecuting in this
action.

   Analysis of both complaints, particularly of the amended complaint, divides
the demands into three categories: (a) Plaintiff individually is suing for
moneys claimed to be advanced by her for medical expenses of the minor.  (b) The
minor is suing for these moneys to be repaid by him to her.  (c) Both plaintiffs
are suing for future support of the minor.

   In Thomas v. Thomas (1939) 14 Cal.2d 355 [94 P.2d 510], the defendant by a
prior divorce decree was ordered to pay the plaintiff wife $ 50 per month
alimony. For over five years the defendant defaulted.  The wife then sued the
defendant in an independent action for the accrued alimony and to incorporate in
the judgment the provision for alimony as contained in the divorce decree. The
court held that the action was proper "as a cumulative right" both to a judgment
for the amounts due under the decree and for an order directing payment of the
amounts to become due.  It was held, however, that in the independent action the
court had no power to modify the terms of the divorce decree, but merely to
enforce them.

   In Hough v. Hough (1945) 26 Cal.2d 605 [160 P.2d 15], the parties to a
divorce action entered into a property settlement agreement in which the husband
agreed, among other matters, to pay the wife $ 200 per  month for her support.
The interlocutory decree ordered the husband to pay that amount "'in accordance
with the property settlement filed herein, which said property settlement is
hereby approved by the Court.'" (P. 607.) Later the husband applied for a
modification of the decree. The court by order reduced the payments to $ 100 per
month.  Thereafter the wife sued the husband on the agreement to recover the
difference between the $ 200 promised in the agreement and the $ 100 ordered by
the court.  The wife obtained judgment in the trial court.  On appeal, however,
the judgment was reversed, the court holding that the order modifying the
divorce decree was res judicata upon the issue as to whether the provision in
the agreement for the support of plaintiff was alimony or a part of the property
settlement covered by the agreement, and that as the divorce court held that it
was alimony, and therefore could and did reduce the amount, an action could not
be brought on the agreement.  The court stated (pp. 613-614): "Reference has
been made in some cases to the issue of whether or not the parties to an
agreement incorporated in and ordered performed by the decree may have an
independent right of action upon the contract.  In some of these cases the issue
was mentioned but not decided.  [Citations.] In others the agreement was not
made an operative part of the decree. [Citations.] Moreover, it was said in the
Roberts case [Roberts v. Roberts, 83 Cal.App. 345 (256 P. 826)] at page 351:

   "'But it is also the law that either husband or wife may enter into any
agreement or transaction with the other respecting property which either might
if unmarried (Civ. Code, sec. 158); and therefore, if after scrutinizing the
agreement entered into between them for the settlement of their property rights
and the circumstances under which it was made, the trial court ascertains and
determines that the same is free from the illegal objects and influences above
mentioned, it may affirm the agreement [citations], and the force given thereto
derives its sanction from the decree made by the court with a knowledge of the
facts [citation].' (Emphasis added.) The case of Gummerson v. Gummerson, 14
Cal.App.2d 450 [58 P.2d 394], overlooks the anomalous situation heretofore
discussed and is therefore disapproved.  . . .

   "From the foregoing discussion it is apparent that plaintiff had no right of
action in the instant case on the portions of the agreement incorporated in and
made an operative part of the divorce decree. Her remedy was on the decree
including such aids as execution, contempt, and other enforcement process of the
court together with an action on the decree.  Hence, the judgment should be
reversed." (Emphasis added.)

    Both parties here take comfort from Hough.  However, it is a distinct
holding that where the settlement agreement is merged in the divorce decree no
action will lie upon the agreement but will lie upon the decree.

   Defendant cites no cases holding that an independent action may not be
brought on the order or judgment in a divorce case ordering the payment of
alimony.  However, this action is not for alimony but for medical expenses, a
part of child support. We see no reason why where the order is made for payment
to the one having custody of the minor, here, the mother, such person may not
sue for the enforcement of that order.  The payment is to be made to the mother
for the benefit of the child and her action is likewise for the benefit of the
child.

    Lewis v. Lewis (1917) 174 Cal. 336 [163 P. 42], was an action brought by a
minor, through her guardian, to compel the father to contribute to her support
and education.  Some years before, her mother had been awarded in an action for
divorce the custody of the minor and an order requiring the father to pay to the
mother for the support of herself and child the sum of $ 1,050 in certain
monthly installments.  The mother waived all other claims against the husband.
The latter paid the $ 1,050 in full.   The trial court in the independent action
ordered the father to pay the minor plaintiff $ 15 per month and counsel fees.
The Supreme Court reversed the judgment on the ground that the divorce court
still had jurisdiction to modify its decree and to provide for payment of
support for the minor by the father.  It stated that where the custody of a
child is vested in the mother by a divorce decree, the father is under no
obligation to provide for such child beyond that directed by the divorce court,
either in its decree or by subsequent modification, and that that court at any
time during the minority of the child may make an order requiring the father to
contribute to its support.  The court further stated: "This does not mean that
the natural duty of a father to provide for his minor child is, under our law,
finally and absolutely terminated by an award of the custody of the child to the
mother.  Where such an award is made by a decree of divorce, or in an action for
custody without divorce (Civ. Code, sec. 199), the court may, as we have already
pointed out, provide at any time during the minority of the children for their
support and education by the father, who is deprived of their custody." (P.
340.)

    The exclusiveness of the divorce court proceeding where it has made an order
concerning a minor is well illustrated in Greene v. Superior Court (1951) 37
Cal.2d 307 [321 P.2d 821], where the divorce court had made an order granting
the minor's custody to the mother, and the father, later, attempted to gain the
minor's custody through a guardian and ward proceeding.  The court said (p.
311): "We find no reason to hold that the continuing jurisdiction of the divorce
court over its custody awards is not also exclusive.  'A decree awarding custody
to a parent claiming adversely to the other parent differs only in formal
respects from a decree appointing one parent guardian of the person of the
child.  The effect in either case is to confer upon the party appointed the care
and custody of the child.' [Citations.]"

     While the mother may sue upon the order made in the divorce court, we find
no authority for the minor to bring such a suit.  The order provides that the
payment for medical expenses be made to the mother.  It does not provide for
payment to the child.  Plaintiffs contend that Fagan v. Fagan (1941) 43
Cal.App.2d 189 [110 P.2d 520], is authority for the right of the minor to sue
for support in his own behalf and without there being any order for it in the
divorce court.  There the mother in a divorce action in Nevada had obtained
custody of the minor and an order for the support of the minor, payable monthly.
The mother died and the minor's grandmother was appointed her guardian. The
minor through her guardian brought an action in this state against the father
for freedom from parental authority and for support.  The father contended that
a parent deprived of the custody of a child by the appointment of a general
guardian is relieved of the duty of supporting such child.  The court held
otherwise, saying (p. 199): "In view of the trend of the more recent decisions,
we are impelled to hold that an impoverished and indigent minor child may
maintain an action to declare herself free from the dominion of the parent for
abuse of parental authority, and for support and education, even though her
custody has been previously awarded to a guardian of her person.  We are unable
to conclude that the mere nomination of a guardian, by a child sixteen years
old, which nomination is subject to the approval of the court, constitutes a
waiver of her claim to future support from her father who has abandoned her."

    Boens v. Bennett (1937) 20 Cal.App.2d 477 [67 P.2d 715], was a case similar
to Fagan in that the action by a  minor son against his father for support was
based upon section 203, Civil Code, which provides that a child may be freed
from the dominion of a parent and the parent's duty of support and education
enforced where the parent has abused the parental authority. Neither Fagan nor
Boens is applicable here because the causes of action here are not based upon
section 203.

    Our discussion so far relates to the right to sue on the order made in the
divorce court.  That order was limited to payments for medical expenses for the
child.   We meet a different situation when we consider both the mother's and
the minor's alleged causes of action for the minor's support and other
necessaries of life, as to which no order of the divorce court has been made.
The cause of action is based upon the "operation of statutory law."  Lewis as
well as Thomas hold that an independent action will not lie where the divorce
court has once taken jurisdiction, and that suit will lie only upon an order of
that court.  The remedy is for plaintiff to apply to the divorce court for an
order requiring defendant to pay support and necessaries for the minor.  "Any
proper modification of the decree of divorce, in the interest of the child,
might be ordered on the application of the mother herself, even though she had
agreed that the father should not be required to contribute further.
[Citations.] The suggestion that the mother might fail to seek provision for the
child in the divorce action does not seem to have a very direct bearing here,
since the mother is the guardian representing the minor in this action.  But if
the mother should fail to pursue the remedy, we do not doubt that the child's
interest is such that the power to make adequate provision for it may be invoked
by a proper representative of the child itself, or may be exercised by the court
of its own motion.  [Citation.]" ( Lewis v. Lewis, supra, 174 Cal. at pp.
341-342.)

      Count 1 in which the minor plaintiff seeks payment of the medical expenses
ordered by the divorce court and count 3 in which he seeks payment for
necessaries of life do not state causes of action.    Count 2, in which
plaintiff seeks recovery of medical expenses ordered by the divorce court, does
state a cause of action.  Count 4 in which plaintiff seeks recovery of
necessaries of life does not state a cause of action.

   Defendant contends that plaintiffs had no right without permission of court
to file an amended complaint when a  demurrer to the complaint and a motion to
dismiss were on file.  The trial court in the discussion on the motion to
dismiss the complaint apparently granted such permission. In later ruling on the
motion to dismiss the amended complaint, it is clear that the court felt that
such permission had been granted, and dismissed the amended complaint solely on
the theory that because of the divorce action an independent action would not
lie.  In any event, as we hold that count 2 states a cause of action, and it
does not state a different cause of action than that in the complaint, the
question of whether the minor plaintiff could be added by the amended complaint
becomes moot.

     The fifth cause of action incorporates certain allegations of the first and
second counts relating to defendant's refusal to pay the minor's medical
expenses as ordered by the court and his refusal to pay for the support of the
minor, and then alleges plaintiff's inability to pay costs and attorney's fees
and defendant's ability to pay them.   Section 137.3, Civil Code, provides in
part: "During the pendency of any action . . . for the custody, support,
maintenance or education of children, the court may order the . . . father . . .
to pay such amount as may be reasonably necessary for the cost of maintaining .
. . the action and for attorney's fees if such relief is requested in the
complaint.  . . ." See Warren v. Superior Court (1955) 132 Cal.App.2d 392 [282
P.2d 207], holding that section 137.3 applies to an action brought by the mother
against the father on a court order for support of minor children and that it
was not necessary for her to have obtained an order for attorneys' fees and
costs in the divorce court.

   It was unnecessary to make a separate count of this request.  It could have
been included in the second count.  However, the fact that it is set forth in a
separate count does not justify a dismissal thereof.

    That portion of the order dismissing the complaint which makes the dismissal
"with prejudice" is reversed.  That portion of the order dismissing counts 1, 3
and 4 of the amended complaint is affirmed.  That portion of the order
dismissing counts 2 and 5 of the amended complaint is reversed.  Plaintiffs will
recover costs.


                              25 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              ROSALIE THERESA ROBERTS, Appellant, v. LEE ROBERTS,
                                   Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 15818

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

          81 Cal. App. 2d 871; 185 P.2d 381; 1947 Cal. App. LEXIS 1150


                                October 17, 1947

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Respondent's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court
was Denied December 15, 1947.  Carter, J., and Schauer, J., Voted for a Hearing.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  Alfred E. Paonessa, Judge.

   Action to annul a divorce judgment, to set aside a property settlement
agreement, and for a divorce.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Pleading--Joinder of Causes of Action.  --A cause of action for
divorce may be joined with a cause of action for annulment of a prior divorce
decree, although the divorce count is triable only in event of the success of
the other count.

(2) Id.--Domicile.  --The jurisdiction of a court to grant a divorce is
determined by the bona fide domicile of at least one of the spouses. Where
neither spouse has established a statutory domicile in the state with honest
intentions to reside there permanently or indefinitely, a divorce decree by a
court of such state, based on the simulated residence of the plaintiff only, is
void.

(3) Id.--Foreign Divorces--Collateral Attack.  --It is competent to impeach
collaterally a divorce decree rendered in another state by extrinsic evidence
showing that neither party had established a bona fide domicile in that state,
notwithstanding the recitals of such decree or the false testimony given by the
plaintiff in support of the judgment.

(4) Id.--Foreign Divorces--Jurisdiction.  --Unless at least one of the spouses
is a resident of another state or of a foreign power in good faith, the courts
of such sister state or of such foreign power cannot acquire jurisdiction to
dissolve the marriage of those who have an established domicile in California.

(5) Id.--Foreign Divorces--Jurisdiction.  --Jurisdiction over divorce
proceedings of residents of California by the courts of a sister state cannot be
conferred by agreement of the litigants.

(6) Id.--Foreign Divorces--Collusion.  --It is a duty of a court of this state
to prevent dissolution of a marriage by the decree of a court of another
jurisdiction pursuant to the collusion of the spouses.

(7) Id.--Foreign Divorces--Jurisdiction.  --A divorce of California residents by
a court of another state is void because of plaintiff's lack of bona fide
residence in the foreign state, and also because of lack of the court's
jurisdiction over the State of California.

(8) Id.--State as Quasi Party.  --The state is a party to every marriage
contract of its own residents as well as the guardian of their morals, and
litigants seeking a divorce cannot confer jurisdiction on Nevada courts over
themselves, nor confer such jurisdiction over this state.

(9) Id.--Foreign Divorces--Collateral Attack.  --A judgment of divorce by a
court of Nevada without first having pursuant to its own laws acquired
jurisdiction over one of the parties, is void and may be impeached in the state
of the domicile, and its effect erased by showing that the Nevada court had no
jurisdiction of the parties.

(10) Id.--Foreign Divorces--Collusion.  --The collusion of the parties is
sufficient to render a Nevada divorce decree voidable, even though the court had
had jurisdiction and the husband had not fraudulently induced the wife to
institute the Nevada proceeding.

(11) Id.--Foreign Divorces--Estoppel.  --Generally, estoppel will not prevail to
support either a divorce decree granted by a foreign court without jurisdiction
of the parties or a decree obtained by a wife at the direction of her husband.
(See Code Civ. Proc., § 1916.)

(12a) (12b) Id.--Foreign Divorces--Estoppel.  --A wife was not estopped to plead
the nullity of a divorce decree which she obtained in Nevada, where she was
persuaded by the fraudulent conduct of her husband to procure a divorce and to
visit Nevada for that purpose at his expense, where she believed his statements
that the best interests of her child and herself would be served by his being
divorced from her and that such divorce would not interfere with her marital
relations, and where she was so weak and ill as to be incapable of exercising an
independent judgment.

(13) Estoppel--Parties Affected.  --Estoppel is to be applied against
wrongdoers, not against the victim of a wrong.

(14) Id.--Operation Against Law or Public Policy.  --Estoppel does not operate
to defeat positive law or public policy.

(15) Divorce--Judgment--Estoppel.  --A void divorce decree cannot be given
effect by estoppel.

(16) Estoppel--How Regarded.  --When misapplied, the doctrine of estoppel may be
a most effective weapon for the accomplishment of injustice.

(17) Divorce--Foreign Divorces--Vacation--Estoppel.  --The filing of an action
to annul a Nevada divorce decree on the grounds that such decree was obtained
through plaintiff's collusion with her husband and that the Nevada court was
without jurisdiction of the parties, was not barred by laches where, on
plaintiff's return to this state following the entry of such decree, she acted
and was treated as the lawful wife of the defendant for over 14 months, after
which he suddenly decided to drive her from the home, and she filed the action
within less than three months after such decision. Such delay was not
unreasonable in view of the circumstances.

(18) Equity--Laches.  --The doctrine of laches is not to be arbitrarily applied.
Whether a delay is unreasonable must be adjudged by the circumstances which
occasioned it, by the nature of the relief demanded, and by a determination that
the rights of defendant or of others have not been prejudiced by the delay.

(19) Pleading--Several Counts--Sufficiency.  --Where a separate general demurrer
was not lodged against one of several counts, only the special demurrers thereto
can be considered.

(20) Id.--Conclusions.  --In a wife's action to set aside a property settlement
agreement, an allegation in the complaint that a designated sum accepted by
plaintiff as her share of the community property was less than her interest in
the community estate, was a mere conclusion and was only inferential and
argumentative. In order to have alleged with certainty the detriment suffered by
plaintiff in accepting the sum for her interest in the community estate, it was
necessary for her not only to describe the property and to allege its reasonable
value, but also to set out facts disclosing the nature of her community
interest.

(21) Id.--Certainty.  --A fact which constitutes an essential element of a cause
of action must be alleged with certainty, and cannot be left to an inference.

(22) Id.--Conclusions.  --In a wife's action to set aside a property settlement
agreement, allegations of the complaint "that plaintiff was without any
opportunity by her to receive independent legal advice as to her rights against
the defendant relating to the community property . . . and to her support and
maintenance by him," and "that said purported agreement was unfair and unjust to
her . . . and is against public policy and therefore void," were inferential and
argumentative statements, conclusions and not direct averments of material
facts.

(23) Id.--Conclusions.  --In a wife's action to set aside a property settlement
agreement, an allegation of the complaint that "plaintiff was also under the
influence, control and dominance of defendant," was a conclusion. To have made
such charge effective, plaintiff should have declared the facts that might show
whether his dominance was due merely to the conjugal relationship or to her fear
of denying his wishes or of losing custody of her child.

(24) Id.--Conclusions.  --In a wife's action to set aside a property settlement
agreement, allegations of the complaint that "had she been so informed and
represented, she would not have entered into and executed the said purported
agreement nor have accepted the consideration and benefits to her therein
expressed; . . . said purported agreement . . . is unfair and unjust to
plaintiff" were mere conclusions.

(25) Id.--Conclusions.  --In a wife's action to set aside a property settlement
agreement, allegations of the complaint that she was "physically sick and in a
highly nervous and mentally distraught state which was well known to defendant;
. . . was also under the influence, control and dominance of defendant; that
plaintiff was not, by reason of her said condition of health and by reason of
said influence, control and dominance, able to exercise independent judgment,"
were not statements of ultimate facts but conclusions only, and were
insufficient to constitute a cause of action.

(26) Husband and Wife--Property Settlement--Rescission--Pleading.  --A wife's
complaint for rescission of a property settlement agreement was subject to
special demurrer for uncertainty where there was no explanation why she did not
return or offer to return the sum paid her for her interest in the community
estate.

(27) Pleading--Ultimate Facts.  --A litigant is entitled to prosecute his cause
only by first pleading the nature of relief sought and the ultimate facts by
which he deems himself to be entitled thereto under the law.

COUNSEL: Hardy and Hardy and Carlos S. Hardy for Appellant.

Reynolds, Painter & Cherniss and Louis Miller for Respondent.

JUDGES: Moore, P. J.  McComb, J., and Wilson, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: MOORE

OPINION

     By her amended complaint appellant sued (1) to annul a decree of divorce
granted to herself in the State of Nevada on the grounds that (a) such decree
was obtained through her collusion with respondent and that (b) the Nevada court
was without jurisdiction of the parties; (2) to set aside a property settlement
agreement executed by her as having been effected by means of respondent's
fraudulent representations and without independent legal advice; and (3) for a
judgment dissolving the marriage of the parties.  This appeal is from the
judgment of dismissal after appellant had declined further to amend, a demurrer
having been sustained.

   The Pleading Abridged

     The third count of the pleading is for a divorce. It is in orthodox form
and contains appropriate declarations as to (1) the marriage, (2) the lawful
issue, (3) the ownership of community property, (4) respondent's acts of extreme
cruelty, (5) appellant's need for support and respondent's ability to provide,
and (6) appellant's residence in Los Angeles County for more than one year.  The
joinder of count three was correct practice although it was triable only in the
event of the success of count one.  Omitting the conclusions as surplusage the
substance of count one is as follows:

   Count One

   I and II.  The parties were married May 10, 1941, and were thereafter until
October, 1944, husband and wife.  With their one child, age four, they have
resided continuously in Los Angeles County.  III.  On August 30, 1944, they
owned a home at Long Beach, the title to which stood in defendant's name.  Large
sums of community funds have been invested in the home and furnishings,  the
amount of which is unknown to plaintiff but is known to defendant.

   IV.  On and immediately prior to said last-mentioned date defendant stated to
plaintiff that although he loved  her and their child and desired to do all in
his power to provide for them, yet it would be better for him and his business
and for the advancement of his financial affairs, and he would be able to do
more for the support and care of plaintiff and their child, if he were not
married to plaintiff; that she could go to Nevada and within less than two
months obtain a divorce, gain a rest and return to their Long Beach home;

   V.  that if she would proceed at once to Nevada and secure a divorce he would
give her $ 1,000 in cash, $ 300 as her allowance for three months and would pay
all expenses of her trip and of her sojourn at Reno, including costs of court
and attorney's fees; during her absence from Long Beach he would employ a nurse
and housekeeper to care for the child at home; that immediately following the
divorce plaintiff should return to their home and resume the care of the child
as well as her marital relations and her position as defendant's wife in their
home; that he would place the title of the home in the child and would have its
life insured in favor of plaintiff.

   VI.  The birth of her child had impaired the health of plaintiff, from which
she had not recovered on said August 30; plaintiff  was then in a weak physical
state, highly nervous, mentally distraught by reason of her said infirmities and
of defendant's persuasive statements, which facts were well known to defendant.
By reason of such afflictions and distress plaintiff was wholly under
defendant's control and dominance, as a result of which she could not exercise
an independent judgment with respect to said representations but by reason of
her physical and mental condition believed his statements to be true and that
her best interests would be served by a compliance with his requests.

   VII.  Plaintiff believed said statements to be true and to have been made in
good faith; while in said condition of mind and body and under the control of
defendant and believing in the truth and good faith of his statements and
promises, on August 30, 1944, plaintiff orally promised to comply with all of
defendant's requests, secure a Nevada divorce and return to their home as soon
as the decree was obtained.

    VIII.  Whereupon defendant gave her $ 100 for one month's support and $ 100
for her attorney's fee, gave her a round trip ticket to Reno, and stated to her
that she  should hurry to Nevada, secure the divorce and return immediately to
her home in Long Beach.  Subsequently, defendant paid her the two succeeding
monthly payments of $ 100 each.  At the time he gave her the ticket defendant
gave plaintiff the name and address of a Reno attorney and told her to employ
him upon her arrival there.  Plaintiff was then without experience in legal
matters.

IX.  She was ignorant of the laws of Nevada and was not advised as to her
rights; she believed it was best to rely upon defendant's statements.  She was
then under his control and unable to exercise an independent judgment.

   X.  While relying solely upon such statements and promises, and while under
defendant's control, plaintiff, on or about September 1, 1944, left her Long
Beach home and her child of two and a half years and entrained for Reno, where
she arrived within three days and thereafter filed a complaint for divorce.
Defendant promptly filed his written appearance in the proceeding.  A decree was
entered on October 20, 1944, purporting (1) to dissolve the marriage of the
parties on the ground of extreme cruelty, (2) to award plaintiff custody of her
child and (3) to direct respondent to pay her $ 50 monthly for the infant's
support until she attains her majority.  During plaintiff's sojourn in Reno she
continued to be under the dominance of defendant and received his frequent
letters directing her to hasten the divorce proceeding and to return home as
soon as possible.

XI.  In departing from Long Beach for Reno plaintiff did not intend to reside or
to remain in Nevada permanently or for an indefinite period, but purposed to
stay there only so long as was necessary to secure a divorce and then to return
to her Long Beach home.  She left Nevada on the very day the decree of divorce
was granted, immediately returned to her said Long Beach home, at which she
resumed marital relations with defendant at his request, and there continued
such relations until December, 1945.  She resided in the home at the time of
filing the amended complaint, June 11, 1946.

   Count Two

   Count two, by express declaration in its first paragraph, adopts only that
part of count one which alleges the marriage, the issue and the Los Angeles
County residence of both parties.

    II.  While plaintiff was physically sick and mentally distraught, which was
known to defendant, she was under the control and dominance of defendant on
August 30, 1944, and by reason of said condition of health and of said control
of defendant she was unable to exercise an independent judgment.

   III.  She then executed a property settlement agreement which purported to
settle the property affairs of herself and husband, whereby she relinquished all
interest in the home of the parties and in the movable property therein other
than her own personal effects and accepted $ 1,000 as her share of the community
property in satisfaction and discharge of defendant's obligation to support her.
Such sum was less than plaintiff's interest in the community estate. She will
credit such payment upon  any sum awarded as her interest in said estate.

   IV. Such agreement was prepared by attorneys selected by defendant and was
executed by plaintiff without first having an opportunity to gain independent
legal advice as to her rights against defendant relating to said community
property and to her support by defendant.  She was advised and urged by said
attorneys and defendant to execute the agreement as being for her best
interests.  She was then upset and ill, inexperienced in such matters and was
not informed of her right to independent legal advice as to her legal position
and privileges.  The agreement was unfair to plaintiff and was against public
policy.

V. Following the execution of the purported agreement the parties continually
engaged in marital relations in the family home until December 25, 1945, with
the exception of the period of plaintiff's sojourn in Nevada.

   The merits of the general demurrer to count one are to be tested by the
allegations of fact with respect to (1) the jurisdiction of the Nevada court *,
(2) appellant's conscious participation  in imposing upon that court, and (3)
the abuse of her confidence by respondent.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*   Section
9460, Nevada Compiled Laws, provides: "Divorce from the bonds of matrimony may
be obtained by complaint, under oath, to the district court of any county in
which the cause therefor shall have accrued, or in which the defendant shall
reside or be found, or in which the plaintiff shall reside, or in which the
parties last cohabited, or if plaintiff shall have resided six weeks in the
state before suit be brought, for the following causes, or any other cause
provided by law: . . .

   Sixth.  Extreme cruelty of either party."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The Merits of Count One

     The jurisdiction of any court to grant a divorce is determined by the bona
fide domicile of at least one of the spouses. Where neither has established a
statutory domicile in the state with honest intentions to reside there
permanently or indefinitely, a decree of divorce by a court of such state based
upon the simulated residence of the plaintiff only is void.  Such decree may be
impeached collaterally by extrinsic evidence.  This is true notwithstanding
either the recitals of such decree or the false testimony given by the plaintiff
in support of the judgment.  ( Crouch v. Crouch, 28 Cal.2d 243, 249 [169 P.2d
897]; Williams v. North Carolina, 325 U.S. 226 [65 S.Ct. 1092, 89 L.Ed. 1577,
157 A.L.R. 1366].) The allegations of count one emphasize the facts of (1)
appellant's actual and continuous domicile in California, (2) her intention to
visit Reno solely for the purpose of obtaining a divorce, (3) her illness and
respondent's dominance over her at the time of her departure for and her sojourn
in Nevada, (4) her prompt return to Long Beach and the resumption and
continuance of the marital relation for more than a year thereafter.  Since the
Nevada court did not have jurisdiction to determine the cause, its decree is
void.

     In all domestic concerns each state of the Union is to be deemed an
independent sovereignty.  As such, it is its province and its duty to forbid
interference by another state as well as by any foreign power with the status of
its own citizens.  Unless at least one of the spouses is a resident thereof in
good faith, the courts of such sister state or of such foreign power cannot
acquire jurisdiction to dissolve the marriage of those who have an established
domicile in the state which resents such interference with matters which disturb
its social serenity or affect the morals of its inhabitants.   Jurisdiction over
divorce proceedings of residents of California by the courts of a sister state
cannot be conferred by agreement of the litigants.   As protector of the morals
of her people it is the duty of a court of this commonwealth to prevent the
dissolution of a marriage by the decree of a court of another jurisdiction
pursuant to the collusion of the spouses. If by surrendering its power it evades
the performance of such duty, marriage will ultimately be considered as a formal
device and its dissolution freed from legal inhibitions.   Not only is a divorce
of California  residents by a court of another state void because  of the
plaintiff's lack of bona fide residence in the foreign state, but it is void
also for lack of the court's jurisdiction over the State of California.   This
state is a party to every marriage contract of its own residents as well as the
guardian of their morals.  Not only can the litigants by their collusion not
confer jurisdiction upon Nevada courts over themselves but neither can they
confer such jurisdiction over this state.

     It therefore follows that a judgment of divorce by a court of Nevada
without first having pursuant to its own laws acquired jurisdiction over one of
the parties is a void decree and may be impeached in the state of the domicile
and its effect erased by showing that the Nevada court had no jurisdiction of
the parties.  ( Kegley v. Kegley, 16 Cal.App.2d 216, 220 [60 P.2d 482]; Ryder v.
Ryder, 2 Cal.App.2d 426, 433 [37 P.2d 1069].) Such decree may always be attacked
for lack of jurisdiction in the foreign court.  ( Crouch v. Crouch, supra, 250.)

     It is equally well settled that the collusion of the parties is sufficient
to render the decree voidable even though the court had had jurisdiction and
respondent had not fraudulently induced her to institute the Nevada proceeding.
( Ryder v. Ryder, supra.)

     The contention that appellant is estopped to plead the nullity of a void
decree because (1) it was procured by her in an alien jurisdiction and (2) was
the result of her instituting the action in another state in collusion with
respondent is not supported.  Generally, estoppel will not prevail to support
either a decree granted by a foreign court without jurisdiction of the parties
or a decree obtained by a wife at the direction of her husband.  ( Code Civ.
Proc., § 1916; Ryder v. Ryder, supra; Estate of Bruneman, 32 Cal.App.2d 606, 608
[90 P.2d 323]; Kegley v. Kegley, supra.) This rule is emphasized in the instant
case by the fraudulent conduct of respondent in inducing appellant to procure a
divorce and to visit Nevada for that purpose at his expense.  In the Kegley
decision whose facts parallel those at bar the appellant urged in support of his
plea of estoppel Bisconer v. Billing, 71 Cal.App. 779 [236 P. 329]; Eaton v.
Wilkins , 163 Cal. 742 [127 P. 71]; and Bruguiere v. Bruguiere, 172 Cal. 199
[155 P. 988, Ann.Cas. 1917E 122].  The first two are distinguished by their
facts and cast no light upon the issues here involved except that in the
Bisconer case the court held that there can be no estoppel in pais against a
plaintiff where he does not know the full truth  of the facts constituting the
basis of the alleged estoppel. In the Bruguiere case plaintiff's husband had
visited Nevada for the purpose of obtaining a divorce. Although the decree
granted him was void for lack of jurisdiction in the court, Mrs. Bruguiere
contracted another marriage. After it had been annulled by the court of New York
she subsequently sued her first mate for support and maintenance.  Because she
knew that the Nevada decree purported to dissolve her marriage and to give her
freedom to effect a new marital alliance she was estopped to question the
validity of the Nevada divorce. She was free to waive all questions of the
effect upon her of such decree and accept the status it conferred upon her.  The
Bruguiere case and many others hold to the doctrine that a remarriage by a
spouse who has acknowledged the validity of the void decree estops him from
subsequently denying its validity.  Because Mrs. Kegley had not remarried the
court denied the plea of estoppel filed by her husband, annulled the Mexican
decree and granted her a divorce although she had by her wilful appearance in
the Mexican court confessed the cruelties alleged.

   Appellant's position is not different from that of Mrs. Kegley.  While the
latter's decree was granted by the court of a sister republic, she there
confessed herself in the wrong.  While Mrs. Roberts actually sued for the
divorce in a sister state, she was persuaded to do so by the fraudulent
inducements of her husband.  "He was the prime mover in the fraud upon the
Nevada Court." ( Estate of Davis, 38 Cal.App.2d 579, 585 [101 P.2d 761, 102 P.2d
545].) To apply the doctrine of estoppel against her would effectually guarantee
the success  of every husband who is so base and so clever as to convince his
wife that the welfare of herself and her child will be enhanced by the entry of
a divorce decree against him in another state.   Estoppel is to be applied
against wrongdoers, not against the victim of a wrong.  ( Harlan v. Harlan, 70
Cal.App.2d 657, 662 [161 P.2d 490]; Estate of Davis, supra.)   It does not
operate to defeat positive law or public policy. ( Panzer-Hamilton Co. v. Bray,
96 Cal.App. 460, 464 [274 P. 769].)   Where a divorce decree is void it cannot
be given validity by estoppel. ( Garman v. Garman, 102 F.2d 272, 274 [70
App.D.C. 4], citing Kegley v. Kegley, supra.)   When misapplied, the doctrine of
estoppel may be a most effective weapon for the accomplishment of injustice.
(19 Am.Jur. 602.)

     Respondent attacks count one as though it were purely a fraud action
whereby he is accused of obtaining the goods of appellant by his false
representations and promises and as though such averments had been made as a
basis of recovery.  Such is not the office of the allegations of respondent's
fraudulent representations and of appellant's physical, nervous and mental
infirmities.  While the misrepresentations are not traversed and the causes of
appellant's bodily and mental ills are not alleged at length, yet the
declarations of the pleading show that respondent had the confidence of
appellant and that she believed his statement that it was for her own best
interest to do as he requested.  Her mind and body had been weakened; she was
mentally distressed and distraught by reason of her infirmities, and on account
of such afflictions was incapable of exercising an independent judgment with
respect to respondent's statements.  By the demurrer he confesses that while she
was debilitated as a result of childbirth and of his demands that she obtain a
divorce he told her not only that his own financial interests and welfare would
be advanced but also that the best interests of her child and herself would be
served by his being divorced from her, and that such divorce quietly obtained in
another state would not interfere with her marital relations or rob her of her
position as his wife or of living in their Long Beach home.  He confesses that
he urged her to hasten her departure for Reno; that he supplied her with the
name of an attorney residing there who would aid her in consummating the fraud;
that he effected her departure within two days after he had gained her promise
to go to Nevada to obtain a decree; and that he provided her with all funds
necessary for her to accomplish his plans which were a fraud upon the courts of
California as well as of Nevada.

   Respondent contends that when a wife agrees with her husband that she will
visit a foreign jurisdiction to obtain a decree of divorce based upon her
simulated residence she cannot thereafter repudiate the decree thus obtained by
her.  In support of such thesis he cites and quotes from many authorities.  By
such authorities it is held (1) that in divorce cases, as in others, equity will
not interfere with judgments obtained through collusion ( Hendricks v. Hendricks
, 216 Cal. 321, 323 [14 P.2d 83]; Bancroft v. Bancroft, 178 Cal. 359, 364 [173
P. 579, L.R.A. 1918F 1029]; Ettlinger v. Ettlinger, 46 Cal.App.2d 628, 632 [116
P.2d 482]; Lanktree v. Lanktree,  42 Cal.App. 648, 652 [183 P. 954]); (2) that
where evidence of the alleged coercion, duress or fraud could have been
presented to the court or to an attorney of complainant's own choosing during
the pendency of the action, seasonably to enable the court to protect the rights
of the parties, equity will not disturb the judgment of such court ( Hendricks
v. Hendricks, supra; Godfrey v. Godfrey, 30 Cal.App.2d 370, 379 [86 P.2d 357];
Thompson v. Thompson, 38 Cal.App.2d 377 [101 P.2d 160]); (3) that a party who
has obtained a decree of divorce upon simulated residence in a foreign
jurisdiction is estopped from thereafter attacking the decree as invalid for
want of jurisdiction in the court ( Harlan v. Harlan, supra; Estate of Davis, 38
Cal.App.2d 579, 584 [101 P.2d 761, 102 P.2d 545]; Seymour v. Seymour, 18
Cal.App.2d 481 [64 P.2d 168]; 1 Freeman on Judgments, 5th ed., § 1438; Rest.
Conflict of Laws, § 112).

   While a number of the cited authorities have already been discussed, neither
they nor respondent's thesis are pertinent to the  issues presented by count
one.  In each instance the petitioner who sought to have the foreign decree
annulled was a free moral agent in procuring the divorce, or he had sat
passively by and knowingly acquiesced in the action of his spouse in seeking the
foreign decree, or had financed her litigation, or had enjoyed the fruits of
such decree while acknowledging the validity thereof.  Appellant here was the
agent of respondent in her journey to Nevada and in all that she did while there
in employing an attorney and in procuring a decree. No part of it was her wish;
neither was it her deed.  While weak and ill, she was by fraud persuaded by
respondent to consent to visit Nevada, to follow the directions of a Reno
attorney designated by respondent who paid him, to remain there until a decree
should be entered and then promptly to return to California.  Respondent
confesses these abominable facts.  He is therefore without equity.  With unclean
hands he attempts to thwart the efforts of the person to whom he owes the
highest duty but whom he has foully deceived to her detriment.  By raising the
equitable plea of estoppel he would silence her at the very threshold of the
temple.  Under the long-established principles of equity he cannot shield his
own perfidious wrongs by use of a plea designed to silence only those who have
knowingly invited and accepted the causes of their unhappiness.  His own
estoppel is estopped. The judgment which she would have annulled by the superior
court is the fruitage of  respondent's contempt for good morals and of his
disdain for the law of the state which protects him.  His citing respected
authorities and his chanting fine phrases concerning appellant's procurement of
the divorce do not conceal his guilt of sending his own ill wife away from her
home and her child to Nevada to obtain a divorce by committing perjury and by
imposing upon the courts of that state, knowing that she would return to him
immediately to resume the marital status.  If the plea of estoppel will permit
such a practice it were better that the very foundations of our jurisprudence
should crumble into dust and a new structure for the support of righteousness be
builded.

   Count One not Barred by Laches

     Respondent contends that the filing of this action, April 19, 1946, to
annul the Nevada divorce decree of October 20, 1944, is barred by laches, citing
Rudy v. Slotwinsky, 73 Cal.App. 459, 465 [238 P. 783]; Wattson v. Dillon, 6
Cal.2d 33, 42 [56 P.2d 220]. So to hold would be error.  Upon appellant's return
from Reno following the entry of such decree she acted, and was treated, as the
lawful wife of respondent until December 25, 1945.  As such wife she was his
constant companion for over 14 months; sat at his board and occupied his bed.
His sudden decision at the Christmas season to drive her from the home and to
stand firmly upon the Nevada decree must have administered a shock, requiring
some time for her to adjust her senses to the predicament in which the new turn
of affairs had left her.  Allowing one month for her to reconnoiter the field,
she filed the action within less than three months, a part of which time was of
necessity consumed by counsel in a study of the case and in the preparation of
her pleadings.  Such delay is not unreasonable in view of the circumstances
alleged.  In the Wattson case, supra, the action to vacate a final decree was
begun seven months after its entry, while in the Rudy case the action to set
aside the decree was begun a year after the first judgment.  And in neither of
them was any such equitable ground for relief alleged as that by appellant
herein in addition to the lack of jurisdiction in the Nevada court and the fraud
upon the courts of California.

     The doctrine of laches is not to be arbitrarily applied.  Whether a delay
is unreasonable must be adjudged by the circumstances which occasioned it, by
the nature of the relief demanded and by a determination that the rights of the
defendant or of others have not been prejudiced by the delay.   ( Swart v.
Johnson, 48 Cal.App.2d 829, 834 [120 P.2d 699].) It would be unreasonable to say
that any right of respondent suffered prejudice by reason of appellant's not
having filed her action at an earlier date.

   It follows that count one does state a valid cause of action; that by
treating its  conclusions as harmless surplusage the special demurrers count for
nought; that by confession of respondent the Nevada decree is void, and that the
third count states a valid cause of action. In view of the foregoing the
demurrers to the first and third counts should have been overruled.

   Count Two

   As to the second count of the complaint appellant's position is not so
favorable.  By this cause appellant seeks to have annulled a contract of
property settlement executed in this state.  An attack upon that agreement is
not to be aided by the invalidity of the divorce decree. Neither may it find
support in count one except by such of the latter's allegations as were by
adoption made a part of count two.  Even though by the doctrine of judicial
notice this court could determine that the nullity of the Nevada decree is to be
read into count two, such fact would not necessarily so support the second count
as to exempt it from the statutory rules of pleading by which it must be
measured.

      Since a separate general demurrer was not lodged against count two, only
the special demurrers thereto can be considered.  ( Lord v. Garland, 27 Cal.2d
840, 850 [168 P.2d 5].) Certain of its allegations are ambiguous, uncertain or
unintelligible.   To plead that the sum of $ 1,000 accepted by her as her share
of the community property "was less than the interest of plaintiff in said
community estate," does not state the extent of plaintiff's interest or the
extent of her title in and to the property which she claims was the community
estate. ( California Trust Co. v. Gustason, 15 Cal.2d 268, 273 [101 P.2d 74].)
Not facts but only a conclusion is declared.  In order to have alleged with
certainty the detriment suffered by her in accepting $ 1,000 for her interest in
the community estate it was necessary for her not only to describe the property
and to allege its reasonable value but also to set out facts disclosing the
extent of her community interest.  ( Burkett v. Griffith, 90 Cal. 532, 541 [27
P. 527, 25 Am.St.Rep. 151, 13 L.R.A. 707]; Hencken v. City of Morgan Hill, 21
Cal.App.2d 438, 442  [69 P.2d 462].) The allegations do not make it certain
whether the property in question was acquired wholly with community funds or
whether a definite portion of the purchase price had been paid by the defendant
with his separate funds and a different proportion of the purchase price was
paid with community funds.  The allegation that $ 1,000 was less than
plaintiff's interest is a mere conclusion; is only inferential and
argumentative.  Without the curing of such defect the special demurrer is fatal
to the pleading.   A fact which constitutes an essential element of a cause of
action cannot be left to an inference.  ( Los Angeles v. Signoret, 50 Cal. 298;
Johnson v. Fletcher, 97 Cal.App. 153, 156 [274 P. 1001].)

     The allegations of paragraph IV of the second count "that plaintiff was
without any opportunity by her to receive independent legal advice as to her
rights against the defendant relating to the community property of the parties
and to her support and maintenance by him," and "that said purported agreement
was unfair and unjust to her . . . and is against public policy and therefore
void," are inferential and argumentative statements, conclusions and not direct
averments of material facts.  ( Hauser  v. Pacific Gas & Electric Co., 133
Cal.App. 222, 225 [23 P.2d 1068]; Osborn v. Hoyt, 181 Cal. 336, 339 [184 P. 854]
; Baker v. Miller, 190 Cal. 263, 266 [212 P. 11].) No issue of fact is raised by
such statements; no facts are alleged to show that the agreement was unfair.
Instead of such declarations the pleading should contain averments showing the
facts (1) whereby she was debarred from opportunity to obtain independent legal
advice, (2) whereby the advice she received was not for her advantage, and (3)
from which the injustice of the agreement could be derived.   The same vice
obtains in the allegation that "plaintiff was also under the influence, control
and dominance of defendant." Such language is a conclusion.  To have made such
charge effective appellant should have declared the facts that might show
whether his dominance was due merely to the conjugal relationship or to her fear
of denying his wishes or to her fear of losing custody of her child.   Also the
allegations that  "had she been so informed and represented, she would not have
entered into and executed the said purported agreement nor have accepted the
consideration and benefits to her therein expressed; . . . said purported
agreement . . . is unfair and unjust to plaintiff" are mere conclusions.

   While count two alleges that the agreement was prepared by counsel of
respondent's selection "without any opportunity  by her to receive independent
legal advice," thereby implying that appellant was defrauded by respondent, yet
there is no allegation that the advice given her was illegal or unwise.   While
the pleading sounds primarily in undue influence, it makes no averment that her
illness rendered her incapable of understanding the transaction.  Since there is
no allegation of either fraud, menace or duress, the only attempt to plead an
equitable cause is to be found in the language that she was "physically sick and
in a highly nervous and mentally distraught state which was well known to
defendant; . . . was also under the influence, control and dominance of
defendant; that plaintiff was not, by reason of her said condition of health and
by reason of said influence, control and dominance, able to exercise independent
judgment." Such statements are not ultimate facts but conclusions only, and are
not sufficient to constitute a cause of action. ( Estate of Streeton, 183 Cal.
284, 289 [191 P. 16]; Munfrey v. Cleary, 75 Cal.App.2d 779 [171 P.2d 750];
Estate of Sheppard, 149 Cal. 219, 220 [85 P. 312].)

     The second count contains no allegation of an offer to restore the $ 1,000
paid appellant for her interest in the community estate. There is no allegation
of fact to show that her share exceeds or is equal to $ 1,000.  Her offer is not
sufficient.  There is no allegation by which it can be determined that if the
agreement should be annulled she would in event of a valid divorce be entitled
to any share of the community estate. The title to the property stands in
respondent's name.  On a trial it may develop that it is his separate estate.
Since the action is for rescission and there is no explanation why she did not
return or offer to return the $ 1,000 the special demurrer is fatal to count
two.  ( Clanton v. Clanton, 52 Cal.App.2d 550, 554, 556 [126 P.2d 639]; Hite v.
Mercantile Trust Co., 156 Cal. 765, 767 [106 P. 102].)

   Appellant has cited many authorities ( Davis v. Davis, 49 Cal.App.2d 239 [121
P.2d 523]; Estate of Boeson, 201 Cal. 36 [255 P. 800]; Gaines v.  California
Trust Co., 48 Cal.App.2d 709 [121 P.2d 28]; Norris v. Norris, 50 Cal.App.2d 726
[123 P.2d 847]; Auclair v. Auclair, 72 Cal.App.2d 791 [165 P.2d 527]; Andrew v.
Andrew, 51 Cal.App.2d 451 [125 P.2d 47]; Streeter v. Streeter, 67 Cal.App.2d 138
[153 P.2d 441]) that would serve to support a complaint where reliance is placed
upon undue influence and upon a violation of the confidential relationship.
They do not avail her as support for conclusions instead of ultimate facts.

    Appellant having declined further to amend her complaint to conform with the
rules of pleading this court is without power to grant any relief as to the
property settlement.   A litigant is entitled to prosecute his cause only by
first pleading the nature of relief sought and the ultimate facts by which he
deems himself to be entitled thereto under the law.  If after the court's ruling
that his allegations are ambiguous or uncertain, or unintelligible, he declines
to amend and there is no error in the order, affirmance thereof is the only
answer to his appeal.

   The judgment is affirmed insofar as it relates to the second count.  As to
the first and third counts it is reversed with instructions to overrule the
demurrers as to them.


                              26 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           FRANK C. DEYOE, Petitioner, v. SUPERIOR COURT OF MENDOCINO
                               COUNTY, Respondent

                                 S. F. No. 3642

                          Supreme Court of California

                  140 Cal. 476; 74 P. 28; 1903 Cal. LEXIS 623


                                October 3, 1903

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Rehearing Denied.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    PETITION to the Supreme Court for a Writ of Mandate to the
Superior Court of Mendocino County.  J. Q. White, Judge.

COUNSEL: Mannon & Mannon, for Petitioner.

The act is unconstitutional, as being special legislation regulating practice in
courts of justice (Const., art IV, sec. 25, subd. 3), and in cases where a
general law may be made applicable (Const., art. IV, sec. 25, subd. 33), and is
repugnant to the provision that general laws must have a uniform operation (
Const., art. I, sec. 11), and to the provision that every act "shall embrace but
one subject, which shall be expressed in its title." (Const., art. IV, sec. 24.)
By our fundamental law we are to disregard those provisions of the act not
embraced in the title, and not those provisions of the title exceeded by the
act.  The act adds two new sections to that part of the Civil Code dealing with
"Causes for Denying Divorce," and is not germane to those causes.

H. S. G. McCartney, Camp & Lissner, J. W. McKinley, and William J. Hunsaker as
Amici   Curiae, for Respondent.

The law of divorce is a distinct branch of the law, in which the public have an
interest, and its procedure is anomalous and sui generis.  ( McBain v. McBain,
77 Cal. 509; Warner v. Warner, 100 Cal. 11; Nelson on Divorce and Separation,
vol. 1, secs. 1, 6, vol. 2, sec. 813; Estate of Wood, 137 Cal. 132.) The
classification made by the statute is proper, and the law is general in its
application to all actions included within the class.  The constitutional
requirement is met when the act operates uniformly upon the whole of any single
class.  ( Abeel v. Clark, 84 Cal. 226; Cody v. Murphy, 89 Cal. 522; Rode v.
Siebe, 119 Cal. 518; People v. Central Pacific R. R. Co., 105 Cal. 576; People
v. Mullender, 132 Cal. 221.) The legislature has power to regulate divorces, and
to limit or extend the time when the decree shall be made absolute.  ( Estate of
Wood, 137 Cal. 132; Bigelow v. Bigelow, 108 Mass. 38, 40; Sparhawk v. Sparhawk,
116 Mass. 318.) The title of the act in question is comprehensive enough to
include all the provisions in controversy.  (Black on Constitutional Law, p.
329,  and cases cited; People v. Mullender, 132 Cal. 219; Ex parte Liddell, 93
Cal. 635.)

JUDGES: In Bank.  Angellotti, J.  Van Dyke, J., Beatty, C. J., Lorigan, J.,
Shaw, J., McFarland, J., and Henshaw, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: ANGELLOTTI

OPINION

     Petitioner applied to this court for a writ of mandate, requiring
respondent, the superior court of  Mendocino County, to enter a final judgment
of divorce in an action pending in said court, in which petitioner is plaintiff,
and his wife, Annie I. Deyoe, is defendant.  An alternative writ was issued, and
the matter submitted for decision upon the petition and argument of counsel.

   The action for divorce was instituted by petitioner on April 10, 1903, and
the divorce was asked on the ground of desertion.  The defendant therein, having
been served with summons, as appears from the return of the sheriff of Riverside
County, failed to appear, and her default was entered.  Testimony was then
taken, and on June 22, 1903, the superior court made and caused to be filed its
findings of fact and conclusions of law, constituting its decision, whereby it
found that all of the allegations of the complaint are true, and that plaintiff,
petitioner here, is entitled to a divorce from said defendant.  The petitioner
asked that final judgment in his favor be thereupon entered, but the court
refused to make any order for a final decree, and ordered an interlocutory
decree entered.  On June 29, 1903, the judge of said court signed, and the clerk
entered, the so-called interlocutory decree, whereby it was ordered, adjudged,
and decreed "that the said plaintiff, Frank C. Deyoe, is entitled to a divorce
from his said wife, the defendant, Annie I. Deyoe." The clerk of the said court
has refused, on demand made, to enter any other judgment.

   Admittedly, the action of the superior court was in strict accord with the
provisions of an act of the legislature of the state, relating to actions for
divorce, approved March 2, 1903, (Stats. 1903, p. 75).  It is, however, claimed
by petitioner that said act of the legislature is unconstitutional; that
consequently, the superior court having rendered its decision in favor of
petitioner, it is the duty of that court to enter final judgment in accordance
with that decision, and that mandamus will lie to compel the performance of that
duty.  The act in question (Stats.  1903, p. 75) is as follows, viz: --

    "An act to amend the Civil Code by adding two new sections thereto, to be
numbered one hundred and thirty-one and one hundred and thirty-two, to title
one, of part one, chapter two, article three, relating to actions for divorce.
(Approved March 2, 1903.)

   "The people of the state of California, represented in senate and assembly do
enact as follows:

    "Section 1. The Civil Code of California is hereby amended by adding two new
sections to title one, part one, chapter two, article three, to be numbered
sections one hundred thirty-one and one hundred thirty-two, to read as follows:

   "131. In actions for divorce the court must file its decision and conclusions
of law as in other cases, and if it determines that no divorce shall be granted,
final judgment must thereupon be entered accordingly.  If it determines that the
divorce ought to be granted an interlocutory judgment must be entered, declaring
that the party in whose favor the court decides is entitled to a divorce, and
from such interlocutory judgment an appeal may be taken within six months after
its entry, in the same manner and with like effect as if the judgment were
final.

   "132. When one year has expired after the entry of such interlocutory
judgment, the court on motion of either party, or upon its own motion, may enter
the final judgment granting the divorce, and such final judgment shall restore
them to the status of single persons, and permit either to marry after the entry
thereof; and such other and further relief as may be necessary to complete
disposition of the action, but if any appeal is taken from the interlocutory
judgment or motion for a new trial made, final judgment shall not be entered
until such motion or appeal has been finally disposed of, nor then, if the
motion has been granted or judgment reversed.  The death of either party after
the entry of the interlocutory judgment does not impair the power of the court
to enter final judgment as hereinbefore provided; but such entry shall not
validate any marriage contracted by either party before the entry of such final
judgment, nor constitute any defense of any criminal prosecution made against
either.

   "Sec. 2. All acts or parts of acts in conflict with the provisions of this
act are hereby repealed."

   Petitioner contends that this act is a special law, regulating the practice
of courts of justice, and therefore repugnant to the provisions of subdivision 3
of section 25 of article IV of the constitution.  It is there provided that "The
legislature shall not pass local or special laws in any of the following
enumerated cases, that is to say, . . .  Regulating the practice of courts of
justice."

    That the act does attempt to regulate the practice of courts of justice in
relation to a special class of cases is undeniable.  Ordinarily, a party in
whose favor a case has been decided is entitled to have final judgment entered (
Code Civ. Proc., secs. 633, 654), while the effect of the act in question is to
postpone the entry of final judgment granting a divorce for one year, and if any
appeal has been taken from the so-called interlocutory judgment or decision, or
motion for new trial made, until the determination of the same.  But the mere
fact that it operates only on one class of cases does not make it repugnant to
the constitutional provision. Our statutes contain many provisions regulating
the practice of courts of justice, applicable only to certain classes of actions
or special proceedings, made necessary by the nature of the objects and purposes
of the various classes.  The legislature has the right to enact laws applicable
only to one class of its citizens where the classification is authorized by the
constitution, or is based upon intrinsic differences requiring different
legislation.  The law in this regard was well stated by this court, through Mr.
Justice Harrison, in People v. Central Pacific R. R. Co., 105 Cal. 576, 584,
where it was said: "A law which operates only upon a class of individuals is
none the less a general law, if the individuals to whom it is applicable
constitute a class which requires legislation peculiar to itself in the matter
covered by the law.  The class, however, must not only be germane to the purpose
of the law, but must also be characterized by some substantial qualities or
attributes which render such legislation necessary or appropriate for the
individual members of the class.  It may be 'founded on some natural or
intrinsic or constitutional distinction' ( Pasadena v. Stimson, 91 Cal. 251),
but the distinction must be of such a nature as to reasonably indicate the
necessity or propriety of legislation restricted to that class." (See, also,
Rode v. Siebe , 119 Cal. 518.) The classification must not be arbitrary, for the
mere purpose of classification, but must be founded upon some natural or
intrinsic or constitutional distinction which will suggest a reason which might
rationally be held to justify the diversity in the legislation.  ( Pasadena v.
Stimson, 91 Cal. 238, 251; Darcy v. Mayor etc., 104 Cal. 642.)

   If the individuals to whom the legislation is applicable constitute  a class
characterized by some substantial qualities or attributes of such a character as
to indicate the necessity or propriety of certain legislation restricted to that
class, such legislation, if applicable to all members of that class, is not
violative of our constitutional provisions against special legislation.  This we
do not understand to be seriously disputed by those who assail the act in
question.  But it is strenuously urged that there is no such distinction between
the class of actions to which this law is made applicable, -- i. e. all actions
wherein it is determined that a marriage should be dissolved --  and other
actions as will justify the legislature in prescribing a different rule as to
the entry of final judgment from that applicable in ordinary cases.  In this
contention we cannot concur.  In every civilized country marriage is recognized
as the most important relation in life, and one in which the state is vitally
interested.  The right of the legislative department to determine upon what
conditions and in what manner the marriage relation may be entered into, and,
having been entered into, for what causes and in what manner it may be
dissolved, is unquestioned.  The well-recognized public policy relating to
marriage is to foster and protect it, to make it a permanent and public
institution, to encourage the parties to live together, and to prevent
separation and illicit unions.  (See 1 Nelson on Divorce and Separation, sec.
1.) This policy finds expression in probably every state in this country in
legislative enactments designed to prevent the sundering of the marriage ties
for slight or trivial causes, or by the agreement of the husband and wife, or in
any case, except upon full and satisfactory proof of such facts as have been by
the legislature declared to be a cause for divorce. Such provisions find their
justification only in this well-recognized interest of the state in the
permanency of the marriage relation. While an action to obtain a decree
dissolving the relation of husband and wife is nominally an action between two
parties, the state, because of its interest in maintaining the same, unless good
cause for its dissolution exists, is an interested party.  It has been said by
eminent writers upon the subject that such an action is really a triangular
proceeding, in which the husband and the wife and the state are parties.  It was
said by this court in McBlain v. McBlain, 77 Cal. 507,  in reversing the order
of the court below refusing to set aside a default: "The courts should be very
liberal in granting applications to set aside defaults in divorce cases.  . . .
The parties to the action are not the only people interested in the result
thereof.  The public has an interest in the result of every suit for divorce.
The policy and the letter of the law concur in guarding against collusion and
fraud, and it should be the aim of the court to afford the fullest possible
hearing in such matters." (See, also, Warner v. Warner, 100 Cal. 11, 14; Hatton
v. Hatton, 136 Cal. 353, 356; Newman v. Freitas, 129 Cal.  283, 289.)

   It has long been the law of this state that a divorce shall not be granted
upon the default of the defendant, or upon the uncorroborated evidence of the
parties (Civ. Code, sec. 130), and that a divorce must not be granted unless the
plaintiff has been a resident of the state for one year, and of the county in
which the action is brought for three months next preceding the commencement of
the action.  (Civ. Code, sec. 128.) In discussing this provision of our divorce
law, this court said in Warner v. Warner, 100 Cal. 11: "The state has an
interest in the result of such cases.  The public welfare demands that the bonds
of matrimony should not be lightly set aside, and there is less probability of
successful collusion or unfair advantage where the parties have both resided and
are known than there is in a county where neither has resided, and which the
plaintiff may select solely for the purpose of procuring a divorce." The
provisions above referred to and others contained in our Civil Code, applicable
only to divorce cases, can, as already stated, be sustained only on the theory
of the interest of the state in the maintenance of the marriage relation. We
presume that no one would question their validity, even though some of them do
regulate the practice of courts of justice in divorce cases.

   It is evident that a proceeding to dissolve the marriage relation is, by
reason of the interest of the state, intrinsically different from the ordinary
action, and that the difference is such as not only to justify, but in many
cases to necessitate, special rules of procedure.  As has been said, a suit for
divorce is sui generis.  If the action were the ordinary action between two
parties who alone were interested in the result, it might  be difficult to give
any good reason for a special rule as to the giving of final judgment, or indeed
for any of the provisions specially applicable to divorce cases, already
referred to.  But this interest of the state is sufficient to distinguish it
from all other cases, and to make it one concerning which the legislature is
authorized to enact such laws of procedure as may rationally be held to protect
that interest.  It might be contended with much force that an act of the
legislature providing for the postponement of the giving of a final decree of
divorce for a specified time after the finding that a party was entitled thereto
was fully justified by the  fact that the parties might be reconciled during
such time and a final separation thus obviated.  We find in the statutes of some
of the states provisions for a decree nisi in divorce cases, which decrees are
made absolute only after the expiration of a specified number of years, if the
parties have continued to live separate and apart.  There would seem to be no
question as to the right of a legislature to so regulate divorces. ( Bigelow v.
Bigelow, 108 Mass. 40.) Again, it might be contended with much force that such
legislation was justified, upon the theory that the postponement of the giving
of final judgment for a specified time removes to some extent the temptation to
resort to collusion or fraud in order to obtain a speedy divorce and contract a
new marriage. It is not, however, necessary to base our decision as to the
constitutionality of the act in question upon either of these grounds.  It is
the settled law of this state that the effect of the rendition of a final
judgment of divorce is to at once restore the parties to the state of unmarried
persons, regardless of the fact that the judgment is appealable, and regardless
of the fact that it may be set aside on motion.  The divorced person becomes
unmarried immediately upon the rendition of the decree, and may at once contract
another marriage. (See Estate of Wood, 137 Cal. 129, 130, 137, and cases there
cited.) The husband or wife so taken by the subsequently contracted marriage
would, however, be taken, as said by the chief justice in Estate of Wood, 137
Cal. 129, "subject to the contingency of being displaced by the reversal of an
appealable and possibly erroneous decree," which appeal might be taken within
six months of the entry of the judgment.  Within six months from the rendition
of the judgment the trial court might relieve  the party against whom judgment
was rendered from such judgment, on the ground of mistake, inadvertence,
surprise, or excusable neglect (Code Civ. Proc., sec. 473), and thus displace
the new husband or wife.  As is well known, many divorce judgments are procured
upon substituted service of summons, and, as was said by Mr. Justice Temple in
Estate of Wood, 137 Cal. 129, "In such case the court may, and upon a proper
showing should, allow the defendant to answer to the merits within one year
after the rendition of the decree. (Code Civ. Proc., sec. 473.)" Such permission
would vacate the decree and displace the husband or wife taken by the second
marriage. As was said by Mr. Justice Temple in the case last cited, "Any
civilized people would desire to avoid such possibilities." There can, of
course, be no doubt of the right of the legislature to enact such laws as will
guard against such possibilities.  This was attempted by the legislature by the
amendment of February 25, 1897, to section 61 of the Civil Code, whereby it was
provided that a subsequent marriage is void from its inception, unless "the
former marriage has been annulled or dissolved; provided, that, in case it be
dissolved, the decree of divorce must have been rendered and made at least one
year prior to such subsequent marriage." This amendment was, however, found to
be inadequate, for it was held that it could not affect a marriage solemnized in
a foreign jurisdiction, and it was also clear that it would not suspend the
effect of the decree pending a decision on an appeal.  ( Estate of Wood, 137
Cal. 129.) The change made by the decree of divorce in the status of the parties
and the existence of the possibilities already stated distinguish a decree of
divorce from every other judgment known to our law, and fully justify the
legislature in providing, because of the interest of the state, that no final
decree of divorce shall be made until it shall have been finally and irrevocably
determined that a divorce should be granted.  This, in our judgment, the
legislature has done by the act in question.  It is urged that if this be the
object of the act, it is not accomplished, as an appeal may still be taken from
the subsequent final judgment, after the parties have been restored to the state
of unmarried persons.  There is no merit in this contention.  Whether or not all
the issues made by the pleadings in a divorce case must be  determined by the
"interlocutory judgment," it is not necessary here to decide, but it is clear
that the question as to whether a party is entitled to a divorce must be
determined thereby.  An appeal from that determination is given by the act, and
such determination is thereby "taken out of the category of orders examinable
upon appeal from the final judgment." In this respect, the intermediary judgment
occupies, as to the matters properly embraced therein, the same position as an
interlocutory decree in partition, and is not reviewable upon the appeal from
the final judgment. (Code Civ. Proc., sec. 956; McCortney v. Fortune, 42 Cal.
387; Regan v. McMahon, 43 Cal. 625; Barham v. Hostetter, 67 Cal. 272; Barry v.
Barry, 56 Cal. 10; Gutierrez v. Hebbard, 106 Cal. 167.)

   It is further urged that there is no sound reason why the law should apply
only to those actions for divorce in which it is found that a party is entitled
to a divorce. The answer to this is to be found in what has already been said as
to the peculiar nature and effect of a decree awarding a divorce.  The
distinction in this regard between such a decree and one denying a divorce is
too obvious to merit discussion.

   Much reliance is placed by petitioner upon the decision of this court in
Cullen v. Glendora Water Co., 113 Cal. 503, wherein it was held that a certain
provision of an act supplemental to the act generally known as the Wright Act
(Stats. 1889, p. 212), providing for the judicial examination, approval, and
confirmation of proceedings for the issue and sale of bonds issued under the
provisions of the Wright Act, was in violation of the provision of the
constitution against local or special laws regulating the practice of courts of
justice.  The provision there held violative of that portion of the constitution
was one to the effect that a motion for a new trial could be made only on the
minutes of the court.  The effect of this provision was not only to deny the
right to move for a new trial on a statement of the case or a bill of
exceptions, as permitted in all other cases, but also to preclude a motion for a
new trial on any of four grounds upon which a motion could be made only on
affidavits.  It was said by the court that this provided for a limited species
of judicial proceedings, a mode of moving for a new trial materially different
from that provided by the general law relative to new trials, "without any
reason or  necessity for the difference arising from any peculiar characteristic
of the class of proceedings to which it is applied, nor from any other source."
It is possible that a similar provision applicable to divorce cases would be
invalid for the same reason, for it would be difficult to conceive of any reason
why a party to such an action should be restricted in the rights given other
litigants to move for a new trial upon certain grounds and in a certain manner.
But, as we have already attempted to show, the nature and effect of a decree of
divorce are such as to justify the special method as to the time and manner of
giving final judgment of divorce provided for by this act.  We find nothing in
the opinion in Cullen v. Glendora Water Co., 113 Cal. 503, that is contrary to
what has been said herein.  Our conclusion is, that the act in question is not
violative of the provision of our constitution prohibiting the enactment of
local or special laws regulating the practice of courts of justice.

   What has been said disposes of the objection that the act is violative of
subdivision 33 of section 25 of article IV, which prohibits the enactment of a
special law, "in all other cases where a general law can be made applicable,"
and of the objection that it interferes with the uniform operation of a general
law -- to wit, section 633 of the Code of Civil Procedure -- providing for the
entry of judgment in ordinary cases, and hence is repugnant to section 11 of
article I of the constitution, which provides that all laws of a general nature
shall have a uniform operation.  As was said in Hellman v. Shoulters, 114 Cal.
136, "It has been uniformly held that a law is general which applies to all of a
class -- the classification being a proper one."

   It is further claimed that the provisions of the act relative to the entry of
an interlocutory judgment instead of a final judgment are not embraced within
the subject expressed in the title, and are consequently void under section 24
of article IV of the constitution, which provides as follows, viz.: "Every act
shall embrace but one subject, which subject shall be expressed in its title.
But if any subject shall be embraced in an act which shall not be expressed in
its title, such act shall be void only as to so much thereof as shall not be
expressed in its title." The title of the act, as already  stated, is, "An act
to amend the Civil Code by adding two new sections thereto, to be numbered one
hundred thirty-one and one hundred thirty-two, to title one, of part one,
chapter two, article three, relating to actions for divorce." The statement in
the title that the purpose of the act is to "amend" the Civil Code may be
disregarded, for it further clearly appears in the title that all that is
intended thereby is the addition to said code of two new sections "relating to
actions for divorce." The title, then, shows that the act is simply one to add
two new sections to the Civil Code, to be numbered 131 and 132, "relating to
actions for divorce." Such a title is sufficient to embrace every provision of
the act, with the possible exception of the provision as to the effect of the
final judgment on the status of the parties (which subject is fully covered by
section 91 of the Civil Code), and the provision that the entry of final
judgment shall not validate any marriage contracted by either party before the
entry, nor constitute any defense of any criminal proceeding made against
either.  (See Civ. Code, sec. 61, as amended, Stats.  1903, p. 176.) As to
whether or not these provisions can be held to be included in the title of the
act in question is not important or necessary to here decide, for the
determination of that question can in no way impair the validity of the
remaining provisions.  All of the other provisions of the act clearly relate to
actions for divorce, and are therefore embraced within the subject expressed in
the title.  The only question that could arise in this connection is as to
whether the words "relating to actions for divorce" state the subject with a
sufficient degree of particularity. The constitutional provision requiring the
subject of an act to be expressed in the title has always been liberally
construed, and this court has said that this must be so, because the
constitution itself does not define the degree of particularity required, and
the matter must therefore be left largely to judicial discretion.  It has been
said by this court that if the title contains a reasonable intimation of the
matters under legislative consideration, the public cannot complain ( Ex parte
Liddell, 93 Cal. 633, 638); that it is not required that the title shall
disclose the purpose and scope of the act, but it is sufficient if it
intelligently refers the reader to the subject to which the act applies, or
which is affected by it ( Hellman v.  Shoulters, 114 Cal. 136, 150); and that it
is not necessary that the title of an act should embrace an abstract or
catalogue of its contents.  ( People v. Linda Vista District, 128 Cal. 477,  485
.) It was said in Carpenter v. Furrey, 128 Cal. 665, 668, that the subject of an
act adding a new section providing for the filing of a bond for the benefit of
laborers, materialmen, and subcontractors, and for a penalty in case the bond
was not filed as required, was sufficiently expressed in the following title,
viz: "An act to add a new section to the Code of Civil Procedure of the state of
California, to be numbered section 1203, relating to liens of mechanics and
others." Under the construction given our constitutional provision, it cannot be
held that the title does not state the subject of the act with a sufficient
degree of particularity.

   Some reliance seems to be placed by petitioner upon the fact that this act,
relating almost entirely to procedure in divorce cases, has been placed in the
Civil Code instead of the Code of Civil Procedure.  We cannot see how this in
any way affects the validity of the act.  As was said in Lewis v. Dunne, 134
Cal. 291, 1 "Nearly all of our general laws are arranged for convenience, under
four main headings, to wit: the Civil Code, the Code of Civil Procedure, the
Penal  Code, and the Political Code, -- but no one of these four codes is
complete in itself; legislation under either code is inseparably interwoven with
legislation under the others; and legislation upon any imaginable subject would
not be held invalid because found in any particular code." (See, also, Enos v.
Snyder, 131 Cal. 68. 2)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   86 Am.
St. Rep. 257, and note.
2   82 Am. St. Rep. 330.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The Civil Code was, however, the appropriate place for the legislation in
question, notwithstanding such legislation relates to procedure, for that code
has always contained all provisions of law specially applicable to divorces and
divorce cases, including such special rules relating to procedure therein as
have from time to time been deemed essential by the legislature.

   It is urged that instead of amending the Civil Code, as stated in the title,
the act in fact amends three separate codes, -- the Code of Civil Procedure, the
Civil Code, and the Penal Code.  As already intimated, the act, as shown by the
title, was not an act to "amend"  any code, but was simply an act to add two new
sections to the Civil Code, "relating to actions for divorce." If it amends any
law, it does so only by implication, and is in no proper sense of the word an
amendment.  (See Hellman v. Shoulters, 114 Cal. 136, 151.)

   An act of the legislature should not be declared unconstitutional by the
courts unless it is clearly apparent that the act is violative of some provision
of the constitution.  Where there is a reasonable doubt as to the validity of
the act, its constitutionality should be affirmed.  "A just deference for the
legislative department enjoins upon the courts the duty to respect its will,
unless the act declaring it be clearly inconsistent with the fundamental law,
which all members of the several departments of the government are sworn to
obey." ( People v. Judge of Twelfth District, 17 Cal. 547.) We see no
constitutional objection to the act in question.

   The application for a peremptory writ of mandate is therefore denied and the
proceeding dismissed.


                              27 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              EVA L. GILB, Respondent, v. FRANK A. GILB, Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 23042

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Three

            170 Cal. App. 2d 379; 339 P.2d 176; 1959 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      2225


                                  May 15, 1959

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  Clarence B. Runkle, Judge.

   Action by wife for divorce, in which husband filed a cross-complaint seeking
an annulment or, in the alternative, a divorce.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1a) (1b) Divorce -- Judgment -- Estoppel to Attack.  -- A husband was estopped
to assert the invalidity of his wife's Nevada divorce from her former husband
where he drove her to Nevada to establish residence there, paid her hotel
expenses while she awaited the divorce, drove her sister to Nevada to visit her,
drove the wife and her sister to the courthouse for the divorce hearing and
drove them both back to this state after the divorce was granted.

(2) Id.--Judgment--Estoppel to Attack.  --The validity of a divorce decree may
not be contested by a party who procured the decree or who remarried in reliance
thereon, or by one who aided another to procure the decree so that the latter
would be free to remarry.

(3) Id.--Appeal--Determination.  --On appeal from the judgment in a divorce
action in which the husband claimed his wife's Nevada divorce from her former
husband was invalid and the trial court found facts that proved the invalidity,
the appellate court, as a matter of law, could not say that the trial court was
required to find that at the time of appellant's marriage to the wife he had no
knowledge of the circumstances under which the Nevada divorce was procured where
appellant had provided transportation to Nevada for the wife and her sister, had
paid the wife's hotel bills and had driven them back to this state after the
divorce was granted.

(4) Id.--Counsel Fees and Costs.  --There was no uncertainty in provisions of a
divorce decree dividing the community property of the parties and authorizing
payment from community funds of the husband's "reasonably necessary" attorney
fees and costs in defending a separate action against him alone, since the
husband could apply to the court for approval of any payment he proposed to make
if in doubt as to whether it was "reasonably necessary."

(5) Id.--Disposition of Property--Equal Division of Community Property.  --In a
divorce action, an award of $ 21,944.94 to the wife was not a charge against the
husband's share of the community property nor an award to the wife of that sum
for attorney's fees, but was merely one step in the process that would
accomplish an equal division of the community property, where such property had
been charged with the sum of $ 23,254 expended by the husband in separate
litigation and where he had paid the wife $ 1,310 as attorney's fees from
community funds.

COUNSEL: Albert G. Bergman for Appellant.

Stanley L. Avery, Jacob W. Silverman and David Daar for Respondent.

JUDGES: Shinn, P. J.  Wood (Parker), J., and Vallee, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: SHINN

OPINION

     Eva sued Frank for divorce. Frank filed a cross-complaint in which he
sought an annulment or, in the alternative, a divorce. After a trial lasting 32
days, the court made findings and entered judgment denying Frank an annulment
and awarding each spouse a divorce upon the ground of  mental cruelty.  The
judgment also contained provisions for the custody and support of the minor
daughter, for a division of the community property, and for the  payment from
community funds of Frank's reasonable expenses in defending an action for
attorneys' fees brought by his former attorneys and to enable Eva to pay her
costs and attorneys' fees in the present action.

   The court tried first the annulment issue and announced its decision; it then
tried separately the divorce issues which included the community property
issues.  Certain of appellant's contentions in his brief related to the
community property issues.  He furnished a record of the oral proceedings upon
the annulment issue but none as to the divorce and community property issues.
Upon respondent's application for augmentation of the record the court gave
appellant a choice between providing an adequate record or abandoning those
points.  He failed to provide such a record; he abandoned some of his points and
others were stricken from his brief by the court for failure to provide an
adequate record with respect thereto.

   Although the appeal is from the judgment in its entirety, it is limited by
appellant's brief, and the only contentions requiring decision are that
appellant should have been granted an annulment on his cross-complaint and that
the court erred in provisions of the judgment relating to allocations made to
the parties from community funds.

   We shall first consider appellant's contention that the court erred in
denying him an annulment.

   The parties were married in Tijuana, Mexico, on September 2, 1939; they
separated in June 1952.  Eva had previously been married to Marcus P. Kennedy.
The theory of Frank's count for an annulment was that Kennedy was living in
September 1939 and that the prior marriage was still in force.  ( Civ. Code, §
82, subd. 2.) In her answer to the cross-complaint Eva alleged that she obtained
a valid decree of divorce from Kennedy in Las Vegas, Nevada, on May 28, 1937,
and she alleged as affirmative defenses that appellant had waived his right to
contest the Nevada decree, that he was estopped to do so, and that he was guilty
of laches. These defenses were pleaded orally in open court and were tried as if
they had been pleaded in formal fashion.

   The court found: (1) Eva was not a bona fide resident of Nevada at the time
of her divorce from Kennedy.  (2)  Knowing that Eva went to Nevada for the
purpose of divorcing Kennedy and having knowledge of the nature and duration of
her sojourn in Nevada, appellant married her in reliance on her divorce and is
estopped to attack the Nevada decree. (3) The parties cohabited from 1939 to
1952, working together and cooperating in the acquisition of community property
and in the raising of their minor daughter, in reliance upon the validity of
their marriage. Pursuant to these findings the court made conclusions of law to
the effect that Frank is estopped to attack Eva's Nevada decree, that he is
without legal standing to attack it, that he has waived his right to attack it,
and that his claim is barred by laches.

   In urging that he should have been granted an annulment, appellant argues
that the court erred in determining that he was guilty of laches and had no
standing to attack the Nevada decree and that the findings of waiver and
estoppel are without support in the evidence.

   The transcript of the annulment proceedings consists of over 800 pages of
testimony and argument.  The parties were questioned at inordinate length as to
the circumstances of Eva's divorce from Kennedy.  The following undisputed facts
were developed in the evidence.  Eva resided in San Diego, California.  She
married Kennedy in January 1936 but never lived with him.  She met appellant in
June 1936.  Frank was a "sales engineer" in the laundry and dry cleaning
business, traveling a regular route through California, Arizona and Nevada.  In
March or April 1937, he drove plaintiff to Las Vegas where she initiated divorce
proceedings and obtained a divorce from Kennedy on May 28th; she left Nevada a
few days later and never returned there to live.

    Eva testified that she did not change her residence from California to
Nevada solely in order to divorce her former husband. Appellant suggested that
she go to Las Vegas; "He knew that I was going to get a divorce and I wanted a
complete change of residence and to make a complete, all around change, and it
was on his suggestion that I went to Las Vegas, Nevada, to establish my
residence." Appellant paid her hotel bill for the first week or 10 days of her
stay in Las Vegas.  He visited her three or four times and they went out
socially; they also corresponded.  On his last trip to Las Vegas, Frank brought
with him Eva's sister, a Mrs. Dilley.  Appellant drove the sisters back to Los
Angeles after the entry of the divorce decree.

    Mrs. Dilley testified that either on the way to Las Vegas or shortly after
their arrival appellant told her that her sister was "there getting a divorce"
but she paid no attention to his statement until her sister confirmed it.  On
the day of the trial,  Frank drove the sisters to the courthouse but he did not
attend the proceedings.  Immediately after the trial respondent packed all her
belongings and the three drove away and spent a week together before returning
to their homes.

   Appellant's testimony was in sharp conflict with that of Mrs. Gilb and her
sister. He allowed Eva to accompany him on a business trip to Arizona in October
1936 and at that time she told him she had been married and divorced.  When he
told her in March or April 1937 that he was going to Las Vegas on his regular
business route she asked to come along and he drove her to Las Vegas; the trip
took 15 days during which he stopped overnight in various cities to call on
customers.  Eva did not tell him she was planning to get a divorce in Las Vegas
or to change her residence.  He left Las Vegas on the third day following their
arrival.  He did not pay Eva's hotel bill but he stayed in a separate room in
the same hotel. He visited her three times while passing through Las Vegas on
his regular route. He did not pay the expenses of her divorce. He took Mrs.
Dilley with him on his last trip to Nevada at her request; she told him she was
going on a vacation.  He denied having driven the sisters to the courthouse. He
drove the sisters back to Los Angeles at their request.  He first learned that
Eva had obtained a divorce in Nevada in November or December 1939, when Eva told
him that she had gone to Nevada for the sole purpose of divorcing Kennedy and
not in order to establish a bona fide residence.

     We have concluded that the evidence amply supports the challenged finding
that appellant is barred by estoppel from asserting the invalidity of
respondent's divorce from her former husband. Since this finding, having support
in the evidence, compels an affirmance of the judgment denying Gilb an
annulment, we deem it unnecessary to discuss the question of laches and waiver
of the right to sue.

     The validity of a divorce decree may not be contested by a party who has
procured the decree, or a party who has remarried in reliance thereon, or by one
who has aided another to procure the decree so that the latter will be free to
remarry.  (Estate of Coleman, 132 Cal.App.2d 137 [281 P.2d  567]; Dietrich v.
Dietrich, 41 Cal.2d 497 [261 P.2d 269].)

     The testimony of Mrs. Gilb and her sister, if believed by the court,
clearly established that appellant knew the purpose of the trip to Nevada and
that by paying Eva's hotel expenses and providing transportation for her and her
sister, he materially assisted her in obtaining a divorce. Appellant asserts,
however, that this testimony was unworthy of belief, and that having rejected
Eva's testimony that she intended to become a bona fide residence of Nevada the
court should also have rejected her testimony that appellant urged her to go to
Nevada and was aware of her divorce plans.  We are not persuaded by his
argument.  Mrs. Gilb's pretense that she intended to establish a residence in
Nevada was no doubt influenced by the recollection of what she had sworn to in
the Nevada court.

     Having found facts which proved the invalidity of the Nevada decree, the
court had to determine whether appellant had knowledge of those facts at the
time he married respondent.  Although appellant denied knowledge of the Nevada
divorce until after his marriage to respondent, it was for the court to decide
whether his activities were merely those of an innocent and obliging friend or
of one who was ready and willing to help his future wife to obtain her freedom.
We cannot say, as a matter of law, that the court was required to find that at
the time of the marriage appellant had no knowledge of the circumstances under
which the Nevada decree was procured.

     We shall next consider appellant's attack upon the provisions of the
judgment relating to the payment of attorney's fees and costs of suit.

   It was stipulated upon the trial of the cross-action for divorce that all the
property of the parties was community property, except for a paid-up policy on
the life of appellant which was stipulated to be his separate property.

   As we have said, each spouse was awarded a divorce upon the ground of
cruelty.  The court was required to order an equal division of the community
property. ( DeBurgh v. DeBurgh, 39 Cal.2d 858, 874 [250 P.2d 598].) The judgment
provided for such a division upon the entry of a final decree, subject to
certain adjustments.  Among the adjustments mentioned therein were the two items
complained of.

   Pursuant to a finding that an action was pending against appellant for fees
allegedly due his former attorneys, the court found: "XIV.  1. Defendant has
expended for his  own litigation, costs and attorney's fees the total sum of $
23,254.94 and Plaintiff has heretofore been allowed by the Court for attorney's
fees and litigation expenses the sum of $ 1,310.00.  Plaintiff does not
presently have sufficient funds on hand to defray her litigation expenses,
including attorney's fees, and an allowance and award shall be made to Plaintiff
out of the first moneys realized from the sale of the community property in the
sum of $ 21,944.94, to enable Plaintiff to defray her litigation costs and
attorney's fees on an equal basis with the Defendant.  Upon the sale of the
community property of the parties, said sum of $ 21,944.94 shall be first paid
and delivered to Plaintiff for such purposes and such sums remaining thereafter
from the sale of the community property of the parties, after payment of all
taxes, involuntary liens or obligations against said property or any part
thereof, shall be divided equally between the parties.  2. $ 500.00 per month is
a reasonable amount to be allowed Defendant as salary for continuing the
operation of the business as set forth in Paragraph VII of the foregoing
Findings.  There is now pending in the above Court, another suit against the
Defendant entitled Donald O. Krag, et al. vs. Defendant, and the Defendant
should be allowed to use community funds to pay only such fees and costs as are
reasonably necessary for the defense thereof." It was found further: "Defendant
is authorized to pay out of community funds only such attorney fees and costs as
are reasonably necessary for the defense of Krag v. Gilb." The judgment
conformed to these findings.

   Appellant says the judgment gives him no method for ascertaining what
payments of costs and attorneys' fees would be "reasonably necessary" in
defending the action of Krag v. Gilb.  He says in his brief: "Appellant is thus
left to the uncertainty of the specification in the order and the position of
lacking information as to what he is or is not permitted to do.  He should not
be subject to the risk of discovering such certainty, for the first time, by the
decision of a court on, or in contempt proceedings." The argument is without
merit.

   As to the other provision, appellant contends that it is ambiguous because it
cannot be determined whether it is one for the payment of attorneys' fees from
his half of the community or a reduction of the  community, half chargeable to
Mrs. Gilb and half to himself.  He argues that if the former, the order was an
abuse of discretion for the reason that the findings upon which it was based are
not the equivalent of  findings that respondent was without the actual financial
ability to pay her costs of suit and attorneys' fees or that $ 21,944.94 was an
amount reasonably necessary to defray her expenses.

   These arguments cannot be maintained.

   There is no uncertainty in either provision.  The judgment states that the
community property will be divided at the time of the entry of a final decree;
that certain judgments will have to be made and some property sold; it specifies
numerous purposes for which defendant may use community funds and it provides
that the court retain jurisdiction to order sales to be made by a referee if the
parties do not agree, such sales to be subject to the court's approval; and the
net proceeds to be equally divided.  Clearly further judicial action would be
necessary before a complete division could be made.

   If defendant is in doubt as to the amount he may use for the defense of the
case of Krag v. Gilb he may apply to the court for approval of any payment he
proposes to make.

   The award to plaintiff of $ 21,944.94 was not a charge against defendant's
share of the community property. It was not an award to plaintiff of that sum
for attorney's fees.  The community property had been charged with the sum of $
23,254 which defendant had expended in his own litigation; he had paid plaintiff
$ 1,310 as attorney's fees, likewise from community funds.   The award to
plaintiff of $ 21,944.94, in addition to what she had received was merely one
step in the process that would accomplish an equal division of the community
property.

   There is and could be no objection to the court's deferring the ultimate
division of the community property to the time of the final decree with respect
to the matters that would call for judicial action in the interim.

   The judgment is affirmed.


                              28 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           JAKE S. DOLGOFF, Appellant, v. MARY H. DOLGOFF, Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 7377

            Court of Appeal of California, Third Appellate District

          81 Cal. App. 2d 146; 183 P.2d 380; 1947 Cal. App. LEXIS 1036


                                 August 1, 1947

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court
was Denied September 29, 1947.  Carter, J., and Schauer, J., Voted for a
Hearing.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from an order of the Superior Court of Yolo County for
maintenance of an infant child.  Mervin C. Lernhart, Judge assigned.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Support and Maintenance of Children--Orders Subsequent to Decree.
--When a court has acquired jurisdiction of the parties to a divorce suit it
retains ancillary jurisdiction to modify the decree of divorce by awarding to
either spouse the custody or necessary maintenance of their minor child, even
though one of the spouses has acquired a residence with the child in another
state.

(2) Id.--Support and Maintenance of Children--Orders Subsequent to Decree.
--Authority to make an allowance to a spouse in a divorce case for maintenance
of a minor child of the parties at any time during such minority is derived from
Civ. Code, § 138, and when such order is made upon due notice to the adverse
party, and both parties appear and participate in the proceeding, it is valid
and binding regardless of actual residence of the applicant therefor, or of
their minor child.

(3) Guardian and Ward--Judicial Appointment--Jurisdiction of Court--Residence of
Minor.  --Jurisdiction to appoint guardians of minor children, unlike
applications for custody or maintenance of minor children in divorce cases under
Civ. Code, § 138, ordinarily depends upon the residence or domicile of the
children.

COUNSEL: J. J. Henderson for Appellant.

Chalmers, Eddy, Cowing & Sans for Respondent.

JUDGES: Thompson, J.  Adams, P. J., and Peek, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: THOMPSON

OPINION

     The plaintiff has appealed from an order in a divorce proceeding for
maintenance of an infant child,  which was made upon application of the
defendant, after an interlocutory decree of divorce had been rendered against
her.

   Plaintiff and defendant were married January 24, 1941.  They resided in Yolo
County.  A son was born as the issue of the marriage. He was named Stephen, and
was about three years of age at the time of the commencement of the divorce
case. The plaintiff became a member of the armed forces and was absent from
their home for several years.  The defendant and their infant child went to
Nevada, where they established a residence.  When the plaintiff returned, he
commenced suit in Yolo County for divorce on the ground of extreme cruelty. The
complaint was filed November 14, 1945.  The defendant appeared and answered the
complaint, denying the alleged cruelty, and asked for custody of and maintenance
for the child.  She also filed a cross-complaint asking for a divorce on the
ground of cruelty. A demurrer to the cross-complaint was sustained with leave to
amend it.  The amendment was not filed.  The defendant was not present at the
time of trial.  But she submitted herself to the jurisdiction of the Yolo County
court by filing her answer to plaintiff's suit for divorce, which remained on
record in that proceeding.  The court thereby obtained jurisdiction of both
parties.

   After trial, an interlocutory decree of divorce was rendered against the
defendant on the ground of cruelty, on June 10, 1946, but it failed to provide
for either the custody or control of the child.  October 8, 1946, the defendant
filed her written application in said case for modification of the interlocutory
decree and for allowance to her of maintenance for said child in the sum of $
100 per month.  That application was supported by her affidavit of merits.  An
order to show cause why said allowance should not be made was issued and served
on the plaintiff.  He appeared in opposition to the motion and filed his
counteraffidavit of merits.  The plaintiff averred that defendant obtained an
absolute divorce from him in the State of Nevada on July 8, 1946, together with
an order for custody and control of the child, and further averred, on
information and belief, that the defendant and their child were residents of
Nevada on September 27, 1946.

   The motion in the Yolo County court, for maintenance of the child, was heard
on the affidavits filed, and submitted upon briefs of the respective parties.
November 26, 1946, the court made its order modifying the interlocutory decree,
and awarding the defendant a specified sum per month for maintenance  and
support of the child.  From that order the plaintiff has appealed.

   The appellant contends that the Yolo County court was without jurisdiction to
allow the defendant maintenance for the child, since both she and the child were
residents of the State of Nevada at the time of the divorce trial and when the
motion for support of the child was heard.

    This is not a question of jurisdiction of a court to render a judgment in a
divorce suit for maintenance of a minor child against the spouse who resides in
another state and who has never appeared or submitted himself to the
jurisdiction of the court.  It is an entirely different problem.  This appeal
presents the question of whether a court, having acquired jurisdiction of both
parties to a divorce case, by their appearances and participation in the motion
for support money for the child, has jurisdiction under section 138 of the Civil
Code, to make an order for such maintenance against the resident spouse, even
though the applicant therefor actually resides with their child in another
state.

   Section 138, supra, provides in part:

   "In actions for divorce the court may, during the pendency of the action, or
at the final hearing or at any time thereafter during the minority of any of the
children of the marriage, make such order for the custody, care, education,
maintenance and support of such minor children as may seem necessary or proper,
and may at any time modify or vacate the same."

     It has been decided by the great weight of authority that when a court has
acquired jurisdiction of the parties to a divorce suit it retains ancillary
jurisdiction to modify the decree of divorce by awarding to either spouse the
custody or necessary maintenance of their minor child, for its best interest,
even though one of the spouses has acquired a residence with the child in
another state.  ( In re Kolb, 60 Cal.App. 198, 200 [212 P. 645]; Stephens v.
Stephens, 53 Idaho 427 [24 P.2d 52, 55]; 70 A.L.R. 526, note.) In the Kolb case,
supra, the husband, who resided in California, brought suit for divorce in this
state.  His wife and minor child resided in New York.  The wife came to
California and answered the complaint, denying the material allegations thereof.
She also filed a cross-complaint, upon which she was awarded a divorce. The
decree did not award the custody of the minor child to the cross-complainant,
but did award maintenance  to the wife and minor child. The child was not
brought to California.  After the interlocutory decree was rendered, the wife
returned to New York.  For failure to pay the maintenance award, upon motion to
show cause the husband was adjudged guilty of contempt.  He instituted habeas
corpus proceedings to secure his release from jail, on the theory that the court
was without jurisdiction, since both the wife and their minor child were
residents of New York.  Upon hearing, the writ was discharged and the prisoner
was remanded.  The court said:

   "At the time the divorce case was commenced the wife was residing in New
York.  Upon being informed of the pendency of the action, she came to
California, but the minor child was not brought into this state.  After the
interlocutory decree was entered the wife returned to New York.  It does not
appear that the decree purported to give the wife the custody of the minor
child. No issue of or concerning its custody is involved.  Hence the rule stated
in De La Montanya v. De La Montanya, 112 Cal. 131 [44 P. 354], is not involved.
The decree did award maintenance to the wife and minor child, residents of New
York, and such money judgment was rendered by a court of this state against the
husband, a resident of this state. . . .

   "It follows that the petitioner should be remanded and the writ discharged.
It is so ordered."

   The principle involved in that cause is the same which is presented in this
case.  That decision is in accord with the great weight of authority, and we
think it controls the issue on the present appeal.  The Kolb case determines
that even though the wife, who is a party to a divorce suit, resides with their
minor child in another state, but personally appears in that suit in a
California court, and thereby confers jurisdiction on the court, an order to pay
maintenance to the wife "and minor child" is valid and enforceable.  The only
distinction between that case and the present one is that the court there made
the order for maintenance in the interlocutory decree, while in this case the
order was made upon subsequent motion for modification of that decree and
allowance of support money for the minor child. Both parties appeared and
participated in that proceeding.  We conclude that the court in this case
retained jurisdiction  to make the challenged order, despite the fact that the
mother and child resided in the State of Nevada.

    We are of the opinion the absence of the minor child from this state during
the trial and subsequent proceeding for maintenance is immaterial.  In the
Stephens case, supra, it is said in that regard:

   "Formally the child was not a party to the action.  She was before the court
because of the fact that her parents were in court, and both parents voluntarily
submitted to the court, who, as between the parents, should have custody and
control. In the case of Anderson v. Anderson, 74 W.Va. 124, 81 S.E. 706, 707,
the court laid down the following rule: 'That the children may not have been
within the jurisdiction of the court at the time of the institution of the suit
or entry of the decree is immaterial, since the parties litigant were the father
and mother, and the cause of action, the right of custody, in so far as it
affected the children, was between them, and the court had full jurisdiction
over them with power to render a personal decree.'"

   It will be observed this case does not involve the right of the custody of
the minor child. It merely affects the jurisdiction of the court in which a
divorce suit is pending to award to the wife, who has the custody of the child
but lives in another state, a specific sum for necessary maintenance of the
child.  Moreover, it is said in 27 Corpus Juris Secundum 1164, section 303b,
that:

   "The court may make a decree for the support and maintenance of a nonresident
child where the parents have submitted to the jurisdiction   of the court."
(Italics added.)

   Likewise, it is said in 17 American Jurisprudence 520, section 686, that:

   "[The] proceedings to modify such a decree [awarding the custody of children
in a divorce case] are, in a sense, ancillary to the suit for divorce in which
jurisdiction of the parties has been properly acquired." (Italics ours.)

   In the heading to annotations appearing on that subject, in 70 American Law
Reports at page 526, note, which is supported by numerous authorities from
various states, the author states:

   "In some jurisdictions there are statutes which empower the court, in
entering a decree of divorce, to make an order fixing the right to the custody
of children, and to alter or modify the same from time to time, as the
circumstances may require.  The question whether, under such statute, or, in the
absence of statute, in the exercise of its inherent powers, a  court may alter
or modify its decree of divorce as to the custody of children, in the absence of
the parent or the child from its territorial jurisdiction, has been resolved, by
the great weight of decisions, in favor of the existence of such power in the
court."

     In California, the authority to make an allowance to a spouse in a divorce
case for the maintenance of a minor child which is the issue of the marriage, at
any time during the pendency of the action, or at the final hearing, or "at any
time thereafter during the minority of any of the children of the marriage," is
found in section 138 of the Civil Code, as we have previously stated.  When that
order is made upon due notice to the adverse party, and both parties appear and
participate in the proceeding, it is valid and binding regardless of the actual
residence of the applicant therefor, or of their minor child.

   The cases cited by the appellant in opposition to the previously stated rule
are distinguishable from the facts of the present case.  The text cited by the
appellant from 9 California Jurisprudence, at page 786, section 130, to the
effect that a court has "no authority to award custody of children not within
its territorial jurisdiction," has no application to an order made in a divorce
case for the maintenance of a child, where both parties appear and participate
in the proceeding.  The first case cited in support of that statement in the
text is In re McMullin, 164 Cal. 504 [129 P. 773]. That was a petition for a
writ of habeas corpus in which petitioner, the husband, alleged that he was
being unlawfully imprisoned by the sheriff of Sonoma County under section 270 of
the Penal Code for wilfully failing to support his minor child. It was not an
application in a divorce case, under section 138 of the Civil Code, for an order
to support a minor child. No divorce suit  was ever commenced in California.
The wife did take their daughter to Nevada, where she procured a divorce and
custody of the child.  She then returned to Sonoma County, where she was duly
appointed guardian of the person and estate of their daughter.  Since there was
no divorce suit pending in Sonoma County, the question of actual or ancillary
jurisdiction of a divorce court was not involved.

   In support of the same quotation from California Jurisprudence, last
mentioned, the case of De La Montanya v. De La Montanya, 112 Cal. 131 [44 P.
354], was cited.  That was a separate suit brought in San Francisco by the wife,
for the  guardianship, custody and control of children.  It was not a divorce
case. Prior to the commencement of that suit, and a former suit for divorce,
which last-mentioned case was reversed on appeal (112 Cal. 101 [44 P. 345, 53
Am.St.Rep. 165, 32 L.R.A. 82]), the husband had taken the children and left the
State of California.  He was not present and did not participate in either
trial.  In both suits service by publication of summons, only, was made.  The
defendant did not appear or answer either complaint.  In the latter suit for
guardianship and custody of the children, the default of the defendant was
entered, and judgment was rendered awarding plaintiff the custody of the
children.  Subsequently, the father moved to vacate the judgment on the ground
that the court lacked jurisdiction, since the father and the children were
residing in another state, and he did not appear or submit himself to the
jurisdiction of the court.  That motion was granted.  The court said,
"Jurisdiction to appoint a guardian for infants under the American system is
entirely local." That case has no application to the facts of this suit.  The
court never acquired jurisdiction in that case of either the father or the
children.  That was a petition for guardianship, and not a suit for divorce. In
the present action both parties submitted to the jurisdiction of the court in
the divorce suit, and participated in the very motion for support of the
children.

    In re Chandler, 36 Cal.App.2d 583 [97 P.2d 1048], relied on by the appellant
in this case, is not in point.  The question of jurisdiction of a California
court to make an order for the maintenance of minor children, in a divorce suit,
was not involved.  In that case, the father, who petitioned for a writ of habeas
corpus, had taken the minor children from California and established a residence
in Texas.  The wife subsequently commenced suit for divorce in Los Angeles.  The
defendant appeared in that suit in California.  The court made an order for the
defendant to "bring said children from the State of Texas and produce them in
the Los Angeles superior court." For failure to do so he was cited before the
court on a charge of contempt, and found guilty thereof.  He was imprisoned for
contempt, and instituted the petition for habeas corpus on the ground that the
California court had no authority to compel him to bring the children from Texas
to California.  That was the only issue determined in that case.  The court held
that a parent could not be compelled to bring children from their domicile in
one state into another state.   In support of that conclusion the court cited
the text in 9 California Jurisprudence, at page 786.  That case is not
authority, precluding a court from awarding maintenance for the benefit of minor
children in a divorce court when both parties have submitted themselves to the
jurisdiction of that court.

   The other cases cited by the appellant may be likewise distinguished.

     It is true that jurisdiction to appoint guardians of minor children, unlike
applications for custody or maintenance of minor children in divorce cases under
section 138 of the Civil Code, ordinarily depends upon the residence or domicile
of the children.  (13 Cal.Jur. 146, §§ 8, 9.) That very distinction has led to
much confusion upon that subject.

   That portion of the order awarding maintenance to the respondent for support
of the minor son, from which this appeal was taken, is affirmed.


                              29 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             ALICE GORDILLO REDIKER, Appellant, v. ABRAHAM SANFORD
                          REDIKER et al., Respondents

                                L. A. No. 20704

                          Supreme Court of California

          35 Cal. 2d 796; 221 P.2d 1; 1950 Cal. LEXIS 380; 20 A.L.R.2d
                                      1152


                                August 18, 1950

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  William J. Palmer, Judge.

   Action for separate maintenance, to which defendant filed a cross-complaint
for annulment of marriage.

COUNSEL: William Ellis Lady for Appellant.

Hahn, Ross, Goldstone & Saunders and Philip Gordon for Respondents.

JUDGES: In Bank. Traynor, J.  Gibson, C. J., Shenk, J., Edmonds, J., Carter, J.,
Schauer, J., and Spence, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: TRAYNOR

OPINION

      Plaintiff appeals from a judgment annulling as bigamous her marriage to
defendant and awarding her $ 15,000 as a putative spouse for her share of the
community property and as compensation for her services to defendant during the
purported marriage. She seeks to abandon her appeal from the award of $ 15,000,
but that award is based on the decree of annulment and is inseparable therefrom.
The appeal must therefore be taken from the entire judgment.  ( Milo v. Prior,
210 Cal. 569, 571 [292 P. 647]; Bailey v. Bailey, 60 Cal.App.2d 291, 293 [140
P.2d 693].)

   Defendant and Bessie Yalkut were married in New York in 1922.  The following
year they moved to Havana, Cuba, where defendant entered the manufacturing
business and registered with the American consul as a Cuban resident.  They
lived together in Havana until 1930 when Bessie and their minor daughter
returned to the United States.  Defendant remained in Havana, and on January 27,
1939, in the Court of First Instance of the Southern District of Havana, he
obtained a default divorce decree from Bessie.  Bessie was awarded custody of
their daughter.  On November 28, 1939, defendant married plaintiff and lived
with her as her husband until January 26, 1945, when he left plaintiff and came
to Los Angeles.  She followed him and discovered that he had married Josefina
Valle, a former employee in his Havana factory.

   Defendant was charged with bigamy because he married Miss Valle while still
married to plaintiff.  He was convicted of the charge but was granted probation
upon payment of a $ 2,500 fine.

    Plaintiff brought this action in the Superior Court of Los Angeles County
for separate maintenance on the grounds of adultery and extreme cruelty.
Defendant was personally served in the action and  cross-complained for an
annulment of their marriage on the ground that at the time of their purported
marriage plaintiff was still the wife of one Reinhold Graf.  The trial court
found that plaintiff was divorced from Graf six years before her marriage to
defendant.  The court also found, however, that at the time of her marriage to
defendant he was still the husband of Bessie Yalkut Rediker and that the
marriage of plaintiff and defendant was therefore bigamous and void.  It found
defendant's Cuban decree invalid for want of jurisdiction in that "said Bessie
Rediker was never served with process in any such proceedings or purported
proceedings, if any were had, and no trial or hearing was had in connection with
any such proceedings or purported proceedings for the purpose of divorcing
defendant from Bessie Rediker," and that defendant was lawfully married to
Bessie Rediker until she obtained a divorce decree on August 28, 1944, in the
Circuit Court of Dade County, Florida.

   Defendant introduced the Florida decree over plaintiff's objection for the
purpose of establishing that he and Bessie were lawfully married until the entry
of the decree dissolved their marriage. The trial court, holding that the decree
was conclusive of that fact stated: "Now, the Constitution of the United States
specifically places upon this Court the duty to give full faith and credit to
that judgment of the Court of the State of Florida.  . . .  Consequently I am
not in a position to ignore it.  I have to accept it and as I pointed out in my
notice of decision that judgment carried the absolutely necessary implication
that up to the time that it was rendered Abraham and Bessie were married and
that at the time Abraham married Alicia he was married to Bessie.  . . .  You
say that you were not a party to the divorce action. That is not a fully correct
statement because we are all parties to every divorce action because a divorce
action is an action in rem and that divorce action was presented in this Court
for the purpose of proving not any of the issues that were involved in the case
but simply for the purpose of proving itself, namely, that she was given a
decree of divorce as of a certain date and in my judgment it was very properly
admissible in this case."

   The trial court concluded that in "proving itself" the  Florida decree proved
the "absolutely necessary implication" that defendant and Bessie were married
until the date it was entered and that it was res judicata on that issue.  It
therefore found that the marriage of defendant and plaintiff was bigamous and
granted the prayer of the cross-complaint for an annulment.

   On this appeal plaintiff contends that the Florida decree is res judicata in
this action only insofar as it adjudicated the parties' lack of marital
relationship to each other from then on, that the trial court's finding that the
Cuban divorce is invalid is not supported by the evidence, and that defendant,
having initiated the Cuban action and having taken advantage of the decree
therein by remarrying, is estopped to deny its validity.

     Defendant contends that an existing valid marriage is a condition precedent
to the entry of a divorce decree under Florida law ( Keener v. Keener, 152 Fla.
13 [11 So.2d 180]), and that the entry of the decree imports a finding that
defendant and Bessie were lawfully married at the time of its entry, five years
after the purported marriage of defendant to plaintiff.  He urges that, since a
divorce decree is a judgment in rem, the essential finding that the parties
thereto were lawfully married is res judicata in this action, and that, since
the Florida court had jurisdiction to enter the decree and plaintiff does not
contend that it was procured by fraud or collusion, this court must accord full
faith and credit to the decree and to the finding of a lawful marriage
necessarily implied therein.  (U.S. Const., art. IV, § 1; Williams v. North
Carolina, 317 U.S. 287, 299 [63 S.Ct. 207, 87 L.Ed. 279, 143 A.L.R. 1273]; Estin
v. Estin, 334 U.S. 541, 546-547 [68 S.Ct. 1213, 92 L.Ed. 1561, 1 A.L.R.2d 1412]
.) He alleges that "a judgment in a divorce case must be treated as dealing with
status prior to divorce as well as after, and the one independently of the
other," and that the res in a divorce action  "is not only the subsequent
singleness of the parties, but also their prior marital status -- a
determination which is 'immune from collateral attack.'"

   That contention, however, is opposed to the prevailing rule in most of the
jurisdiction of the United States and to several decisions of this court.  It is
an oversimplification to state that a divorce proceeding is a proceeding in rem,
and to proceed from that statement to the assumption that a decree entered
therein is res judicata in an action between a party and a stranger thereto, not
only as to the subsequent status  of the parties with relation to each other,
but also as to all issues decided or that might have been decided in the
proceeding.  The weight of authority holds that a decree of divorce is a
judgment in rem only to the extent that it adjudicates the future status of the
parties in relation to each other.  ( Williams v. North Carolina, 317 U.S. 287,
298 [63 S.Ct. 207, 87 L.Ed. 279, 143 A.L.R. 1273]; Williams v. North Carolina,
325 U.S. 226, 232 [65 S.Ct. 1092, 89 L.Ed. 1577, 157 A.L.R. 1366].) As between
parties or privies, the decree is res judicata not only of their status with
relation to each other but also of all issues that were litigated or that could
have been litigated therein.  ( Blumenthal v. Blumenthal, 97 Cal.App. 558, 561
[275 P. 987]; Petry v. Petry, 47 Cal.App.2d 594, 595 [118 P.2d 498]; Borg v.
Borg, 25 Cal.App.2d 25, 29 [76 P.2d 218]; 2 Freeman, Judgments, § 906, p. 1904.)
Estate of Lee, 200 Cal. 310, 314 [253 P. 145], on which defendant relies, has
been properly interpreted in Blumenthal v. Blumenthal, supra, as stating the
rule applicable between parties and their privies.  As between strangers or
strangers and parties, however, the decree is res judicata only in that it
conclusively determines that the parties are thereafter free to remarry so far
as any relation to each other is concerned.  It does not establish the previous
validity of their marriage against third persons who were not and had no right
to be heard thereon.  (2 Freeman, Judgments, § 910, p. 1913; 3 Freeman,
Judgments, § 1524, pp. 3131-3132; Restatement, Judgments, § 74, p. 335; Hunter
v. Hunter, 111 Cal. 261, 266 [43 P. 756, 52 Am.St.Rep. 180, 31 L.R.A. 411];
Estate of James, 99 Cal. 374, 379 [33 P. 1122, 37 Am.St.Rep. 60].) "We may lay
on one side, then, any argument based on the misleading expression that all the
world are parties to a proceeding in rem.  This does not mean that all the world
are entitled to be heard, and as strangers in interest are not entitled to be
heard, there is no reason why they should be bound by the findings of fact,
although bound to admit the title or status which the judgment establishes."
(Holmes, J., in Brigham v. Fayerweather, 140 Mass. 411, 413 [5 N.E. 265]; see
also, Wilson v. Mitchell, 48 Colo. 454, 469 [111 P. 21, 30 L.R.A.N.S. 507];
Oborn v. State, 143 Wis. 249, 267 [126 N.W. 737, 31 L.R.A.N.S. 966]; Williams v.
Williams, 63 Wis. 58, 75 [23 N.W. 110, 53 Am.Rep. 253]; Pollard v. Ward, 289 Mo.
275, 284 [233 S.W. 14, 20 A.L.R. 936]; American Woolen Co. v. Lesher,  267 Ill.
11, 17-18 [107 N.E. 882]; Willey v. Howell, 168 Ky. 466, 470 [182 S.W. 619];
Matter of Holmes, 291 N.Y. 261, 269-270, 271 [52 N.E.2d 424, 150 A.L.R. 447]; 44
Columb.L.Rev. 442, 444-445; 16 Cal.L.Rev. 146.)

   The decisions of this court have established that a divorce decree is res
judicata as to strangers thereto only to the extent that it establishes the
future status of the parties.  Thus, in Hunter v. Hunter, 111 Cal. 261 [43 P.
756, 52 Am.Rep. 180, 31 L.R.A. 411], plaintiff, suing to annul as bigamous his
marriage to the defendant, introduced a decree of divorce obtained by her from
her first husband 25 years after she married plaintiff.  He asserted that the
entry of the decree dissolving that marriage was res judicata of its existence
until it was dissolved by the entry of the divorce decree. This court, however,
held that as between a party to the divorce action and a stranger thereto the
decree was a judgment in rem only in that it adjudicated the future status of
the parties.  "So far and no farther, the judgment bound him and all the world."
(111 Cal. 261, 266.)

   In Estate of James, 99 Cal. 374, 379 [33 P. 1122, 37 Am.St.Rep. 60], and
Estate of McNeil, 155 Cal. 333, 343-344 [100 P. 1086], identical questions were
presented.  In  each case, a first wife challenged the right of decedent's
second wife to succeed to his estate.  In each case the first wife contended
that decedent's second marriage was bigamous for the reason that his divorce
from his first wife was invalid. In support of that contention, each first wife
offered in evidence a separate maintenance decree obtained by her after the
decedent obtained the allegedly invalid divorce, contending that the separate
maintenance decree was res judicata of the continued existence of the first
marriage. In both cases, the court held that the later decree did not, as
between a party thereto and a stranger, reinstate the first marriage
notwithstanding the intervention of a previous decree.

    This court has also held that an order admitting a will to probate, although
a judgment in rem to that extent, was not res judicata of the essential finding
that decedent was a California domiciliary, except as between the parties to the
probate proceeding.  ( Estate of Bloom, 213 Cal. 575, 578-579 [2 P.2d 753]; see
also, Estate of Newman, 124 Cal. 688, 692 [57 P. 686, 45 L.R.A. 780]; Riley v.
New York Trust Co., 315 U.S. 343, 352-353 [62 S.Ct. 608, 86 L.Ed. 885].)
Although several decisions have held that the findings in a divorce action are
res judicata as between the parties thereto, they  have disclaimed any intention
to apply the doctrine to persons not parties to the divorce action. ( Estate of
Hughes, 80 Cal.App.2d 550, 556 [182 P.2d 253]; Godfrey v. Godfrey, 30 Cal.App.2d
370, 380 [86 P.2d 357]; Borg v. Borg, 25 Cal.App.2d 25, 29 [76 P.2d 218].)

   Uncertainty as to the validity of migratory divorces created by the recent
decisions of the United States Supreme Court ( Williams v. North Carolina, 317
U.S. 287, 299 [63 S.Ct. 207, 87 L.Ed. 279, 143 A.L.R. 1273]; Williams v. North
Carolina, 325 U.S. 226 [65 S.Ct. 1092, 89 L.Ed. 1577, 157 A.L.R. 1366]; Rice v.
Rice, 336 U.S. 674 [69 S.Ct. 751, 93 L.Ed. 957]) has induced many spouses,
doubtful of the validity of such a divorce and wishing to insure the validity of
a remarriage, to seek a second divorce in the state of their present domicile.
(See Powell, And Repent at Leisure, 58 Harv.L.Rev. 930, 1004.) The possibility
that a trial court in a later proceeding may find that the moving spouse was not
domiciled in the state in which the decree was entered may induce many spouses
to secure a second decree rather than to rely on the first, to avoid the risk
that later litigation will prove such reliance misplaced.  ( Williams v. North
Carolina, 325 U.S. 226, 232 [65 S.Ct. 1092, 89 L.Ed. 1577, 157 A.L.R. 1366];
Rice v. Rice, 336 U.S. 674 [69 S.Ct. 751, 93 L.Ed. 957]; Crouch v. Crouch, 28
Cal.2d 243 [169 P.2d 897]; see Powell, supra.)

     The rights of an innocent second spouse or the children of a second
marriage are not diminished by the findings of fact in a proceeding to which
they were not parties and in which they had no right to be heard.  Such a
holding would be not only unreasonable but constitutionally objectionable.  A
decision of any court purporting to bind by the findings of fact of an earlier
action a person who was not a party thereto and who had no notice or right to a
hearing in that action deprives that person of property without due process of
law and is prohibited by the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States
Constitution.  ( Mullane v. Central Hanover Bank & Trust Co. (April 24, 1950),
339 U.S. 306 [70 S.Ct. 652, 656, 94 L.Ed. 865]; Hansberry v. Lee, 311 U.S. 32,
40-41 [61 S.Ct. 115, 85 L.Ed. 22, 132 A.L.R. 741]; Gratiot County State Bank v.
Johnson, 249 U.S. 246, 248-249 [39 S.Ct. 263, 63 L.Ed. 587].) A state court
cannot dispense with the requirement of notice and hearing by labelling the
proceeding "in rem" if it seeks to make the findings of fact binding upon a
stranger to the earlier action.  A state court may no more  make its findings of
fact binding on a person over whom it has no jurisdiction than it may bind him
by a judgment in personam when he has not been personally served. ( Hansberry v.
Lee, supra; Pennoyer v. Neff, 95 U.S. 714, 729 [24 L.Ed. 565].)

     Apart from the Florida decree, there is no evidence to support the finding
that "the marriage between said Bessie Rediker and defendant was not dissolved
prior to August 28, 1944 or at all by or as a result of any proceedings
conducted" in the Cuban divorce action. The trial court did not find that
defendant was not a bona fide Cuban domiciliary; defendant admits that he was.
The Cuban court therefore had jurisdiction to enter the decree and, since its
procurement was not the result of fraud or collusion, the decree must be given
"the same effect as final judgments rendered in this state" or in the court of a
sister state to which this court must give full faith and credit.  ( Code Civ.
Proc., § 1915; Williams v. North Carolina, 317 U.S. 287, 299 [63 S.Ct. 207, 87
L.Ed. 279, 143 A.L.R. 1273]; Sherrer v. Sherrer, 334 U.S. 343 [68 S.Ct. 1087,
1097, 92 L.Ed. 1429, 1 A.L.R.2d 1355]; Coe v. Coe, 334 U.S. 378 [68 S.Ct. 1094,
1097, 92 L.Ed. 1451, 1 A.L.R. 1376]; Baldwin v.  Baldwin, 28 Cal.2d 406, 410-411
[170 P.2d 670].)

     The trial court found the Cuban divorce decree invalid for want of
jurisdiction in that "said Bessie Rediker was never served with process in any
such proceedings."  It is undisputed that Bessie was not personally served in
the Cuban action, but personal service on an absent spouse is not a
jurisdictional requirement, if the action is brought in the state of domicile of
the complainant.  (Williams v. North Carolina, supra; Baldwin v. Baldwin, supra;
Crouch v. Crouch, 28 Cal.2d 243 [169 P.2d 897]; Saul v. Saul, 122 F.2d 64, 69.)
Constructive service on the absent spouse gives the court of the state of
domicile jurisdiction of the cause and the parties, and the record is devoid of
any evidence that Bessie was not constructively served in the Cuban action.  The
only evidence before the trial judge on that issue was the recital of
jurisdiction in the Cuban decree. In the absence of competent contrary evidence,
it must be presumed that the foreign court had jurisdiction and that its recital
thereof is true.  ( De Young v. De Young, 27 Cal.2d 521, 525 [165 P.2d 457];
Saul v. Saul, 122 F.2d 64, 69.)

     Defendant testified by deposition that he did not appear in the Cuban
action but that he gave an attorney 75  dollars and requested him to procure a
divorce, and that he knew nothing further about the matter until his attorney
informed him that the divorce was granted.  Entry of the decree upon the failure
of the complainant to appear personally in the Cuban action may have been error,
but his failure to appear did not deprive the Cuban court of jurisdiction to
entertain the action.  If a court has jurisdiction of an action, a judgment
entered therein is not subject to collateral attack on a showing of error in the
exercise of that jurisdiction.  "Something more than mere error must be shown,
in attack upon a foreign judgment, to deprive it of force and effectiveness."
(Rutledge, J., in Saul v. Saul, 122 F.2d 64, 68; Baldwin v.  Baldwin, 28 Cal.2d
406, 410-411 [170 P.2d 670].)

     Even if the Cuban decree were invalid, defendant cannot contest its
validity.  The validity of a divorce decree cannot be contested by a party who
has procured the decree or a party who has remarried in reliance thereon, or by
one who has aided another to procure the decree so that the latter will be free
to remarry.  ( Bruguiere v. Bruguiere, 172 Cal. 199, 203-204 [155 P. 988,
Ann.Cas. 1917E 122]; Kelsey v. Miller, 203 Cal. 61, 86 [263 P. 200]; Harlan v.
Harlan , 70 Cal.App.2d 657, 662 [161 P.2d 490]; Estate of Davis, 38 Cal.App.2d
579, 584-585 [101 P.2d 761, 102 P.2d 545]; Hensgen v. Silberman, 87 Cal.App.2d
668, 674 [197 P.2d 356]; In re Kyle, 77 Cal.App.2d 634, 639-640 [176 P.2d 96];
Goodloe v. Hawk, 113 F.2d 753, 756, 757; Saul v. Saul, 122 F.2d 64, 70;
Margulies v. Margulies, 109 N.J.Eq. 391, 392 [157 A. 676]; Van Slyke v. Van
Slyke, 186 Mich. 324, 330 [152 N.W. 921]; Bowen v. Fink, 34 F.Supp. 235; Krause
v. Krause, 282 N.Y. 355, 360 [26 N.E.2d 290]; Brown v. Brown, 242 App.Div. 33
[272 N.Y.S. 877], aff'd.  266 N.Y. 532 [195 N.E. 186]; Chapman v. Chapman, 224
Mass. 427, 433 [113 N.E. 359]; Matter of Lindgren, 293 N.Y. 18, 22-23 [55 N.E.2d
849, 153 A.L.R. 936]; Marvin v. Foster, 61 Minn. 154, 160 [63 N.W. 484]; Mohler
v. Shank's  Estate, 93 Iowa 273, 282, [61 N.W. 981, 57 Am.St.Rep. 274, 34 L.R.A.
161]; Rest., Conflict of Laws, § 112, pp. 169-170; Goodrich, Conflict of Laws
[3d ed., 1949], § 127, pp. 401-402.) Thus, in a suit for separate maintenance in
which the husband asserted as a defense an earlier Nevada divorce secured by
him, this court held that the plaintiff wife was estopped from contesting the
validity of the decree by virtue of her remarriage in reliance upon it.  (
Bruguiere v. Bruguiere, 172 Cal. 199, 203-204 [155 P. 988, Ann.Cas.  1917E
122].) By the same reasoning, it has been held that a wife who consented to a
Mexican "mail order divorce" and remarried in reliance upon it was estopped from
questioning its validity in an action to determine whether she or her
ex-husband's second wife was entitled to his estate.  ( Hensgen v. Silberman, 87
Cal.App.2d 668, 674 [197 P.2d 356]; see also Estate of Davis, 38 Cal.App.2d 579,
584-585 [101 P.2d 761, 102 P.2d 545].) The doctrine of estoppel has also been
held applicable to cases in which a husband sought to assert the invalidity of
his or his wife's earlier divorce from another as a defense to her action for
divorce and alimony.  ( Margulies v. Margulies, 109 N.J.Eq. 391, 392 [157 A.
676]; Van Slyke v. Van Slyke, 186 Mich. 324, 330 [152 N.W. 921].)

   In Harlan v. Harlan, 70 Cal.App.2d 657 [161 P.2d 490], plaintiff sued his
wife for an annulment of their marriage as bigamous, alleging that she secured a
Mexican divorce from her first husband but that the divorce was invalid for want
of jurisdiction in the Mexican court.  The trial court granted an annulment on
the finding that the Mexican decree was invalid. The judgment was reversed on
appeal.  The appellate court held that notwithstanding that the defendant's
Mexican decree was invalid, plaintiff was estopped from asserting its invalidity
because he had aided and counselled the defendant in procuring it so that she
might marry him.  "To hold otherwise protects neither the welfare nor morals of
society but, on the contrary, such holding is a flagrant invitation to others to
attempt to circumvent the law, cohabit in unlawful state, and when tired of such
situation, apply to the courts for a release from the indicia of the marriage
status." ( Harlan v. Harlan, 70 Cal.App.2d 657, 663-664 [161 P.2d 490].)

   The New York Court of Appeals, in a case similar to the present one, reached
the same conclusion as the court in the Harlan case.  As a defense to his wife's
suit for separate maintenance, the defendant contended that their marriage was
bigamous on the ground that he had secured a Nevada divorce from his first wife
but that the Nevada court lacked jurisdiction to enter the decree. Although the
court regarded the Nevada decree as invalid, it refused to annul the marriage
because the defendant, having procured the decree, was estopped from questioning
its validity.  "We cannot lose sight of the fact that the present defendant was
himself the party who had obtained the decree of divorce which he now asserts
to be invalid and repudiates in order that he may now disown any legal
obligation to support the plaintiff, whom he purported to marry.  To refuse to
permit this defendant to escape his obligation to support plaintiff does not
mean that the courts of this State recognize as valid a judgment of divorce
which necessarily is assumed to be invalid in the case at bar, but only that it
is not open to defendant in these proceedings to avoid the responsibility which
he voluntarily incurred." ( Krause v. Krause, 282 N.Y. 355, 359-360 [26 N.E.2d
290]; Matter of Lindgren, 293 N.Y. 18, 22 [55 N.E.2d 849, 153 A.L.R. 936];
Guilmain v. Guilmain, 58 N.Y.S.2d 662, 666; Picciano v. Picciano, 65 N.Y.S.2d
410, 411; Goodloe v.  Hawk, 113 F.2d 753, 756; Saul v. Saul, 122 F.2d 64, 70;
Bowen v. Finke, 34 F.Supp. 235; Chapman v. Chapman, 224 Mass. 427, 433 [113 N.
E. 359]; Mohler v. Shank's Estate, 93 Iowa 273, 282 [61 N.W. 981, 57 Am.St.Rep.
274, 34 L.R.A. 161].)

   By the same reasoning, it is clear that defendant has estopped himself by his
conduct from contesting the suit of his wife for separate maintenance on the
ground that they are not lawfully married. He was the moving party in the Cuban
action;  he accepted the benefits of the decree therein by remarrying; and he
now seeks to assert its invalidity to avoid his obligations to the plaintiff by
virtue of that marriage. "One who has invoked the exercise of a jurisdiction
within the general powers of the court cannot seek to reverse its orders upon
the ground of lack of jurisdiction." ( Harlan v. Harlan, 70 Cal.App.2d 657, 662
[161 P.2d 490].) Defendant seeks to avoid estoppel in this case by reliance on
his testimony that he went to a lawyer to get a divorce, that he did not know
anything further about the action until he was informed that the divorce had
been granted, and that he did not appear in the divorce proceedings.  He
contends that he was not the moving party in the action so as to be estopped by
his conduct therein.  This contention overlooks the facts that he initiated the
proceedings, paid for the attorney's services in connection therewith, did not
disclaim the divorce when informed that it was granted, and took advantage of
the decree by marrying the plaintiff ten months later.

     Defendant contends, however, that the public policy of the state requires
the annulment of bigamous marriages whenever their bigamous character is
discovered.  We find no basis for such a sweeping application of public policy.
There is a strong presumption that the second marriage is  valid in the absence
of positive evidence to the contrary.  ( Wilcox v. Wilcox, 171 Cal. 770, 774
[155 P. 95]; Estate of Pusey, 173 Cal. 141, 143 [159 P. 433]; Hamburgh v. Hys,
22 Cal.App.2d 508, 509 [71 P.2d 301]; Immel v. Dowd, 6 Cal.App.2d 145, 147 [44
P.2d 373].) Defendant does not indicate how any public purpose is served by the
annulment of his marriage. The rights of his first wife are not affected
thereby; she has already secured a divorce from him in Florida and will not be
injured by defendant's remaining married to plaintiff.  Moreover, the state has
already recognized the validity of defendant's marriage to plaintiff by its
prosecution of defendant for bigamy because of his marriage to Miss Valle in
1945.  His prosecution could be maintained only on the ground that his 1939
marriage to plaintiff was valid.

   "It can no longer be said that public policy requires nonrecognition of all
irregular foreign divorces. We have recognized that the interest of the state in
many situations may lie with recognition of such divorces and preservation of
remarriages rather than a dubious attempt to resurrect the original.  From a
pragmatic viewpoint, judicial invalidation of irregular foreign divorces and
attendant remarriages, years after both events, is a less than effective
sanction against an institution whose charm lies in its immediate
respectability.  We think it may now be stated that the general public policy in
this jurisdiction, as judicially interpreted, no longer prevents application in
annulment actions of the laches and estoppel doctrines in determining the effect
to be given such divorce decrees." (Vinson J., in Goodloe  v. Hawk, 113 F.2d
753, 757; Harlan v. Harlan, 70 Cal.App.2d 657, 663-664 [161 P.2 490]; Krause v.
Krause, 282 N.Y. 355, 360 [26 N.E.2d 290].) We conclude that the public policy
of this state requires the preservation of the second marriage and the
protection of the rights of the second spouse "rather than a dubious attempt to
resurrect the original" marriage.

   Since the application of the doctrine of estoppel presupposes the entry of a
final decree, cases involving remarriage after the entry of only an
interlocutory decree ( Sullivan v. Sullivan, 219 Cal. 734, 736 [28 P.2d 914];
Estate of Elliott, 165 Cal. 339 [132 P. 439]), or with the first marriage
unaffected by any decree ( Anderson v. Anderson, 7 Cal.2d 265 [60 P.2d 290];
Brandt v. Brandt, 32 Cal.App.2d 99 [89 P.2d 171]), are not in point.

   The trial court erred in entering a judgment of annulment on defendant's
cross-complaint.  The judgment is reversed  and the cause remanded for a new
trial on the issues of plaintiff's complaint.


                              30 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              ISAAC LIONEL ETTLINGER, Plaintiff; MELVILLE MARX, as
             Executor, etc. (Substituted Plaintiff), Appellant, v.
                    MILLICENT L. SEARS ETTLINGER, Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 11701

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FIRST APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION ONE

          46 Cal. App. 2d 628; 116 P.2d 482; 1941 Cal. App. LEXIS 1438


                            August 28, 1941, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:      APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of the City and
County of San Francisco. Maurice T. Dooling, Judge Presiding. Action to annul
interlocutory and final judgments of divorce and to enjoin portions thereof.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Proceedings--Judgment or Decree--Res Judicata--Property Settlement
Agreement.  --Where the legality of a property settlement agreement was made an
issue in a divorce proceeding and the agreement was adopted by the judgments of
divorce and where the Supreme Court, in reversing an order reducing the amount
of the monthly payments, held that the agreement was immune from judicial
modification, such judgments were res judicata upon the issue of legality of the
agreement, in a proceeding to enjoin the enforcement thereof.

(2) Id.--Proceedings--Judgment or Decree--Estoppel to Attack Decree.  --Where
interlocutory and final judgments of divorce adopted a property settlement
agreement and defendant permitted them to become final, and where he executed a
deed, and for several years made monthly payments pursuant to the agreement, and
where, more than six years after the judgment had become final, he sought relief
in equity from the terms of the judgments on the grounds that the agreement was
immoral, relief was properly denied.

(3) Husband and Wife--Transactions Inter Se--Property Settlement Agreements--
Agreement as Contra Bonos Mores.  --In a suit to enjoin enforcement of a divorce
judgment adopting a property settlement agreement, where the agreement, the
divorce complaint, findings, decrees of divorce, and a decision of the Supreme
Court are in evidence and all indicate that the agreement was not made to
facilitate a divorce, and where other facts point to the same conclusion, a
finding that the agreement is contra bonos mores would be without evidentiary
support.

(4) Pleading--Admissions--Construction--Conflicting Admission and Denials.
--The admission in the answer of a portion of one paragraph of the complaint did
not amount to an admission that a property settlement agreement was contra bonos
mores, where the answer positively denied allegations of other paragraphs of the
complaint that the agreement was to facilitate a divorce and was contrary to
public policy and void and unenforceable, and where, when the complaint and
answer were read as a whole, the admissions did not establish a prima facie case
that the agreement was contra bonos mores.

COUNSEL: John Elliott Cook and Werner V. Olds for Appellant.

John H. Crabbe for Respondent.

JUDGES: KNIGHT, J. Peters, P. J., and Ward, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: KNIGHT

OPINION

     KNIGHT, J. -- Subsequent to the submission of this appeal on the merits,
Isaac Lionel Ettlinger, by whom the appeal was taken, died, and on August 28,
1941, on stipulation, the representative of his estate was substituted as party
plaintiff and appellant, and it was further stipulated that the rights of the
parties did not abate upon the death of the said Isaac Lionel Ettlinger.
However, the decedent will be hereinafter referred to as the appellant.

   The appeal is from an order granting a nonsuit in a nonjury trial. The
complaint bears the caption "Complaint for Declaratory Relief," and appellant
contends that such is the nature of the action. But the substance of the
complaint, its allegations and prayer, show that it is a suit in equity brought
to annul the adjudications of an interlocutory and a final judgment of divorce
confirming and adopting a property settlement agreement, and to enjoin the
enforcement of the executory portions of said adjudications that respondent do
have and recover from appellant the monthly sum of $ 250 until her death or
remarriage, upon the ground that the property settlement agreement is contra
bonos mores.

   The suit was commenced over six and a half years after the entry of the
interlocutory judgment; and the respondent, besides upholding the legality of
the property settlement agreement, contends in support of the ruling granting
the nonsuit, first, that the two judgments entered in the divorce  action and a
judgment on appeal ( Ettlinger v. Ettlinger, 3 Cal. 2d 172 [44 P.2d 540])
rendered by the Supreme Court six years after the entry of the interlocutory
judgment, involving the particular portions of the divorce judgments here sought
to be annulled, are and each of them is res judicata upon the question of the
legality of said property settlement agreement; and secondly, that, under the
undisputed facts here shown, established equitable doctrines preclude appellant
from being granted any affirmative relief. It is our conclusion that the points
so made by respondent are well taken.

   The facts relating to the two latter issues may be stated as follows: The
appellant, Isaac Lionel Ettlinger, and the respondent, Millicent L. Sears
Ettlinger, were married in December, 1920, and separated in February, 1927.
There were no children, and about two years subsequent to their separation and
on March 28, 1929, Mrs. Ettlinger was granted an interlocutory judgment of
divorce upon the ground of desertion. The question of the legality of the
property settlement agreement was made an issue by the pleadings in the case. In
this regard the record shows that Mrs. Ettlinger alleged in her divorce
complaint: "That heretofore, to wit, on or about the 20th day of March, 1929, an
agreement was entered into between the plaintiff and the defendant for the
settlement of their property rights, that said agreement is fair, just and
equitable and that the same was not made for the purpose of facilitating or
expediting a divorce by the parties, but for the sole and only purpose of
settling the property rights of the parties" (italics ours); and in his answer
appellant denied all of the foregoing allegations. At the trial of the case
appellant was represented by counsel; the agreement was introduced in evidence
by respondent, and she gave testimony with respect thereto. It is a lengthy
document, covering thirteen legal-size typewritten pages; and under its terms
appellant agreed, among other things, to execute a deed conveying to Mrs.
Ettlinger residential property in Monterey County (title to which stood in her
name), to make certain cash payments aggregating $ 4500, of which Mrs. Ettlinger
was to receive $ 1500, and in addition to pay her the monthly sum of $ 250 until
her death or remarriage. After hearing the evidence introduced by respondent in
support of her case the court found that the allegations of the complaint, which
included the allegations above quoted relating to the  property settlement
agreement, were true and sustained by testimony free from legal exception as to
its admissibility or sufficiency; and the interlocutory judgment contained,
among others, these adjudications: "It is further ordered, adjudged and decreed
that that certain agreement for the settlement of the property rights . . . a
copy of which is attached hereto . . . and by such reference made a part hereof
. . . be, and the same is, hereby ratified, approved and confirmed. And it is
further ordered, adjudged and decreed that in pursuance of the aforementioned
agreement the plaintiff [Mrs. Ettlinger] do have and recover from the defendant
the sum of Two hundred fifty ($ 250.00) dollars per month commencing with the
month of April, 1929, and payable on the first day of each and every month until
the death or remarriage of the plaintiff." (Italics ours.)

   Appellant permitted the interlocutory judgment to become final without attack
by way of appeal or otherwise; and likewise he permitted the final judgment of
divorce entered in the same form a year later to become final without any attack
being made thereon. Meanwhile, in conformity with the terms of said
interlocutory judgment, appellant executed said deed, and made said cash
payments; and for nearly four years he accepted and carried out the remaining
provision thereof by making said $ 250 monthly payments. At the end of that time
and on March 7, 1933, he applied to the superior court for, and over Mrs.
Ettlinger's objections, was granted an order reducing the amount of the monthly
payments to $ 175 for a period of one year. Mrs. Ettlinger appealed and the
Supreme Court reversed the order, holding that for the reasons given in the
decision the agreement was immune from judicial modification. ( Ettlinger v.
Ettlinger, supra.) In so holding the court went on to say: "We are satisfied
from an examination of the entire agreement, having particular reference to the
above-quoted provisions thereof, that it was the intention of the parties to
definitely, fully and permanently adjust and settle all of their property
rights. The agreement indicates that the monthly payments to be made thereunder
by defendant to plaintiff, stated to be for the latter's 'support and
maintenance', constituted an integral and important element in the amicable
adjustment and liquidation of such property rights. In our opinion, the contract
suggests that such payments were to be made to and received by  plaintiff as
part of the property settlement and in lieu of property rights. . . . That the
parties may contract with regard to their properties and their respective
interests therein is now settled. Though not binding in the first instance on
the court in which the divorce action is pending, such contract may be approved
and confirmed by the court, and if appropriately referred to and adopted in its
decree, as here, such decree, as to the matters covered by the agreement,
becomes immune from subsequent modification." That decision was rendered on
April 16, 1935, and about six months later appellant instituted the present
suit.

     From the foregoing it becomes obvious that the suit is nothing more than an
open attack upon the plain provisions of a judgment for the payment of money,
made more than six years after said judgment has become final, upon the ground
that those provisions are based upon an alleged immoral contract in which
appellant was admittedly in pari delicto; and we are in complete accord, not
only with respondent's contention that the judgments of divorce and the judgment
rendered by the Supreme Court on appeal are res judicata upon the issue of the
legality of said property settlement agreement, but also with respondent's
further contention that under the existing facts and circumstances the trial
court herein, sitting as a court of equity, was fully justified in refusing to
intervene in appellant's behalf by granting him the equitable relief sought by
him in the present suit. In this latter respect there would seem to be no
difference in principle between the present suit and one whereby a party seeks
through equity to nullify a judgment of divorce which has become final, upon the
ground that it was procured through a collusive agreement to which he was a
party. ( Godfrey v. Godfrey, 30 Cal. App. 2d 370 [86 P.2d 357]; Bancroft v.
Bancroft, 178 Cal. 359 [173 P. 579, L. R. A. 1918F, 1029].) As said in the
former case, "When an interlocutory decree of divorce is procured by collusion
of the parties to the action, equity will not interfere with the final divorce
at the instance of either of the culpable parties." (Citing cases.) And in the
latter case, the following language used by Mr. Justice Shaw in his concurring
opinion would seem particularly apt to the present situation. He said: ". . .
while it is to the interest of the state that divorces shall not be obtained by
collusion between the parties that interest does not extend so far as to prevent
the operation  of the doctrine that equity will not relieve a party from an
improper judgment rendered upon his own invitation,  upon full knowledge of the
facts and without coercion, imposition, or fraud upon him."

     The fact that appellant may not have seen fit to stress his claim of
illegality of the property settlement agreement at the time of the granting of
the judgments of divorce or when he sought a modification of the property
settlement adjudication or in defending the appeal from the order made in that
behalf, does not strengthen his position, for admittedly he could have done so
on any of those occasions; and having failed so to do, he was precluded from
doing so afterwards in a proceeding instituted for that specific purpose. (
Godfrey v. Godfrey, supra; Allen v. Allen, 159 Cal. 197 [113 P. 160]; Short v.
Short, 106 Cal. App. 210 [288 P. 1111].) Appellant cites and seems to rely
strongly on the cases of Schley v. Andrews, 225 N.Y. 110 [121 N.E. 812], and
English v. English, 9 Cal. 2d 358 [70 P.2d 625, 128 A. L. R. 467]. But neither
case is here controlling, for, among other reasons, the factual situations there
involved were essentially different from the one here presented.

   Irrespective, however, of the two points above discussed, and even assuming
that under some possible theory appellant could, in the present suit, go behind
said judgments and assail the legality of the agreement upon which they are
founded, it is manifest that the trial court was fully warranted in granting the
nonsuit upon the ground that appellant failed to produce any evidence which
would support a finding that said contract was contra bonos mores. The only
evidence adduced established to the contrary. In this regard the record
discloses that appellant offered no oral testimony whatever. All he did was to
introduce in evidence the judgment roll and files in the divorce action, a
transcript of testimony taken at the trial thereof, and a copy of respondent's
opening brief filed in the Supreme Court on the appeal from the order of
modification. The facts appearing therefrom were these: Appellant deserted
respondent and continued to live separate and apart from her for more than a
year, at the end of which period, to-wit, in February, 1928, respondent sued for
separate maintenance upon the ground of desertion. Appellant, answering, filed a
cross-complaint for divorce upon the ground of cruelty. During the several
months which followed appellant's   deposition was taken, whereby it was
revealed that he was the owner of separate property of the net value of $
265,000. Finally the parties arrived at a property settlement which was reduced
to writing and signed on March 20, 1929. It embodied these provisions: "WHEREAS,
it is the desire of both parties hereto that all of the property rights of the
parties hereto respectively shall be finally adjusted, settled, and determined,
and WHEREAS, the parties hereto have agreed to adjust, liquidate and settle
between themselves all rights and claims of each as against the separate
property of the other, there being no community property. NOW THEREFORE, it is
hereby agreed and stipulated by and between the parties hereto as follows: 1.
This agreement does not in any way and is not in any way intended to bind either
of the parties hereto as to their respective courses concerning the filing,
maintenance or defense of any action for divorce or as to any facts necessary to
the maintenance of any action for divorce or any defense thereto, and the
parties hereto shall be entirely free as to their respective action in the
matter of applying for a divorce or resisting any application for a divorce or
any other steps in any divorce action save and except as to the property rights
of the parties hereto and the maintenance and support of the first party and the
amount of the costs, expenses and attorneys fees and in those respects both of
the parties hereto agree and stipulate as hereinafter set forth." Being thus
entirely unrestricted by said agreement as to the exercise of any of her legal
rights respecting court matters, respondent amended her complaint so as to ask
for a divorce upon the ground of desertion, instead of a decree for separate
maintenance on that ground. Appellant then filed an answer denying the
allegations of desertion and a request for a dismissal of his cross-complaint;
whereupon, on March 28, 1929, the divorce trial took place and the interlocutory
judgment was granted, which as already pointed out ratified, approved and
confirmed the property settlement agreement.

     It appears, therefore, that at the time of the granting of the nonsuit the
only evidence before the trial court bearing upon the legality of the property
settlement agreement consisted of the agreement itself, which in direct terms
declared that it was not made to facilitate a divorce,  but left the parties
entirely free to act as they saw fit; the allegations in respondent's divorce
complaint that said agreement  was not entered into to facilitate a divorce, and
the finding of the trial court that said allegations were true; the decrees of
divorce based on said findings; and the decision of the Supreme Court refusing
to modify said decrees. There was also the fact of the failure of appellant to
appeal from either of the divorce decrees, and the fact that in making his
application to modify the same, and in defending the appeal before the Supreme
Court, he took the position that the agreement was valid. Furthermore, it was at
no time claimed that the divorce was obtained by collusion, or that respondent
did not have a meritorious cause of action for a divorce upon the ground of
desertion. In that state of the record a finding that the agreement was contra
bonos mores would have been entirely wanting in evidentiary support. ( Cookinham
v. Cookinham, 219 Cal. 723 [28 P.2d 1045]; Queen v. Queen, 44 Cal. App. 2d 475
[112 P.2d 755].)

   Appellant points out that respondent first filed suit for separate
maintenance; that several months later she amended her complaint so as to ask
for a divorce, and that the property settlement agreement was signed about a
week before she amended her complaint. But certainly it cannot be said that
these circumstances serve as ground for nullifying the agreement. Nor can the
excerpt taken by appellant from the argument made by counsel for respondent in
the brief filed by him on the appeal to the Supreme Court be considered as
evidence against respondent in the present suit. It was simply a statement used
by her counsel in an argumentative sense in presenting her appeal.

     Appellant also calls attention to the fact that respondent's answer herein
admitted a portion of the allegations of paragraph III of the complaint, which
appellant construes as an admission by respondent that the agreement was contra
bonos mores. An analysis of the allegations of paragraph III and the answer
thereto would seem to demonstrate, however, that the admission does not go that
far. In any event, in paragraph IV of appellant's complaint it was definitely
alleged that the agreement was entered into for the purpose of facilitating a
divorce, and this allegation was positively denied by respondent's answer. Again
in paragraph VII of the complaint it was in effect alleged that the agreement
entered into between the parties was "contrary to public policy and void and
unenforceable"; and the allegations of that  paragraph also were positively
denied by respondent's answer. Therefore, reading the complaint and the answer
thereto as a whole, it is apparent that the admissions relied on by appellant by
no means established a prima facie case that the agreement was contra bonos
mores.

   The remaining points do not require attention; nor do we deem any of the
other authorities cited in appellant's briefs as here controlling.

   The order is affirmed.

   Peters, P. J., and Ward, J., concurred.


                              31 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           GEORGE SALVATO, Appellant, v. MARY J. SALVATO, Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 10070

            Court of Appeal of California, Third Appellate District

            195 Cal. App. 2d 869; 16 Cal. Rptr. 263; 1961 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1536


                                October 2, 1961

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court
was Denied November 29, 1961.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Calaveras
County.  Virgil M. Airola, Judge.

   Husband's action for divorce, wherein wife cross-complained for separate
maintenance.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Permanent Alimony.  --The Legislature in providing for alimony in
the divorce statute was not dealing with the general subject of alimony as an
independent subject matter of legislation, but only as one of the incidents of
an application for divorce. Such provision was not intended to be a prohibition
to the granting of alimony in other cases.

(2) Id.--Separate Maintenance.  --Though a wife who was sued for divorce had a
cause of action for divorce against her husband, she had a statutory right to
elect, perhaps because of personal or religious scruples, to prove the facts in
support of a cross-complaint for separate maintenance.

(3) Id.--Separate Maintenance.  --A wife who has the statutory right to prove
the facts, which would constitute grounds for divorce, in support of a
cross-complaint for separate maintenance should not be circumscribed and limited
by slavish adherence to a rule obtaining in a simple action for divorce where
the fault of defendant alone is in issue, namely, that the court was without
jurisdiction to grant permanent support to her by reason of the fact that the
divorce was not granted to her, but was granted to her husband for her fault.

(4) Appeal--Presumptions.  --On a judgment roll appeal, every presumption must
be indulged in support of the judgment if the court had power to pronounce it.

(5) Divorce -- Separate Maintenance.  -- Where the trial court's opinion, in a
husband's action for divorce in which the wife filed a cross-complaint for
separate maintenance, demonstrated that both parties proved a cause of action
for divorce and further satisfied the court that there was equality of fault and
that the legitimate ends of marriage had been rendered impossible of attainment,
and where the wife had been without means of support since separation from the
husband other than some partial support payments, alimony should be granted the
wronged wife.

COUNSEL: Huberty and Huberty for Appellant.

P. Basil Lambros and Samuel Z. Winnikoff for Respondent.

JUDGES: Van Dyke, P. J.  Schottky, J., and Warne, J. pro tem., * concurred.

*   Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: VAN DYKE

OPINION

     This is a judgment roll appeal from that portion of an interlocutory decree
of divorce which awarded respondent $ 50 a month alimony.

   Appellant brought this action for divorce on the ground of extreme cruelty.
Respondent filed a cross-complaint alleging cruelty on the part of appellant and
praying for separate maintenance. The trial court expressly found that each of
the parties was guilty of extreme cruelty toward the other and granted appellant
an interlocutory decree of divorce but awarded alimony to respondent.

   Appellant contends that when a divorce was granted to appellant the court
then lacked power under any circumstances to order permanent alimony paid to
respondent, saying such an order is prohibited by Civil Code section 139, which
in material part reads as follows:

   "In any interlocutory or final decree of divorce or in any final judgment or
decree in an action for separate maintenance, the court may compel the party
against whom the decree or judgment is granted to make such suitable allowance
for support and maintenance of the other party for his or her life, . . . ."

   Appellant cites and relies on such cases as Lampson v. Lampson, 171 Cal. 332
[153 P. 238], and In re McKenna, 116 Cal.App. 232 [2 P.2d 429]. From McKenna he
quotes the following:

   ". . . The court was without jurisdiction to grant permanent support to the
wife by reason of the fact that the divorce was not granted to her, but was
granted to her husband for her fault, . . . ."

    We think, however, the quoted holding is too broad and that under the
findings here the court had power to make the order it did.

     In Galland v. Galland, 38 Cal. 265, 267 -- recently cited with approval in
Hudson v. Hudson, 52 Cal.2d 735, 743 [344 P.2d 295] -- the Supreme Court said:

   "The statute of this State regulating divorce and alimony, entitles the wife
to a divorce if the husband has deserted her for two years; and on filing her
complaint, the Court is authorized to grant her alimony, pendente lite -- and
permanent alimony, if she obtains the divorce. But there is no provision of the
statute which authorizes an application for alimony, except in connection with a
prayer for divorce; and it is claimed on behalf of the defendant, that, inasmuch
as provision is made for the allowance of alimony only on an application for
divorce, it was the intention of the Legislature to limit the power of the Court
to grant alimony to that class of cases.  The maxim 'expressio unius est
exclusio alterius' is invoked as applicable to this proposition.  But, in my
opinion, it has no application to the case.  The main subject-matter of the
statute was the regulation of divorce; and only as incidental to that subject
the statute prescribes the power of the Court in respect to alimony in that
class of cases.  The Legislature was not dealing with the general subject of
alimony, as an independent subject-matter of legislation;  but, only, as one of
the incidents of an application for divorce. It saw fit to define the power of
the Court over the allowance of alimony on an application  for divorce; but was
not considering the subject of alimony in any other class of cases.  . . .  [A]
provision for alimony in a suit for divorce is not to be considered as a
declaration that alimony shall not be allowed in other actions.  The maxim which
is invoked has no application to this class of cases."

   We are persuaded that the rule in Lampson and McKenna ought not to be here
applied.  The action here was not a mere "application for divorce."  Respondent,
having, as the court found, a cause of action for divorce against appellant,
elected, perhaps because of personal or religious scruples, to prove the facts
in support of a cross-complaint for separate maintenance. This she had a
statutory right to do.   And this right should not be circumscribed and limited
by slavish adherence to a rule obtaining in a simple action for divorce where
the fault of the defendant alone is in issue.  Had defendant sued for divorce
the court could, and no doubt  would, have granted a divorce to both parties in
order to escape from the rule declared in Lampson and McKenna and do justice.
But is the rule so rigid that in a situation such as this record presents gross
injustice must be done or a wronged wife must seek an unwanted divorce? We think
not.   This is a judgment roll appeal.  Therefore every presumption must be
indulged in support of the judgment if the court had power to pronounce it.
The opinion of the trial court demonstrates that both parties proved a cause of
action for divorce and further satisfied the court that there was equality of
fault and that the legitimate ends of marriage had been rendered impossible of
attainment. Young children were involved and a continuance of the unhappy
marital community would no doubt adversely affect them.  The court said:

   "In view of the fact that acts constituting grounds of divorce upon extreme
cruelty have been found to have been also committed by plaintiff upon defendant,
and that the latter has been without any means of support since her separation
from plaintiff, other than some partial support payments, the Court believes and
finds that the defendant should be entitled to alimony . . . ."

   We see no reason why, in line with the modern and enlightened policy evinced
in such cases as De Burgh v. De Burgh, 39 Cal.2d 858 [250 P.2d 598], Hull v.
Superior Court, 54 Cal.2d 139 [5 Cal.Rptr. 1, 352 P.2d 161], Hudson v. Hudson,
supra, and others, it should not be declared that in this case and on this
record alimony could be granted to the wronged wife.

   That portion of judgment appealed from is affirmed.


                              32 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            VIVIAN H. MANN, Respondent, v. GEORGE M. MANN, Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 13050

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

           76 Cal. App. 2d 32; 172 P.2d 369; 1946 Cal. App. LEXIS 679


                               September 11, 1946

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:      Rehearing Denied 76 Cal. App. 2d 32 at 45.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of the City and
County of San Francisco.  Melvyn I. Cronin, Judge.

   Action on a promissory note.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Judgment--Res Judicata.  --An interlocutory decree awarded the wife
in a divorce action, in which the husband pleaded as a special defense that a
prior reconciliation between the parties was obtained through the wife's
fraudulent representations, was a final adjudication of the issues of fraud and
undue influence insofar as those issues related to the reconciliation and the
resultant execution of a promissory note by the husband to the wife, precluding
him, in a subsequent trial of her action on said note, from successfully relying
on the defenses of fraud and undue influence.

(2) Husband and Wife--Actions--Between Spouses.  --A wife may maintain an action
on a promissory note given to her by her husband.

(3) Pleading--Subject Matter--Conclusions.  --In a wife's action on a promissory
note given to her by her husband, an answer setting up the defense of want of
consideration stated no more than the pleader's conclusion where there was no
allegation of facts offsetting the presumption of consideration from the written
instrument.

(4) Appeal--Harmless and Reversible Error--Pleading--Striking Special Defenses.
--In a wife's action on a promissory note given to her by her husband, where, at
the hearing of plaintiff's motion to strike special defenses of defendant, it
was stipulated by the parties that the defenses of want of consideration and of
fraud and undue influence were deemed to be interrelated and the ruling of one
was to cover all three, any error in striking the defense of want of
consideration was cured by defendant's stipulation and his offer of proof
disclosing that his only evidence in support of the plea was that which went to
prove the charges of fraud and undue influence.

(5) Husband and Wife--Actions--Defenses--Estoppel.  --In a wife's action on a
promissory note given to her by her husband, defendant's plea that the wife was
estopped to sue because of an award of alimony and counsel fees in a divorce
proceeding was sham, because his obligation under the promissory note was
separate and unrelated to the obligations as fixed in the divorce proceeding.

(6) Pleading--Answer--Sufficiency.  --In a wife's action on a promissory note
given to her by her husband, an allegation in defendant's answer that he was
made a defendant in a divorce action of a certain number in the same court was
sufficient to warrant the trial court in taking notice of the divorce
proceedings.

(7) Trial--Introduction of Evidence--Documentary Evidence.  --Where a record of
proceedings in another action was not formally offered in evidence, but the
trial court and both parties treated the record of such proceedings as having
been properly received in evidence, a reviewing court will not look for
technical reasons to exclude from consideration any part of the record which was
before the trial court.

(8) Evidence--Judicial Notice.  --Judicial notice is a form of evidence.

(9) Trial--Direction of Verdict.  --In a wife's action on a promissory note
given to her by her husband, the defendant, having tendered evidence of a former
divorce proceeding by his answer, could not complain because the issue of fact
was not submitted to the jury for determination whether the court in the divorce
proceeding actually determined what there appeared on the face of the record.
Nor could defendant successfully attack an order directing a verdict for
plaintiff, where on the showing and stipulations made at the hearing of a
pretrial motion to strike defendant's special defenses, the question of former
adjudication was settled and no question of fact was left for a jury to
determine.

(10) Divorce--Judgment--Res Judicata.  --The court's reservation of jurisdiction
to determine the character and value of the community property does not affect
the finality of an interlocutory divorce decree awarded the wife insofar as it
becomes res judicata with respect to a determination that a prior reconciliation
of the parties was not procured by the fraud or undue influence of the wife.

(11) Appeal--Presumptions--Findings--Where Findings are Waived.  --Where
findings of fact have been waived, an appellate court must presume, in support
of a former adjudication that there was no fraud or undue influence behind a
reconciliation agreement of husband and wife, that if findings had been made,
they would have been adverse to the pleas of fraud and undue influence.

(12) Divorce--Judgment--Res Judicata.  --When necessary issues are determined in
an interlocutory decree of divorce, the decree becomes a conclusive
determination of those issues.

(13) Negotiable Instruments--Amount Recoverable--Attorneys' Fees.  --Where a
promissory note provides for payment of a reasonable attorney's fee, the amount
is to be fixed by the court in its discretion, without necessity for evidence.

(14) Husband and Wife--Actions--Defenses.  --In a wife's action on a promissory
note given to her by her husband, it was not a valid defense that an antenuptial
agreement undertook to compensate the wife if she obtained a divorce, where the
note in suit was executed in consideration of money loaned defendant by
plaintiff, and was not conditioned on a subsequent divorce.

(15) Id.--Actions--Defenses--Estoppel.  --In a wife's action on a promissory
note given to her by her husband, the defendant had foreclosed himself from
raising the question of the validity of an antenuptial agreement where he
pleaded a final determination of the validity of such agreement had been made in
a prior divorce action.

COUNSEL: Vincent W. Hallinan and James Martin MacInnis for Appellant.

Knight, Boland & Riordan, F. Eldred Boland, John H. Riordan, Burton L. Walsh,
Oswald A. Hunt and John H. Riordan, Jr., for Respondent.

JUDGES: Nourse, P. J.  Goodell, J., and Dooling, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: NOURSE

OPINION

     Plaintiff sued upon a promissory note. The cause was tried to a jury and at
the close of the trial the court directed a verdict in favor of the plaintiff.

   The note in suit was executed by defendant on December 22, 1939.  The
complaint pleads it in haec verba.  It calls for the payment on demand of $
25,000 with interest at 6 per cent,  and, in case of suit for collection, the
payment of "a reasonable attorney's fee to be fixed by the court." The defendant
in his answer admitted the execution of the note and set up seven special
defenses which were attacked by the plaintiff in a pretrial motion to strike and
to debar defendant from presenting evidence in support of them.  Payments on
principal and interest were admitted which reduced the debt to $ 16,238.54.
Judgment was entered for that amount plus attorney's fees fixed at 20 per cent
of the recovery.

   The facts are without material conflict.  Plaintiff and defendant were
married in November, 1931.  Preceding the marriage they entered into a written
contract settling their property rights.  Defendant agreed that if plaintiff
should obtain a divorce from him he would pay her the sum of $ 25,000 in full
settlement of all claims.  Plaintiff agreed to accept such sum in full
satisfaction and discharge of all rights acquired by the marriage.  In October,
1936, plaintiff obtained an interlocutory decree of divorce and defendant paid
to her the sum of $ 25,000 in accordance with this agreement.  In 1937 the
parties were reconciled and another agreement was executed under which plaintiff
was restored to her community property rights, given a joint tenancy in a home
valued at $ 170,000, and "permitted . . . to retain the said sum of $ 25,000."
In December, 1939, defendant executed the note in suit after plaintiff
"restored" to him $ 19,000 in cash, the balance remaining of the original
payment of $ 25,000.  This transaction the defendant alleges was made on this
basis: The plaintiff agreed to restore to defendant the sum of $ 19,000 "on a
loan basis" "for his usage on a purported loan basis" on condition that he would
execute a new note for the sum of $ 25,000.

   In June, 1943, the plaintiff filed a complaint for divorce. The complaint in
the present action was filed in December, 1944.  In March, 1945, the defendant
herein filed his answer and cross-complaint in which he alleged: "Thereafter, in
the month of June, 1943, without cause or provocation, plaintiff Vivian H. Mann
left defendant and separated herself from his person, and George M. Mann,
defendant herein, was made a defendant in a second action for divorce, the same
being numbered 321,467, in the Superior Court of the State of California in and
for the City and County of San Francisco; in the months of June and July, 1944,
and continuing up to and including the present time, testimony was taken and is
currently being taken in the premises of said action for divorce;  from and out
of the matters and things revealed  by the testimony in said action, defendant
George M. Mann has discovered the falsity of the representations so made by
plaintiff Vivian H. Mann as aforesaid.  Defendant, George M. Mann, therefore
alleges that the obligation which is purportedly evidenced by the document set
forth in haec verba of paragraph II of plaintiff's complaint herein was an
obligation created and obtained by the fraud of said Vivian H. Mann upon him and
that the instrument of December 1939 was signed by him upon his continued
reliance upon said false and fraudulent representations of said Vivian H. Mann."

   Upon these allegations the defendant grounds his first defense of fraud, his
second of no consideration, and his fourth of undue influence. His third defense
is the statute of limitations, his fifth is incapacity of a wife to sue her
husband, his sixth is estoppel of the wife to sue because of the award of
alimony and counsel fees in the divorce proceeding, and his seventh is
nonownership of the note because of her assignment to a bank for collection.

   At the hearing of the pretrial motion to delimit the issues the court, upon
stipulation of the parties, considered the first and fourth defenses, fraud and
undue influence, as interrelated and dependent upon the validity of the
reconciliation agreement.  It was then agreed by counsel for the defendant:
"That if the validity of the reconciliation agreement was determined in that
other case, the prior divorce case, . . . that would be a bar to opening that up
in this case now. . . ."

   With the issue thus defined the argument on the pretrial motion was directed
to the question of the effect of the decree in the divorce case as determining
the issue of the validity of the reconciliation agreement.  Before the
submission of this cause to the jury the defendant, in the presence of the jury,
offered to prove by evidence discovered in the divorce case that the
reconciliation agreement was procured by the fraud of plaintiff in order to
restore her interest in the community property and to extract from him his
promise to build her an expensive home.  To the offer of proof plaintiff
objected on the ground "that the matter of alleged fraud has already been
adjudicated and made an express issue in the answer and cross-complaint in the
divorce case, and in the judgment of his Honor Judge Conlan in the interlocutory
decree of divorce." To this statement counsel for defendant made no objection.
Thereupon counsel for plaintiff asked that it be  stipulated that in ruling upon
the motion to delimit the issues the court had before it the full record in the
divorce case. No stipulation was made, but the trial judge stated: "That in
offering the motions heretofore passed upon, the mover, the plaintiff, offered
to the Court for consideration the complete file in the case of 'The People For
the Best Interest and Protection of George Richard Mann, Vivian Joye Mann and
Virginia Diana Mann upon the petition of George M. Mann and Concerning
Controversies between Petitioner and Vivian Mann, wife of Petitioner,
Respondent.  Vivian Mann, Plaintiff and Cross-Defendant versus George M. Mann,
Defendant and Cross-Complainant.' No. 321,467 in the Superior Court of the City
and County of San Francisco, State of California.  And the Court had in mind at
the time of passing on the motion, the matters presented in said action, as well
as the arguments presented and the citations of authority." To this statement
counsel for the defendant made no objection.  In his answer in the divorce
action the defendant herein pleaded as a special defense that the reconciliation
of 1937 was procured through the false promises of this plaintiff, that: "Said
promises on plaintiff's part were not made in good faith, and said return and
resumption of marital relations by plaintiff were made in order to gain a
financial advantage and without intent on the part of plaintiff to continue said
marital relations except so long as it might suit plaintiff's convenience so to
do."

   On this showing the trial court herein granted plaintiff's motion to strike
the first, second and fourth defenses.  They are all related and all rest on the
basis of prior adjudication.  These pleas are the gravamen of appellant's case
and they will be treated as presenting one question.   Appellant's preliminary
objection to the ruling is that the interlocutory decree was not a final
judgment and could not therefore create an estoppel. This requires a statement
of the history of the divorce proceedings.  The interlocutory decree was entered
May 21, 1945, "nunc pro tunc" as of July 26, 1944.  The final decree was entered
July 27, 1945.  No appeal was taken from either decree. The cause herein was
tried to the jury and the verdict returned on August 23, 1945.  The
interlocutory decree was accordingly a final adjudication of the issue of fraud
and undue influence at the time the ruling complained of was made insofar as
those issues relate to the reconciliation of 1939 and the resultant execution of
the promissory note in suit.  This disposes of appellant's attack upon  the
ruling, assuming that the record in the prior proceeding was properly before the
court, a question which we will discuss later.

     The first attack made on the judgment is that the wife had no legal right
to sue her husband.  This was pleaded in his answer as his fifth separate
defense. Appellant relies upon the ancient common law rule that promissory notes
between husband and wife were void, on the California cases of White v. Warren,
120 Cal. 322 [49 P. 129, 52 P. 723]; Dolliver v. Dolliver, 94 Cal. 642 [30 P. 4]
; and Williamson v. Williamson, 41 Cal.App. 721 [183 P. 301], and sections 158
and 2235 of the Civil Code emphasizing the confidential relations existing
between husband and wife. No one of the cases holds that in a suit upon a
promissory note given by husband or wife to the other the plaintiff must allege
and prove that the note was given for a valuable consideration and that the
confidential relation was not abused.  Dimond v. Sanderson, 103 Cal. 97 [37 P.
189] holds to the contrary.  There the court said (p. 101): "The giving of the
promissory note in question does not indicate a trust.  It is an ordinary
contract.  Being in writing the law presumes a sufficient consideration, though
it may be, in fact, wholly without consideration." The Dimond case was cited
with approval, with other authorities, in Donovan v. Security First Nat. Bank,
67 Cal.App.2d 845, 854 [155 P.2d 856], to the point that the presumption of a
consideration arising from the written instrument is not overcome by the
presumption in section 2235 of the Civil Code "unless it is shown that the
relationship was used by the trustee to obtain an unfair advantage."

   But we do not understand why the point is raised at this time.  On the
pretrial argument to strike this special defense the trial judge stated to
counsel for appellant that, before ruling on the motion to strike, it appeared
to him that the point was well taken.  Counsel for appellant replied, "Yes, I
think in view of the cases he cites, that the common law has probably been
abrogated in that respect." The appellant thus concurred in a ruling which was
sound and not now open to attack.

     Allied to this issue is the second separate defense -- that the note was
based upon no consideration.  It is the theory of appellant that because the
parties were husband and wife there could be no consideration for the note.  The
answer does not contain any allegation of facts offsetting the presumption  of
consideration from the written instrument, and, unless supported by the
allegations in the other special defenses of fraud and undue influence, it is no
more than the pleader's conclusion.   At the hearing of the motion, by
stipulation of the parties, the first, second and fourth defenses were deemed to
be interrelated and the ruling on one was to cover all three.  On the face of
the answer the allegations of the first and fourth defenses are not incorporated
in the second defense.  But by the agreement of the parties they were to be
deemed interrelated so that the allegation of no consideration became one of a
plea that the consideration failed because of the fraud and undue influence
alleged in the other defenses.  Hence, if error occurred in the pretrial order
striking this defense it was cured by appellant's stipulation and his offer of
proof to the jury disclosing that his only evidence in support of the plea was
that which went to prove the charges of fraud and undue influence. And this is
true notwithstanding that, in presenting the issue in his opening brief,
appellant lays greater stress on the argument that, in a suit on a promissory
note given by husband or wife to the other, the plaintiff must allege and prove
valuable consideration and nonabuse of the confidential relationship.

   Appellant's third special defense pleaded the bar of the statute of
limitations.  His seventh pleaded that respondent was not the holder of the
note.  Neither of these  pleas were stricken out.  The respondent went to trial
to the jury and proved payments on the note by appellant up to and subsequent to
the filing of the complaint.  She also proved that she was the true holder and
owner of the note -- that it had at one time been assigned to a bank for
collection but returned to her.

     In his sixth special defense appellant pleaded:

   "In the proceedings under Action No. 321,467 herein said Vivian H. Mann, in
order to obtain awards of alimony pendente lite and counsel fees pendente lite,
averred and represented to the court that she was without funds or property and
upon said averments and representations the Honorable the Superior Court awarded
said Vivian H. Mann alimony pendente lite at the rate of $ 1200 per month,
counsel fees, pendente lite, in the further sum of $ 3500 and a general award of
counsel fees on account of $ 7500, all against said defendant, George M. Mann;
said alimony, pendente lite, has been paid currently by defendant George M. Mann
to plaintiff Vivian  H. Mann from approximately June, 1943, up to and including
the present time and each of the counsel fees above mentioned have been paid by
him as well; from and out of said premises George M. Mann alleges that Vivian H.
Mann is estopped to declare against him the purported indebtedness, as set
forth."

   Appellant makes no special argument directed to this plea.  It does not
appear whether it was stricken out except that during the argument of the
pretrial motion it was stated and apparently conceded that only the third and
seventh defenses were to go to the jury.  It is manifest however that this plea
of estoppel is sham.  Payments of alimony and counsel fees under the divorce
decree were payments of appellant's obligations as fixed in the divorce
proceeding. The obligation under the promissory note was a separate and
unrelated obligation.  There is no logic in a plea that because respondent was
able to enforce the one obligation she was estopped from proceeding on the
other.

     In his preliminary attack upon the order directing a verdict the appellant
asserts that the divorce proceedings were not properly before the court and that
the jury should have been permitted to pass on the evidence.  The divorce
proceedings were brought to the judicial notice of the court by the allegations
in appellant's answer reading:

   "Thereafter, in the month of June, 1943, without cause or provocation,
plaintiff Vivian H. Mann left defendant and separated herself from his person,
and George M. Mann, defendant herein, was made a defendant in a second action
for divorce, the same being numbered 321,467, in the Superior Court of the State
of California in and for the City and County of San Francisco; in the months of
June and July, 1944, and continuing up to and including the present time,
testimony was taken and is currently being taken in the premises of said action
for divorce; from and out of the matters and things revealed by the testimony in
said action, defendant George M. Mann has discovered the falsity of the
representations so made by plaintiff Vivian H. Mann as aforesaid.  Defendant,
George M. Mann, therefore alleges that the obligation which is purportedly
evidenced by the document set forth in haec verba of paragraph II of plaintiff's
complaint herein was an obligation created and obtained by the fraud of said
Vivian H. Mann upon him and that the instrument of December 1939 was signed by
him upon his continued reliance upon said false and fraudulent representations
of said Vivian H. Mann."

    In Roberts v. Roberts, 81 Cal.App. 499, 501 [253 P. 1112], a similar
question arose on similar facts and the court said: "Such reference [the
pleading of the former action in defendant's answer], however, was sufficient to
warrant the trial court in taking judicial notice thereof ( Sewell v. Johnson,
165 Cal. 762 [Ann.Cas. 1915B, 645, 134 P. 704]); and we must presume that the
implied finding as to its effect, which was adverse to the allegations of the
affidavit, was sustained by the terms of the judgment ( Estate of Young, 149
Cal. 173 [85 P. 145]; Fonner v. Martens, 186 Cal. 623, 625 [200 P. 405]; Western
California Land Co. v. Welch, 41 Cal.App. 435 [183 P. 169])."

   Appellant cites and relies upon Willson v. Security-First National Bank, 21
Cal.2d 705 [134 P.2d 800], where the defense of res judicata was raised by
demurrer only.   There is nothing in the Willson case holding that when the
former proceeding is specially pleaded the court is not thereby given notice of
it.  The rule applicable here is found in the Roberts case.  And see Sewell v.
Johnson, 165 Cal. 762 [134 P. 704, Ann.Cas. 1915B 645]; Nordin v. Bank of
America, 11 Cal.2d 98 [52 P.2d 1018].

   The authorities cited should be a sufficient answer to the argument that the
divorce proceedings were not properly before the court.   But it may be added
that, though the record was not formally offered in evidence, counsel for
appellant acquiesced in the use of the record in the argument on the pretrial
motion to limit the issues, and it is manifest that all parties and the court
believed that the record was properly before the court.  This is indicated by
the remarks of counsel for respondent near the close of the argument on the
motion asking that the record should show that these proceedings were before the
court and had been read and examined in passing upon the motion.  The trial
court at the time stated that respondent had offered the complete file of the
divorce proceedings and that the record had been fully considered in passing
upon the motion.  No objection was made by the appellant to either of the
statements of court or counsel and it is fair to assume that he acquiesced in
these statements as to the course of procedure.  The record thus shows that the
trial court and both parties treated the record of the proceedings in the
divorce case as having been properly received in evidence on the hearing of the
motion.  When such is the state of the record in the trial court a reviewing
court  will not look for technical reasons to exclude from consideration any
part of the record which was before the trial court.  See generally when an
exhibit will be deemed to have been properly admitted, 24 Cal.Jur. 759; Wright
v. Roseberry, 81 Cal. 87 [22 P. 336]; Dodson v. Greuner, 28 Cal.App.2d 418, 423
[82 P.2d 741].

     The argument of appellant in relation to this issue that he was denied his
constitutional right of due process is not sound.  Judicial notice is a form of
evidence.  In re Samaha, 130 Cal.App. 116 [19 P.2d 839]; Gayton v. Pacific Fruit
Express Co., 127 Cal.App. 50 [15 P.2d 217].  Having tendered the evidence of the
former proceeding by his answer the appellant cannot complain because the issue
of fact was not submitted to the jury for the determination whether the court in
the divorce proceeding actually determined what there appears on the face of the
record.  That record presented a former adjudication that there was no fraud or
undue influence behind the reconciliation agreement.  Upon the showing and
stipulations made at the hearing of the pretrial motion the question of the
former adjudication was settled and no question of fact -- either of the
existence of such former judgment, or of the scope of the issues there involved
-- was left for a jury to determine.

     But appellant argues that the decree in the divorce proceedings was not
final and cites from the exhibit filed herein:

   "The Court expressly reserved for later determination all questions relating
to property rights of the parties hereto,  if any, and in this respect found and
decreed that Vivian Mann, was entitled to an award equal to not less than
one-half of the community property, if any, of the parties, said award to be
reduced to judgment when the extent and/or existence of said community property,
if any, is determined, and the Court expressly, and with the consent of the
parties, reserved jurisdiction to make such a determination and award."

   This reservation of jurisdiction to determine the character and value of the
community property does not affect the finality of the interlocutory decree
insofar as it becomes res judicata with respect to the determination adverse to
this appellant that the reconciliation was not procured by the fraud or undue
influence of Mrs. Mann as alleged here and in the divorce proceeding. It will be
noted that the court adjudged that Mrs. Mann was entitled to a divorce and also
that she  "was entitled to an award equal to not less than one-half of the
community property, if any.  . . ."  Findings of fact having been waived we must
presume here that, if findings had been made, they would have been adverse to
the pleas of fraud and undue influence, otherwise Mrs. Mann would not have been
entitled to a divorce.

     Appellant argues further that since the promissory note was not in issue in
the divorce proceeding the court would not have jurisdiction to determine his
liability in that proceeding.  But the court did not do so.  It impliedly found
on the issues raised that the reconciliation agreement was not procured by fraud
and undue influence. Here the execution of the promissory note in suit is
attacked on the ground that it stemmed from the reconciliation agreement which
in turn was procured by fraud and undue influence. If the reconciliation
agreement was not tainted with fraud, as it was found in the divorce case, this
attack on the promissory note must fall because the charges of fraud and undue
influence here made are directed specifically to that agreement.  It is manifest
that this agreement was in issue in the divorce case. The pleading of fraud and
undue influence in that case is almost identical in language to that used here.
The necessity of a determination of that issue is apparent.  When necessary
issues are thus determined in an interlocutory decree of divorce the decree
becomes a conclusive determination of those issues.  ( Leupe v. Leupe, 21 Cal.2d
145, 148 [130 P.2d 697], where many authorities are cited.)

     Finally appellant argues that the award of attorney's fees was error since
no evidence was offered to prove their value.  He cites several cases from other
jurisdictions which are wholly out of harmony with the rule followed in this
state.  He also cites Miller v. Ambassador Park Syndicate, 121 Cal.App. 92 [9
P.2d 267] to the effect that an award of attorney's fees was improper because
the complaint contained no allegations regarding such fees and "no claim was
made on the trial." That case is also somewhat out of harmony with the
California rule, but, even so, it has no bearing here because the complaint
pleaded the note and prayed for a reasonable fee, and the "claim" was made to
the court before the cause was submitted.  However, the applicable rule is
stated in Baker v. Eilers Music Co., 175 Cal. 652, 654 [166 P. 1006], as
follows: "Where a promissory note so provides for the payment of a reasonable
attorney's fee, it is  the province of the court to fix that amount in its
discretion and without the introduction of direct evidence upon the matter, and
only for an abuse of discretion -- which does not here appear -- will the
court's action be reversed.  ( Woodward v. Brown, 119 Cal. 283 [63 Am.St.Rep.
108, 51 P. 2, 542]; Patten v. Pepper Hotel Co., 153 Cal. 461 [96 P. 296].)"

     Appellant contends that the whole proceeding is wrong because the
antenuptial agreement of 1931 was contrary to good morals since it undertook to
compensate Mrs. Mann if she obtained a divorce. The note in suit was executed in
consideration of money loaned appellant by respondent; it was not conditioned
upon a subsequent divorce; and it bore no relation to the previous agreement and
separation.  Hence Pereira v. Pereira, 156 Cal. 1 [103 P. 488, 134 Am.St.Rep.
107, 23 L.R.A.N.S. 880] and similar cases which denounce a contract between
husband and wife having for its object the dissolution of the marriage contract
are not applicable to a case of this kind.  The modern and accepted rule which
recognizes a mutual property settlement agreement incidental to a contemplated
divorce is found in Hill v. Hill, 23 Cal.2d 82, 93 [142 P.2d 417].

     Furthermore the appellant has foreclosed himself from raising the question
of the validity of the antenuptial agreement by the allegation in his answer
that in the first divorce action the plaintiff herein insisted that she was
entitled to a greater award than the proceeds of the $ 25,000 agreement, but
that the court sustained the contract and awarded the plaintiff the sum of $
25,000 "in full of all claims." The appellant has thus pleaded a final
determination of the validity of the prenuptial agreement and that question is
not open to further argument.

   From the allegations in the answer it appears that the validity of the
prenuptial agreement and of the reconciliation agreement has been finally
determined adversely to the appellant.  During the argument of the motion to
limit the issues the court stated that since the validity of the reconciliation
agreement had been determined in the prior divorce case it seemed that the only
issue then before the court was whether that decree would be a bar to opening up
the same issue here.  To this  counsel for appellant replied: "That is exactly
the way I perceive it, your Honor." The validity of that agreement having been
adjudicated and the record of the divorce proceedings having been brought to the
knowledge of the court by appellant's pleadings, it necessarily follows that,
the  issues of fraud and undue influence having been determined by the prior
decree, there was nothing in relation to those issues left to be determined by
the jury.

   For the reasons stated we are satisfied that appellant was not denied any
legal right of trial by the ruling complained of since he had theretofore been
accorded all the due process of law to which he was entitled when the same
issues were tried in the divorce proceeding.

   Judgment affirmed.


                              33 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          EMILIE ROBERTS, Respondent, v. ELMORE W. ROBERTS, Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 5764

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FIRST APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION ONE

             83 Cal. App. 345; 256 P. 826; 1927 Cal. App. LEXIS 593


                             May 24, 1927, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:      APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Alameda
County. T. W. Harris, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Husband and Wife -- Divorce -- Agreement as to Amount of Maintenance--
Refusal of Trial Court to Recognize Validity of--Public Policy--Remedies.
--Where husband and wife entered into a written agreement for settlement of
property rights and maintenance in contemplation of divorce, the fact that in
the subsequent action of divorce brought by the wife the court's conclusions of
law held certain clauses of said agreement, providing for the incorporation in
the decree of provisions relating to the amount of alimony, to be void as
against public policy, but sustained the agreement in all other respects, did
not prevent the wife from bringing action thereon after divorce.

(2) Id. -- Agreement Fixing Amount of Alimony--Public Policy--Judgments.  -- A
decree in a divorce action holding clauses in a maintenance agreement relating
to the amount of alimony void as against public policy invalidated the agreement
only in so far as the enforcement of the terms of said excepted clauses were
concerned, as the parties could not by agreement control the action of the court
in fixing the amount of alimony nor interfere with its powers in that respect.

(3) Id.--Agreement for Divorce--Enforcement of.  --Any agreement for divorce, or
any collateral bargaining promotive of it, is void and will not be enforced.

(4) Id. -- Community Property -- Authority of Court.  --In divorce actions, the
trial court has unlimited authority to make disposition of the community
property.

(5) Id. -- Agreement of Husband and Wife Settling Property Rights--Disregard by
Trial Court Where Object is Dissolution of Marriage.  -- Whenever an agreement
is presented to and urged upon the court for acceptance as the basis for a
decree settling property rights of the parties to a divorce action, the court
has jurisdiction to disregard the agreement as contra bonos mores, where it has
for its object the dissolution of the marriage, or facilitates that result.

(6) Id. -- Marriage -- Contracts Promotive of Dissolution -- Nonenforcement of.
--The law favors marriage, and cannot sanction contracts intended to promote its
dissolution by lending itself to their enforcement.

(7) Id. -- Settlement of Property Rights -- Agreement Between Husband and Wife
-- Sustained When Free from Illegal Objects.  -- An agreement entered into
between husband and wife, under section 158 of the Civil Code, for the
settlement of property rights in contemplation of divorce will be sustained
where it is free from illegal objects and influences.

(8) Id. -- Validity of Agreement -- Action by Wife.  --The refusal of the trial
court in a divorce action to follow certain clauses of an agreement in
settlement of property rights and maintenance entered into by the parties in
contemplation of divorce did not constitute an adjudication that the balance of
the agreement was void so as to prevent the wife from suing upon the agreement
for the difference between the amount awarded by the court as alimony and the
amount stipulated in the agreement, where the court specifically found that the
agreement, except as to said clauses, was in all respects valid and binding.

(9) Id.--Payments--How Credited.  --Where a divorced wife has concurrent
remedies under a property settlement agreement and a divorce decree, payments
made under one should be credited to the amount due under both.

COUNSEL: James Donovan for Appellant.

John L. McVey for Respondent.

JUDGES: KNIGHT, J. Tyler, P. J., and Cashin, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: KNIGHT

OPINION

     KNIGHT, J. This is defendant's appeal from a judgment rendered against him
in an action to recover money claimed to be due under a written agreement
entered into between defendant and plaintiff as husband and wife.

   The agreement in question was executed on August 26, 1924, about six weeks
after the parties had separated, and provided among other things for a property
settlement including the payment to plaintiff by defendant of the sum of $ 100 a
month as maintenance. Shortly after the execution of said agreement plaintiff
commenced an action for divorce upon the ground of extreme cruelty, alleging in
her complaint that there was no community property; that the property rights had
been settled between them by the written agreement of August 26, 1924, as a part
of which settlement defendant promised and agreed to pay her the sum of $ 100 a
month as maintenance; and she therefore asked that the decree of divorce which
she was seeking embody a provision directing such payment to be made. One of the
several defenses interposed by defendant was that said agreement was void, as
contra bonos mores, but upon trial that defense was not  sustained, the court
making findings upholding the legality of said instrument except as to two
clauses thereof which will be hereinafter referred to. Thereupon an
interlocutory decree of divorce was granted, but the court, refusing to be bound
by the two clauses above mentioned, which  related to the amount of maintenance
which the parties had agreed should be allowed plaintiff in case of divorce,
awarded plaintiff monthly maintenance in the sum of $ 65 instead of $ 100 as
stipulated in said agreement. The interlocutory decree was entered on November
14, 1925, and no appeal was taken therefrom.

   Subsequently, and on May 8, 1926, plaintiff commenced the instant action to
collect the accrued payments claimed to be due under said settlement agreement
minus the amount of alimony granted by the court under the divorce decree, which
the defendant had paid. Defendant urged as one of his defenses that the
agreement upon which plaintiff's action was founded had been declared void by
the decision in the divorce action, and that therefore its terms were not
afterwards enforceable. The trial court expressly negatived this defense, and
held affirmatively that the decision in the divorce action established that said
agreement was "a valid, subsisting, and legal agreement between the parties
thereto" except as to the two clauses above mentioned, and that no appeal having
been taken, the decision and decree therein became final and conclusive against
the parties in the present action "as to the questions involved herein
respecting said agreement." Whereupon plaintiff was given judgment for $ 910, of
which sum $ 700 represented the full amount of the monthly allowance called for
under said agreement from the date of its execution up to the time of the entry
of the interlocutory decree of divorce, the balance representing the difference
of $ 35 a month between the amount of the monthly maintenance fixed by said
agreement and the amount awarded by the court and paid by the defendant in the
divorce action, from the date of the interlocutory decree to the date of
judgment herein; and the court further declared in its decision:  "That said
plaintiff has concurrent remedies against defendant, one under said
interlocutory decree for the payment of alimony and one upon said written
agreement; that any moneys paid by said defendant to plaintiff for her
maintenance and support over and above the sum of seven hundred dollars ($ 700)
which was due upon said agreement at the time of the giving and making of said
interlocutory decree of divorce shall be credited both upon said judgment for
alimony and upon said agreement."

     The principal question presented is whether the refusal of the trial court
in the divorce proceeding to follow the two clauses of said agreement relating
to the amount of maintenance, upon the grounds therein stated, constituted an
adjudication that the portion of the agreement now being sued upon was void as
contra bonos mores. Defendant contends that it was, and upon the assumption that
the adverse finding on that issue in the instant action is not supported by the
facts, has devoted much of his brief to a discussion of the question of the
invalidity of that portion of said agreement upon the grounds mentioned.

   The record in the divorce action discloses that the issue as to the validity
of the entire agreement was brought squarely before the trial court for
determination under the affirmative allegations of defendant's answer to the
effect that said agreement was void as being against public policy, and the
court found specifically against those allegations, its finding being: "That it
is not true that said contract is or that all the terms thereof are against
public policy in violation of the express provisions of law relating to domestic
relations between husband and wife or otherwise . . ." Following this finding
the court set forth said agreement in full, which in part provided as follows:
"Now therefore, the party of the first part (defendant) hereby agrees to pay to
the party of the second part as and for her maintenance and support, the sum of
$ 100.00 per month, and in addition thereto agrees to turn over and deliver to
the second party" certain shares of corporate stock and household furnishings.
In its conclusions of law, however, the court quoted again the two accepted
clauses of said agreement above referred to, which provided that "in any action
for divorce which may be filed by either of the parties against the other, the
court may award to the party of the second part [plaintiff] in the event that
any decree of divorce is given or made in her favor, the sum of $ 100 per month
as and for maintenance and alimony, and may incorporate in any such decree the
provisions of this agreement respecting the property rights of the parties
hereto," said monthly maintenance to terminate if plaintiff should remarry; and
with reference to these latter clauses found that the same were "void as against
public policy, but that in all other respects the agreement is a valid,
subsisting, and legal agreement between the parties thereto."  (Italics ours.)
Thereupon, refusing to be bound by the provisions of the two clauses above
mentioned, the court awarded plaintiff alimony in the sum of $ 65 a month only.
There was no finding whatever, however, as defendant seems to contend, that the
agreement made by defendant to pay plaintiff the said sum of $ 100 a month was
void for any reason.

     From the foregoing we conclude that the trial court correctly held in the
instant  action that its decision in the divorce proceeding definitely disposed
of the question of legality of said agreement adversely to defendant's
contention, and that in the absence of an appeal the decision and judgment
therein has become final. The language used by the court, in the divorce action,
in declaring the two clauses above referred to "void as against public policy,"
when reasonably construed in the light of the entire decision, means simply that
so far as the enforcement of the terms of said two excepted clauses were
concerned the parties could not presume to control by agreement the action of
the court in fixing the amount of alimony in a divorce proceeding nor to
interfere with its powers in that respect; and to the extent that they had
attempted to do so, those clauses of said agreement were void as against public
policy.

     Any agreement for divorce, or any collateral bargaining promotive of it, is
considered unlawful and void;  and furthermore in divorce actions the trial
court has unlimited authority to make disposition of the community property. (
Newman v. Freitas, 129 Cal. 283 [50 L. R. A. 548, 61 P. 907], citing Bishop on
Marriage, Divorce and Separation, sec. 696; Greenwood on Public Policy, 490.)
Consequently, whenever an agreement is presented to and urged upon the court for
acceptance as basis for a decree settling the property rights of the parties,
the court necessarily has jurisdiction to consider the agreement and to
disregard the same as contra bonos mores if it finds that the same has for its
object the dissolution of the marriage, or the facilitating that result, such as
an agreement by the defendant in a pending action for divorce to withdraw his or
her oppositions and to make no defense. ( Newman v. Freitas, supra; McCahan v.
McCahan, 47 Cal. App. 173 [190 P. 458].)   The doctrine stated is founded upon
the proposition that the law favors marriage, and cannot therefore  sanction
contracts intended to promote its dissolution by lending itself to their
enforcement. ( Muckenburg v. Holler, 29 Ind. 139 [92 Am. Dec. 345]; Newman v.
Freitas, supra.)   But it is also the law that either husband or wife may enter
into any agreement or transaction with the other respecting property which
either might if unmarried (Civ. Code, sec. 158); and therefore, if after
scrutinizing the agreement entered into between them for the settlement of their
property rights and the circumstances under which it was made, the trial court
ascertains and determines that the same is free from the illegal objects and
influences above mentioned, it may affirm the agreement ( McCahan v. McCahan,
supra), and the force given thereto derives its sanction from the decree made by
the court with a knowledge of the facts ( Loveren v. Loveren, 106 Cal. 509 [39
P. 801]).  In the divorce action here the trial court determined upon the
evidence adduced before it and after considering the text of the agreement that
said agreement was not entered into in violation of the policy of the law or
contrary to good morals, and was therefore valid, but in the exercise of its
power as a court of equity it declined to follow the two clauses thereof
relating to the matter of fixing the amount of plaintiff's maintenance. It is
apparent, however, that this latter action on the part of the court in no way
affected its express general finding that otherwise said agreement was valid;
and being valid its executory terms were not abrogated or rendered ineffectual
by plaintiff's subsequent application for a divorce, and she was therefore
entitled to enforce the same in the present action. ( Carey v. Mackey, 82 Me.
516 [17 Am. St. Rep. 500, 9 L. R. A. 113, 20 A.  84]; Galusha v. Galusha, 116
N.Y. 635 [15 Am. St. Rep. 453, 6 L. R. A. 487, 22 N.E. 1114]; Pryor v. Pryor, 88
Ark. 302 [129 Am. St. Rep. 102, 114 S.W. 700]; Chamberlain v. Cuming, 37 Misc.
815 [76 N.Y.S. 896]; Van Horn v. Van Horn, 196 A.D. 472 [188 N.Y.S. 98]; Clark
v. Fosdick, 118 N.Y. 7 [16 Am. St. Rep. 733, 6 L. R. A. 132, 22 N.E. 1111]; 9 R.
C. L. 536.)

     The portion of the decree declaring that plaintiff was entitled to
concurrent remedies under both the agreement and the divorce decree, and that
payments under the former of any sum over $ 700 should be credited on both, is
in conformity with the ruling in the case of Newell v. Newell, 28 Cal. App. 784
[154 P. 32]. There the husband entered into an agreement to pay the wife $ 75
per month as maintenance and subsequently a divorce was granted in her favor
with a provision for the payment of $ 75 per month as alimony. It was contended
by the husband that the granting of such alimony by the court required him to
pay $ 75 a month under the decree and that he was also obliged to pay an
additional $ 75 per month under the agreement. The court held this contention to
be without merit, saying: "Conceding that he may be bound by both the order and
agreement to pay said sum, and upon default plaintiff might have concurrent
remedies in enforcing payment, nevertheless the payment of $ 75 per month would
not only satisfy his obligation existing by virtue of the agreement made with
plaintiff, but at the same time satisfy the obligation imposed upon him by the
order and decree made in accordance with the terms of the agreement and pursuant
to the prayer of the complaint."

   For the reasons hereinabove stated, we are of the opinion that the judgment
should be affirmed, and it is so ordered.

   Tyler, P. J., and Cashin, J., concurred.


                              34 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            EDITH M. CROUCH, Appellant, v. BEN E. CROUCH Respondent

                                L. A. No. 18870

                          Supreme Court of California

               28 Cal. 2d 243; 169 P.2d 897; 1946 Cal. LEXIS 207


                                  May 24, 1946

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  Ruben S. Schmidt, Judge.

   Action for divorce and for other relief.

COUNSEL: Charles C. Montgomery, Jr., for Appellant.

Peters & Peters for Respondent.

JUDGES: In Bank. Edmonds, J.  Gibson, C. J., Shenk, J., Traynor, J., and Spence,
J., concurred.  Schauer, J., dissents.  Carter, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: EDMONDS

OPINION

     In a suit for divorce and for a share of the community property, the wife's
causes of action were held to be barred by a final decree of divorce rendered in
favor of her husband in the State of Nevada.  But the court found, as a fact,
that at no time while the husband was in Nevada did he have any intention of
becoming a resident of that state except for the purpose of obtaining a divorce,
and the question for decision concerns the effect of the foreign decree under
such circumstances.

   The appeal is upon the judgment roll. In the complaint filed by Edith M.
Crouch in March, 1942, she alleged that the separation between herself and her
husband Ben E. Crouch, occurred in 1938; that he deserted her and is now living
in this state.  She also pleaded a cause of action upon the ground of cruelty,
one upon the ground of adultery, and another in which she asserted that he had
failed to provide for her.  Mrs. Crouch also sought to enjoin the defendants
from disposing of any community property in which she had any interest.  Within
a month before the complaint was filed, she alleged, her husband went to Nevada,
"simulating a purported residence" there for the purpose of obtaining a divorce.
She prayed for a divorce, an accounting of the community property, alimony, and
attorney's fees.  By answer the husband denied all of the wife's charges and
pleaded as a defense to each cause of action that at the time of the filing of
her complaint he was, and for some time prior thereto had been, a resident of
Nevada where on May 4, 1942, he had obtained a decree of divorce from her.

   Upon the issues framed by these pleadings the court found that each of the
appellant's causes of action is barred by the decree of divorce obtained by
Crouch in Nevada.  But the court also found that at the time when Crouch filed
his complaint and at the time of the rendition of judgment, he was not a bona
fide resident of Nevada but a resident of California.  Crouch entered Nevada,
the findings continue, "solely for the purpose of obtaining a divorce from the
plaintiff  herein [and] . . . in so doing . . . [he abandoned his wife] without
cause." He remained in Nevada "just long enough to obtain an apparent residence"
there and then filed his action for divorce, obtained the decree in his favor,
and returned to California.  And, continued the trial court, ". . . at no time
while defendant was in the state of Nevada did he have any intention of becoming
a resident thereof save and except for the sole purpose of obtaining a divorce
from this plaintiff." According to the findings, in the Nevada action there was
"constructive service" upon Mrs. Crouch.  At the trial of the present suit, her
counsel admitted that there was no community property and the cause of action
for a part of it was abandoned.  By the determination that the decree of divorce
obtained by Crouch in Nevada bars the present action, there was no occasion for
a finding concerning alimony, but, so far as the record shows, Mrs. Crouch is
continuing to assert her right to support.

   The Nevada decree recites that "the defendant . . . [was] personally served
with summons in the City of Glendale, County of Los Angeles, State of
California," and, contrary to the trial court's finding, that "the plaintiff is
a bona fide resident of the County of Washoe, State of Nevada." However, the
findings of each court state that Mrs. Crouch did not appear in the Nevada
action.

   Under the findings of fact of the trial court, says the appellant, the
decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States do not compel a holding that
the divorce decree obtained in Nevada bars the present action in California.
The principles laid down by the court, Mrs. Crouch asserts, have no effect upon
the rule of decision in this state that the judgment of a sister state may be
collaterally attacked for extrinsic fraud.  In support of the determination in
his favor, Crouch declares that, as Mrs. Crouch was personally served with a
copy of the complaint and of the summons in the foreign action, the courts of
California must give full faith and credit to the Nevada decree and are required
to recognize it as controlling the rights of the parties in the present
litigation.

   In Williams v. North Carolina, 317 U.S. 287 [63 S.Ct. 207, 87 L.Ed. 279, 143
A.L.R.  1273], the defendants were convicted of bigamy in the state court.  At
the time they went to Nevada to obtain divorces from their respective spouses,
they were residents of North Carolina.  After satisfying the residence
requirement under the Nevada statute, each of them  obtained a divorce. They
were married in Nevada shortly after the divorces were granted and then returned
to North Carolina where they lived together as husband and wife. There they were
indicted for bigamy and found guilty by a jury.  The state Supreme Court
sustained the convictions.  ( State v. Williams, 220 N.C. 445 [17 S.E.2d 769].)

   The judgments of conviction were reversed by the Supreme Court of the United
States, which overruled Haddock v. Haddock, 201 U.S. 562 [26 S.Ct. 525, 50 L.Ed.
867]. If either spouse is domiciled in a state where a divorce is granted upon
constructive service, the court held, the divorce must be recognized in other
states.  But it was careful to point out that the decision did not apply to a
situation such as that shown by the record now before this court, saying: "In
the first place, we repeat that in this case we must assume that petitioners had
a bona fide domicil in Nevada, not that the Nevada domicil was a sham.  We thus
have no question on the present record whether a divorce decree granted by the
courts of one state to a resident, as distinguished from a domiciliary, is
entitled to full faith and credit in another state.  Nor do we reach here the
question as to the power of North Carolina to refuse full faith and credit to
Nevada divorce decrees because, contrary to the findings of the Nevada court,
North Carolina finds that no bona fide domicil was acquired in Nevada." (317
U.S. 302.) The decision consistently has been applied in accordance with this
reservation.  (See: Williams v. North Carolina, 325 U.S. 226 [65 S.Ct. 1092, 89
L.Ed. 1577, 157 A.L.R. 1366]; Marshall v. Marshall, 69 Cal.App.2d 20 [157 P.2d
854]; Davis v. Davis,    Ohio App.    [57 N.E.2d 703]; Wilkes v. Wilkes, 245
Ala. 54 [16 So.2d 15]; Atkins v. Atkins, 386 Ill. 345 [54 N.E.2d 488]; Wolff v.
Wolff, 134 N.J.Eq. 8 [34 A.2d 150]; Melnick v. Melnick, 154 Pa.Super.Ct. 481 [36
A.2d 235]; Koscove v. Koscove (1945), 113 Colo. 317 [156 P.2d 696]; Kraunz v.
Kraunz , 51 N.Y.S.2d 433; Coe v. Coe (1944), 316 Mass. 423 [55 N.E.2d 702];
Bowditch v. Bowditch, 314 Mass. 410 [50 N.E.2d 65]; Commonwealth ex rel.
Esenwein v. Esenwein, 348 Pa. 455 [35 A.2d 335]; see cases cited in 157 A.L.R.
1399, supplementing annotation in 143 A.L.R. 1294.)

   In a second case arising out of the same divorces ( Williams v. North
Carolina, 325 U.S. 226 [65 S.Ct. 1092, 89 L.Ed. 1577, 157 A.L.R. 1366]), the
question was directly raised whether a Nevada decree must be given full faith
and credit when North  Carolina found that no bona fide domicil had been
established in Nevada.  The court ruled that a judgment of one state must be
given full faith and credit in another state only if the court that rendered the
original judgment had jurisdiction to do so; that North Carolina's determination
that the libellants did not establish a bona fide domicil in Nevada sufficient
to give its courts jurisdiction to render a divorce decree was warranted by the
evidence; and that, under such circumstances, North Carolina was not bound to
give full faith and credit to the Nevada decree. The judgments of conviction
were affirmed.

   In  Esenwein v. Pennsylvania, 325 U.S. 279 [65 S.Ct. 1118, 89 L.Ed. 1608, 157
A.L.R. 1396], William F. Esenwein sought relief from an order requiring him to
support May H. Esenwein, whom he had married some years before.  Twice the
petitioner had sought a divorce in Pennsylvania and each time failed to obtain a
dissolution of his marriage. Later he went to Nevada and obtained a divorce
after the minimum six weeks residence period.  Shortly thereafter he left Nevada
and became a resident of Ohio.

    Petitioner then filed an application in Pennsylvania for relief from the
support order.  The application was denied upon the ground that petitioner did
not have a bona fide domicil in Nevada when he obtained his decree of divorce. (
348 Pa. 455 [35 A.2d 335].) The United States Supreme Court, upon certiorari,
affirmed the judgment, declaring that the state courts "were warranted in
finding that the respondent sustained her burden of impeaching the foundation of
the Nevada decree on the jurisdictional prerequisite of bona fide domicil." (
Esenwein v. Pennsylvania, 325 U.S. 279 [65 S.Ct. 1118, 1119, 89 L.Ed. 1608, 157
A.L.R. 1396].)

   Neither the second Williams case, supra, nor the Esenwein case, supra,
necessarily controls the determination of the present controversy.  Although
these cases hold that one state need not give full faith and credit to a divorce
decree rendered by a state which has neither jurisdiction of the parties nor
subject matter, they do not decide that one state may not, if it wishes,
recognize as valid a decree of another state.  However, the decisions are
significant for they point out, not only that a state has the "right
collaterally to impeach a decree of divorce made in another state, by proof that
the court had no jurisdiction, even when the record purports to show
jurisdiction" and that "jurisdiction . . . is founded  on domicil," but also
that if the findings of domicil by one state were conclusive in the state from
which the successful litigant came, "the policy of each State in matters of most
intimate concern could be subverted by the policy of every other State." (
Williams v. North Carolina, 325 U.S. 226 [65 S.Ct. 1092, pp. 1095, 1096, 89
L.Ed. 1577, 157 A.L.R. 1366].)

     It is a well established rule that jurisdiction to grant a divorce rests
upon bona fide domicil. Where neither party is domiciled within the state, no
divorce can validly be granted and all proceedings, as well as the judgment, are
void.  Stated another way, a decree of divorce rendered in one state may be
impeached and denied recognition in another upon the ground that neither of the
parties had domicil at the divorce forum, and this is true notwithstanding the
recital in the decree from the other state of the jurisdictional fact of domicil
or residence.  (See: Beale, Conflict of Laws, vol. 1, §§ 74.3, 111.1 and cases
cited therein; Goodrich, Conflict of Laws (2d ed.) § 123; Rest., Conflict of
Lawe, § 111; 9 Cal.Jur. 815, 817.) This principle has been recognized by the
United States Supreme Court in recent decisions ( Williams v. North Carolina,
325 U.S. 226 [65 S.Ct. 1092, 89 L.Ed. 1577, 157 A.L.R. 1366]; Esenwein v.
Pennsylvania, supra), and has been consistently followed by courts of other
states.  ( Reed v. State (1945),     Tex.Crim.R.     [187 S.W.2d 660]; Atkins v.
Atkins, supra; Davis v. Davis, supra; Wilkes v. Wilkes, supra; Wolff v. Wolff,
supra; Melnick v. Melnick, supra; Koscove v. Koscove, supra; Usen v. Usen, 136
Me. 480 [13 A.2d 738, 128 A.L.R. 1449]; Howe v. Howe, 179 Va. 111 [18 S.E.2d
294]; Adams v. Adams, 191 Ga. 537 [13 S.E.2d 173]; Wright v. Wright (1942), 350
Mo. 325 [165 S.W.2d 870]; Ainscow v. Alexander (1944),    Del.    [39 A.2d 54];
Navarrette v. Joseph Laughlin, Inc. (1944, La.App.), 20 So.2d 313; Coe v. Coe
(1944), 316 Mass. 423 [55 N.E.2d 702]; Re Lindgren, 293 N.Y. 18 [55 N.E.2d 849,
153 A.L.R. 936]; Commonwealth ex rel. Esenwein v. Esenwein, 348 Pa. 455 [35 A.2d
335]; Noffsinger v. Noffsinger (1943, D.C.Dist.Col.), 50 F.Supp. 810; and for a
more complete list of cases see 157 A.L.R. 1399 supplementing annotation in 143
A.L.R. 1294.)

     The rule of decision long followed in this state is that when a foreign
divorce decree is relied upon, and the record shows compliance with the foreign
law, a presumption of validity  arises and, in the absence of a successful
attack upon the ground that the foreign court had no jurisdiction, the foreign
decree will be recognized here.   However, by an equally well settled corollary
of the rule, it is always competent to collaterally impeach a decree of divorce
rendered in another state by extrinsic evidence showing that the court
pronouncing it did not have jurisdiction either of the parties or the subject
matter.  Thus the decree may always be attacked upon the ground that the foreign
court had no jurisdiction because the petitioning party had not established a
bona fide domicil. ( Kadello v. Kadello, 220 Cal. 1 [29 P.2d 171]; Delanoy v.
Delanoy, 216 Cal. 27 [13 P.2d 719]; Estate of Pusey, 180 Cal. 368 [181 P. 648];
Estate of Pusey, 177 Cal. 367 [170 P. 846]; Bruguiere v. Bruguiere, 172 Cal. 199
[155 P. 988, Ann.Cas. 1917E, 122]; Estate of Hancock, 156 Cal. 804 [106 P. 58,
134 Am.St.Rep. 177]; In re James, 99 Cal. 374 [33 P. 1122, 27 Am.St.Rep. 60];
Marshall v. Marshall, 69 Cal.App.2d 20 [157 P.2d 854]; Brill v. Brill, 38
Cal.App.2d 741 [102 P.2d 534]; Estate of Davis, 38 Cal.App.2d 579 [101 P.2d 761,
102 P.2d 545]; Estate of McNutt, 36 Cal.App.2d 542 [98 P.2d 253]; Estate of
Bruneman, 32 Cal.App.2d 606 [90 P.2d 323]; DuQuesnay v. Henderson, 24 Cal.App.2d
11 [74 P.2d 294]; Wynne v. Wynne, 20 Cal.App.2d 131 [66 P.2d 467]; Kegley v.
Kegley, 16 Cal.App.2d 216 [60 P.2d 482]; People v. Harlow, 9 Cal.App.2d 643 [50
P.2d 1052]; Ryder v. Ryder, 2 Cal.App.2d 426 [37 P.2d 1069]; Warren v. Warren,
127 Cal.App. 231 [15 P.2d 556]; Broder v. Broder, 122 Cal.App. 296 [10 P.2d 182]
; Anthony v. Tarpley, 45 Cal.App. 72 [187 P. 779]; Steinbroner v. Steinbroner,
30 Cal.App. 673 [159 P. 235]; In re Culp, 2 Cal.App. 70 [83 P. 89].)   A decree
based upon either personal or constructive service or even a personal appearance
may be attacked upon this ground.  ( Rehfuss v. Rehfuss, 169 Cal. 86 [145 P.
1020]; Brill v. Brill, supra; Estate of Davis, supra; Estate of McNutt, supra;
Estate of Bruneman, supra; Kegley v. Kegley, supra; Ryder v. Ryder, supra;
Anthony v. Tarpley, supra; see: Roberts v. Roberts, 83 Cal.App. 345 [256 P. 826]
; Goodrich, Conflict of Laws (2d ed.) § 123, and cases cited therein; Beale,
Conflict of Laws, vol. 1, § 111.1.)

      Section 1916 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides: "Any judicial record
may be impeached by evidence of a want of jurisdiction in the court or judicial
officer, of collusion between the parties, or of fraud in the party offering the
record, in respect to the proceedings."  Civil Code, section 90, provides:
"Marriage is dissolved only: One -- By the death of one of the parties; or, Two
-- By the judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction decreeing a divorce of
the parties." In view of these code provisions, once it is established that the
court of a sister state or foreign country was without jurisdiction to render a
valid decree of divorce, the courts of this state are precluded from recognizing
as valid a dissolution of marriage based upon such a judgment.  (See: People v.
Harlow, supra, p. 646, and In re Culp, supra, p. 81.)

     A state undoubtedly has a constitutional right to declare and maintain a
policy in regard to marriage and divorce or any other family relationship, at
least as to persons domiciled within its borders.  And to hold that every
divorce decree must be recognized as valid here because our social state
generally recognizes divorce and the legality of remarriage would be to
disregard our own marital policy as established by the Legislature.  Also, the
state is vitally concerned with the welfare of the deserted wife or children
within its borders, and the fact that a spouse is unwilling or unable to travel
across the country to dispute the issue of jurisdiction, or that no one is in a
position to protest before the foreign decree is entered, or that a recital of
jurisdiction is contained in the decree should not be, of itself, a certificate
of legal correctness for what has been done.  ( Delanoy v. Delanoy, supra, p. 35
; Rehfuss v. Rehfuss, supra, p. 92; Kegley v. Kegley, supra, p. 221; Howe v.
Howe, supra, p. 118; Usen v. Usen, supra; see: Powell, And Repent at Leisure, 58
Harv.L.Rev. 930; Williams v. North Carolina, 325 U.S. 226 [65 S.Ct. 1092, 89
L.Ed. 1577, 157 A.L.R. 1366]; Radin, The Authenticated Full Faith and Credit
Clause, 39 Ill.L.Rev. 1; Rodman, Bases of Divorce Jurisdiction, 39 Ill.L.Rev.
343; Goodrich, Conflict of Laws (2d ed.) § 123; Beale, Conflict of Laws, vol. 1,
§ 110.1.)

   By the preliminary recitals of the findings of fact, it appears that after
the court "heard testimony" and "examined proofs offered by the plaintiff," on
its own motion it "refused to hear further evidence."  What this further
evidence was or by whom it was offered is not shown by the record.  However, in
his brief, the respondent states that he was called as a witness and testified
for the appellant under the provisions of section 2055 of the Code of Civil
Procedure. During his examination, it is said, upon the introduction in evidence
of the final decree of divorce rendered in Nevada, the court  "halted the trial"
and decided that the determination in the prior action was decisive of the
issues presented by Mrs. Crouch's complaint.

     The basis for the ruling upon the introduction of further evidence is made
clear by the court's decision.  It concluded, as a matter of law, that even if
the respondent's domicil in Nevada was not bona fide, the decree of divorce
entered in that state is a bar to the present action.  As the appeal is upon the
judgment roll alone, in conformity with the general rule, it will be presumed
that the finding as to the respondent's lack of good faith in establishing a
Nevada domicil is supported by the evidence.   If he was not given an
opportunity to present evidence in addition to his own testimony as an adverse
witness, the ruling was not prejudicial for the judgment was in his favor.  In
the event of another trial, unquestionably the court will receive such
admissible evidence as may be offered by each of the parties upon the issue of
the bona fides of the respondent's Nevada domicil.

   The judgment is reversed.

DISSENT BY: SCHAUER

DISSENT

   SCHAUER, J.  I dissent from the majority opinion and judgment insofar as
concerns the discussion and holding as to the lack of finality of the Nevada
decree in respect to the marital status of the parties, and am of the view that
the judgment should be affirmed insofar as it determines the status of the
parties to be as adjudicated in Nevada, but I believe that such part, and such
part only, of the judgment as forthwith denies plaintiff any support from
defendant should be reversed and remanded to the trial court for a new trial
solely on the issue of plaintiff's right, if any, to support from defendant.

   I view as unsound in principle and obnoxious to our social order the
proposition, today espoused by a majority of this court, that California shall
accord substantially no faith or credit to the judgment of the court of a sister
state admittedly valid therein.  The federal Constitution still contains the
language of section 1, article IV.  That the proposition may be limited to a
judgment determining marital status does not make the vice inconsequential.  As
acknowledged by the majority opinion, the decision of the Supreme Court in
Williams  v. North Carolina (1945), 325 U.S. 226 [65 S.Ct. 1092, 89 L.Ed. 1577,
157 A.L.R. 1366] (the second Williams case), does not compel such a commitment.
The choice is made by us.  I should much prefer to see California heed the
philosophy and follow the views expressed by Justices Rutledge and Black
(Justice Black's opinion is concurred in by Justice Douglas) in their dissenting
opinions in the mentioned case.  Such dissenting opinions seem to me to emblazon
their conclusion with clarity of thought and language and integrity of principle
which are outstanding among all discussions of the subject.  And, remarkably
enough, they simply urge that a clear constitutional mandate be upheld.  The
application of their views to the case at hand appears from the facts
hereinafter recited and from the portions of the opinions quoted.

   The judgment roll in the case before us shows that the plaintiff was
personally served, in California, with the summons in the earlier Nevada action
and that the Nevada court found as a fact "that the plaintiff [defendant in this
action] is a bona fide resident of the County of Washoe, State of Nevada." There
is no finding that the Nevada court was the victim of fraud or that the evidence
before that court did not as a matter of law support the finding it made.  If
the Nevada decree were shown to be invalid under Nevada law we should have an
entirely different situation.  But that is not the case.  The Nevada court's
findings and  judgment remain unimpaired and fully operative in the State of
Nevada and the California court in this case has expressly adjudicated "That the
final decree of divorce obtained by the defendant . . . from the plaintiff . . .
in . . . the State of Nevada . . . is valid." The court here has simply assumed
to relitigate between the same parties, one of the identical issues which was
litigated in the Nevada court; i.e., the issue of residence or domicile of a
party.  And such relitigation is indulged in not to determine whether the
residence of the party in Nevada was bona fide within the concept of Nevada law
and social policy but whether such residence in Nevada was bona fide in Nevada
within the concept of a California judge and California's laws and policy.  The
mere incident that the California court reached a different determination upon
such evidence as it received (whether the same or different) touching the issue
of fact as to domicile wholly fails to solve the constitutional question and
certainly not the social problem.  The Nevada court, within the concept of that
court and that state's law  and social policy, had jurisdiction of the cause and
over the party who submitted his status to its adjudication.  The defendant
there (plaintiff here) was not denied due process.

   It seems to me that, as suggested by Justice Douglas in his concurring
opinion in the Esenwein case ( Esenwein v. Pennsylvania (1945), 325 U.S. 279 [65
S.Ct. 1118, 1119, 89 L.Ed. 1608, 157 A.L.R. 1396]), there is a "basic difference
between the problem of marital capacity and the problem of support" and that in
an action for monetary support a plaintiff upon that theory and under certain
circumstances could recover from a defendant who had procured a decree in
another state.  Thus, we are confronted with two problems in this case:  (1) we
must squarely face the question of the quantum of faith and credit, if any, to
be accorded an adjudication of marital status made by the court of, and fully
valid in, another state; (2) we must decide what, if any, rights to support
exist in favor of a former spouse of one who has severed the marital ties by a
divorce secured in another state.

   The Marital Status

   In connection with the first problem -- that of marital status -- we must
consider, denuded of confusing qualifications, the stark question as to whether
California shall accord full faith and credit to the Nevada judgment, fully
valid in that state, or shall reexamine and retry the basic factual issue of
domicile. That issue, the majority opinion holds, shall be retried in California
not to determine whether the standard concept of domicile acceptable to Nevada,
and upon which she has full authority to accord state citizenship rights, was
established, but whether a concept ordained for Nevada by California (in the
estimation of the trier of fact), as to citizens moving to Nevada from other
states, was shown in Nevada.  And furthermore, the majority hold, the question
to be tried is not whether the evidence presented to the Nevada court was
sufficient or insufficient as a matter of law to sustain the finding it made,
nor whether there was fraud upon the Nevada court, extrinsic or intrinsic (the
record here reveals no extrinsic fraud), but the proceeding here is simply a
trial de novo between the same parties, upon the same cause -- their marital
status -- in a different jurisdiction which has a different standard or concept
of legal residence.

   The holding in this case may also result in nullifying, in many cases, the
effect of section 63 of the Civil Code of California, which provides that "All
marriages contracted without  this state, which would be valid by the laws of
the country in which the same were contracted are valid in this state." This
section has been upheld and applied by this court.  ( McDonald v. McDonald
(1936), 6 Cal.2d 457, 459 [58 P.2d 163, 104 A.L.R. 1290].) The defendant in this
case, who is legally divorced in Nevada, could contract a valid marriage in that
state.  If he brought his Nevada wife to California, would the majority of this
court hold that he had two legal wives in California?  Or would they refuse to
apply section 63 and hold him guilty of bigamy? What would be the status in
California of his children born of the Nevada marriage? These are questions
which adherence to the constitutional mandate would  preclude from arising or
would answer but which the majority holding tends to engender.

   Our social state generally recognizes divorce and the legality of remarriage.
It is reported that there are approximately five million divorced persons
scattered throughout the forty-eight states.  It seems to me that if the status
of those persons is to be kept socially tolerable it should be accorded a high
degree of stability and be legally ascertainable by a rule of law, applicable
alike in all states to all persons within the class, rather than determinable by
individual whimsy of judge or jury in each state in a conclusion based on
indirect evidence as to a subjective fact.

   It is said that domicile depends upon intent.  Only the possessor of the
intent can give direct evidence of it.  It is essentially intangible.  Once
fixed it may perdure for the full span of a life or it may shift and reshift as
quickly as sequent thoughts.  The one may be no less real than the other.
Neither is susceptible of conclusive proof hence, courts accept what we term
legal proof.  Aside from the direct testimony of the party, circumstantial
evidence -- such as physical presence in a locality, ownership of land, etc. --
is the only means of legal proof.  Legal proof acceptable to Nevada was
established by the defendant here in his Nevada action.

   Section 1, amendment XIV, of the United States Constitution declares that
"All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the
jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the State wherein
they reside." (Italics added.) No definition of the word "reside" is provided.
No law has been suggested as precluding Nevada from extending state citizenship
rights to any United States citizen who meets her requirements, nor as
precluding any  such person from claiming and exercising such rights.  It is not
disputed that Nevada's residence requirements for divorce, so far as physical
presence within the state for the prescribed time are concerned, were met by the
defendant.  And the Nevada court, upon competent evidence, in a proceeding not
even suggested to be vitiated by extrinsic fraud, found that defendant
entertained the required intent.  It should not lie within the power of a court
of another state, under such circumstances, to relitigate that nebulous question
which in its very nature can frequently, if not always, be open to conflicting
inferences but never to conclusive proof.  The majority holding means that no
person divorced in another jurisdiction (apparently whether in a default or
contested proceeding) can be certain of his status in California until the issue
of domicile has been relitigated here.  The majority opinion does not purport to
limit its ruling to California citizens who undertake to establish residence in
Nevada; it appears to base its holding on a finding of the fact trier that in
his estimation defendant was not a legal resident of Nevada.  And if the rule is
sound as to a Nevada divorce it must be equally applicable to a divorce granted
in any other state or country.  Whether the residence requirement of a state be
one month or five years can make no difference.  The physical residence
requirement may be fully met, as it was here, yet that nebulous question of
intent can always be retried.  The obnoxious consequences to the social order of
such a rule are self-evident.

   The masterful protests of Justices Rutledge and Black as voiced in their
dissenting opinions in Williams v. North Carolina (1945), supra, 65 S.Ct. 1092,
1101 and 1109, obviously do not possess the power of law today but they
enunciate realistic principles of reason and philosophy which we may hope will
prevail when the time comes that the nation or the states will relieve our
divorced citizens from the intolerable uncertainties of their present status and
solve the problems which seem to me to be created and left unanswered by the
majority opinion in that case and which recur, in one form, in this case.

   Mr. Justice Rutledge in dissenting says (p. 1101 of 65 S.Ct.): "Once again
the ghost of 'unitary domicil' returns on its perpetual round, in the guise of
'jurisdictional fact,' to upset judgments, marriages, divorces, undermine the
relations founded upon them, and make this Court the unwilling  and uncertain
arbiter between the concededly valid laws and decrees  of sister states.  From
Bell and Andrews to Davis to Haddock to Williams and now back to Haddock and
Davis through Williams again -- is the maze the Court has travelled in a
domiciliary wilderness, only to come out with no settled constitutional policy
where one is needed most. . . .

   ". . . Were all judgments given the same infirmity, the full faith and credit
clause would be only a dead constitutional letter. . . .

   "I.

   "What, exactly are the effects of the decision?  The Court is careful not to
say that Nevada's judgment is not valid in Nevada.  To repeat, the Court could
not so declare it, unless a different test applies to sustain that judgment than
supports North Carolina's.  Presumably the same standard applies to both; and
each state accordingly is free to follow its own policy, wherever the evidence,
whether the same or different, permits conflicting inferences of domicil, as it
always does when the question becomes important. . . .

   ". . . [P. 1103 of 65 S.Ct.] Every divorce, wherever granted, whether upon a
residence of six weeks, six months or six years, may now be re-examined by every
other state, upon the same or different evidence, to redetermine the
'jurisdictional fact,' always the ultimate conclusion of 'domicil.' . . .  [Any]
decree, granted after any length of time, upon any ground for divorce, and
however solid the proof, may be reexamined either by 'the state of domiciliary
origin' or by any other state, as the case uncertainly may be.  And all that is
needed, to disregard it, is some evidence from which a jury reasonably may
conclude there was no domiciliary intent when the decree was rendered. . . .

   "II.

   ". . . [P. 1106 of 65 S. Ct.] By every test remaining effective, and not
disputed, Nevada had power to alter the petitioner's marital status. She made
the alteration.  If it is valid, neither North Carolina [nor California] nor we
are free to qualify it by saying it shall not be effective there, while it is
effective in Nevada, and stands without impeachment for ineffectiveness there. .
. .

   ". . . It is exactly for the situation where state policies differ that the
clause and the legislation were intended.  Without  such differences, the need
for constitutional limitation was hardly one of magnitude. . . .

   "III

   "[P. 1107 of 65 S.Ct.] Domicil, as a substantive concept, steadily reflects
neither a policy of permanence nor one of transiency.  It rather reflects both
inconstantly.  The very name gives forth the idea of home with all its ancient
associations of permanence. But 'home' in the modern world is often a trailer or
a tourist camp.  Automobiles, nation-wide business and multiple family dwelling
units have deprived the institution, though not the idea, of its former general
fixation to soil and locality.  But, beyond this, 'home' in the domiciliary
sense can be changed in the twinkling of an eye, the time it takes a man to make
up his mind to remain where he is when he is away from home.  He need do no more
than decide, by a flash or thought, to stay 'either permanently or for an
indefinite or unlimited length of time.' No other connection of permanence is
required.  All of his belongings, his business, his family, his established
interests and intimate relations may remain where they have always been.  Yet if
he is but physically present elsewhere, without even bag or baggage, and
undergoes the mental flash, in a moment he has created a new domicil though
hardly a new home.

   "Domicil thus combines the essentially contradictory elements of permanence
and instantaneous change.  No legal conception, save possibly 'jurisdiction,' of
which it is an elusive substratum, affords such possibilities for uncertain
application.  The only thing certain about it, beyond its uncertainty, is that
one must travel to change his domicil. But he may travel without changing it,
even remain for a lifetime in his new place of abode without doing so.  Apart
from the necessity for travel, hardly evidentiary  of stabilized relationship in
a transient age, the criterion comes down to a purely subjective mental state,
related to remaining for a length of time never yet defined with clarity. . . .

   "[P. 1109 of 65 S.Ct.] I therefore dissent from the judgment which, in my
opinion, has permitted North Carolina at her substantially unfettered will to
deny all faith and credit to the Nevada decree, without in any way impeaching or
attempting to impeach that judgment's constitutional validity.  But if she is
not to be required thus to give the faith and credit due, in my opinion she
should not be allowed to deny  it by any standard of proof which is less than
generally is required to overturn or disregard a judgment upon direct attack.
Cf.  Schneiderman v. United States, 320 U.S. 118, 63 S.Ct. 1333, 87 L.Ed. 1796.
The solemnity of the judicial act and the very minimum of 'respect' due the
action of a sister state should compel adherence to this standard,  though doing
so would not give the full faith and credit which the Constitution commands.  To
approximate the constitutional policy would be better than to nullify it."

   Mr. Justice Black, with whom Mr. Justice Douglas concurs, says (p. 1109 of 65
S.Ct.): "Statistics indicate that approximately five million divorced persons
are scattered throughout the forty-eight states.  More than 85% of these
divorces were granted in uncontested proceedings.  Not one of this latter group
can now retain any feeling of security in his divorce decree. Ever present will
be the danger of criminal prosecution and harassment.

   "All these decrees were granted by state courts.  Erie R. Co. v. Tompkins,
304 U.S. 64, 58 S.Ct. 817, 82 L.Ed. 1188, 114 A.L.R. 1487, and cases following
it, recognized the obvious truth, that rules of law laid down by state courts
are binding.  These judicial 'laws' are represented by decrees, judgments and
court opinions.  Today's opinion, however, undermines and makes uncertain the
validity of every uncontested divorce decree. It wipes out every semblance of
their finality and decisiveness.  It achieves what the Court terms the
'desirable effect' of providing the 'same' quality to every divorce decree,
'wherever the question arises' -- it endows them all alike with the 'same'
instability and precariousness.  The result is to classify divorced persons in a
distinctive and invidious category.  A year ago, a majority of this Court in a
workmen's compensation case declared that the Full Faith and Credit Clause of
the Constitution was a 'nationally unifying force'; today, as to divorce
decrees, that clause . . . has become a nationally disruptive force.
Uncontested divorce decrees are thus so degraded that a person who marries in
reliance upon them can be sent to jail. . . .

   "[P. 1111 of 65 S.Ct.] The petitioners were married in Nevada.  North
Carolina has sentenced them to prison for living together as husband and wife in
North Carolina.  This Court today affirms those sentences without a
determination that the Nevada marriage was invalid under that State's laws.
This holding can be supported, if at all, only on one of two  grounds: (1) North
Carolina has extra-territorial power to regulate marriages within Nevada's
territorial boundaries, or (2) North Carolina can punish people who live
together in that state as husband and wife even though they have been validly
married in Nevada.  A holding based on either of these two grounds encroaches
upon the general principle recognized by this Court that a marriage validly
consummated under one state's laws is valid in every other state.  If the Court
is today abandoning that principle, it takes away from the states a large part
of their hitherto plenary control over the institution of marriage. A further
consequence is to subject people to criminal prosecutions for adultery and
bigamy merely because they exercise their constitutional right to pass from a
state in which they were validly married into another state which refuses to
recognize their marriage. Such a consequence runs counter to the basic
guarantees of our federal union.  Edwards v. California, 314 U.S. 160, 62 S.Ct.
164, 86 L.Ed. 119. . . .

   "[P. 1112 of 65 S.Ct.] The Court permits North Carolina to disregard the
decrees on the following line of reasoning.  No state need give full faith and
credit to  a 'void' decree. A decree rendered by a court without 'jurisdiction'
is 'void.' No state court has 'jurisdiction' to grant a divorce unless one of
the parties is 'domiciled' in the state.  The North Carolina court has decided
that these petitioners had no 'domicile' in Nevada.  Therefore, the Nevada court
had no 'jurisdiction,' the decrees are 'void,' and North Carolina need not give
them faith or credit. . . .

   "[P. 1113 of 65 S.Ct.] The Constitution provides that 'Full Faith and Credit
shall be given in each State to the Public Acts, Records, and Judicial
Proceedings of every other State.  And the Congress may be general Laws
prescribe the Manner in which such Acts, Records, and Proceedings shall be
proved, and the Effect thereof.' (Emphasis added.) Acting pursuant to this
constitutional authority, Congress in 1790 declared what law should govern and
what 'Effect' should be given the judgments of state courts.  That statute is
still the law.  Its command is that they 'shall have such faith and credit given
to them . . . as they have by law or usage in the courts of the State from which
they are taken.' 28 U.S.C. 687, 28 U.S.C.A. § 687. If, as the Court today
implies, divorce decrees should be given less effect than other court judgments,
Congress alone has the constitutional power to say so.  We  should not attempt
to solve the 'divorce problem' by constitutional interpretation.  At least,
until Congress has commanded a different 'Effect' for divorces granted on a
short sojourn within a state, we should stay our hands.  A proper respect for
the Constitution and the Congress would seem to me to require that we leave this
problem where the Constitution did.  If we follow that course North Carolina
cannot be permitted to disregard the Nevada decrees without passing upon the
'faith and credit' which Nevada itself would give to them under its own 'law or
usage.' . . .  No 'law or usage' of Nevada has been pointed out to us which
would indicate that Nevada would, under any circumstances, consider its decrees
so 'void' as to warrant imprisoning those who have remarried in reliance upon
such existing and unannulled decrees. . . .

   ". . . [P. 1117 of 65 S.Ct.] [The] Court's unjustifiable devitalization of
the Full Faith and Credit Clause and the Act passed pursuant to it creates a
situation which makes the North Carolina statute [and that of California and all
similar statutes of other states] an inescapable trap for any person who places
the slightest reliance on another state's divorce decree -- a situation which a
proper interpretation of the federal question would avoid. . . .

   "[P. 1118 of 65 S.Ct.] In earlier times, some Rulers placed their criminal
laws where the common man could not see them, in order that he might be
entrapped into their violation.  Others imposed standards of conduct impossible
of achievement to the end that those obnoxious to the ruling powers might be
convicted under the forms of law.  No one of them ever provided a more certain
entrapment, than a statute which prescribes a penitentiary punishment for
nothing more than a layman's failure to prophesy what a judge or jury will do.
This Court's decision of a federal question today does just that." And the
decision of the majority in this court today in California does just that.

   The Right to Support

   In this state it is declared by statute that "Husband and wife contract
towards each other obligations of mutual respect, fidelity, and support." ( Civ.
Code, § 155; italics added.) In addition, a thing in action (i. e., a right of
action against another) is personal property ( Civ. Code, § 14), and, as this
court observed in Ponsonby v. Sacramento Suburban Fruit  Lands Co. (1930), 210
Cal. 229,  282 [291 P. 167], "The term [property] is a generic one.  . . .  When
unqualified the term is sufficiently comprehensive to include every species of
estate, both real and personal, whether choate or inchoate [citations], whether
corporeal or incorporeal [citations].  The word is sometimes used in the sense
of 'estate.' . . ." Further with respect to property it is stated in 50 Corpus
Juris, pages 736-738, that "Generally, the subjects of property comprise all
valuable rights or interests protected by law.  . . .  In the broad sense of the
term, 'property'  includes . . . choses in action.  . . .  In modern legal
systems, property includes practically all valuable rights.  The term is
indicative and descriptive of every possible interest which a person can have,
extends to every species of valuable right or interest, and comprises a vast
variety of rights.  The right to be protected in a person's privileges belonging
to him as an individual or secured to him as a member of the commonwealth is
property, as is any valuable interest in or to any object of value that a person
may lawfully acquire or hold." (Cited in Scott v. McPheeters (1939), 33
Cal.App.2d 629,  632 [92 P.2d 678, 93 P.2d 562].)

   It is elementary constitutional law that a court of one state cannot render a
personal judgment against one who is a nonresident and who has not been
personally served within the state or appeared in the action, nor can such court
cut off the property rights, existing without the state, of such nonresident.
(See 5 Cal.Jur. § 223, pp. 873-874; 14 Cal.Jur. § 6, pp. 860-862; 42 Am.Jur. §§
67, 73-87, pp. 56, 62-76.) And yet that is exactly the effect which the judgment
of the trial court herein would accord to the Nevada divorce decree secured by
defendant.  Although plaintiff in her complaint pleads four separate causes of
action for support as well as for divorce against defendant, the trial court
made no findings as to the truth or merit of any of them, but simply found "that
each of them are barred by" defendant's Nevada decree. It seems to me that
regardless of the efficacy, or lack thereof, of such decree to fix the marital
status of the parties, plaintiff is entitled to an adjudication by the courts of
this state in accordance with our laws as to any right of support she may have
had against defendant as of the date of, and preceding, the Nevada decree. (See
concurring opinion in De Young v. De Young (1946), 27 Cal.2d 521, 527 [165 P.2d
457].) If, regardless of the Nevada decree, the court finds that plaintiff is
entitled to such support, then it should be awarded to her.

    Public policy would also, it appears, be supported by such a procedure.
Although, as indicated hereinabove, it is my view that it is in the interests of
such policy that a decree of divorce rendered under the circumstances here shown
be accorded full faith and credit in every state of the union insofar as
concerns marital status, it seems equally apparent that public policy would
likewise be served by refusing to recognize such decree (in a proceeding not
having personal jurisdiction over the defendant therein) as cutting off the
right to support which then and theretofore existed in favor of a resident of
this state.  This state has itself assumed a duty of support towards indigent
persons and has, in order to relieve itself of certain of the burdens incident
to the granting of relief, undertaken to enforce support from those who by law
are made responsible for such persons.  ( Welf. & Inst. Code, §§ 2400- 2615.) To
permit the courts of another state to cut off that responsibility by means of
constructive service of process in an action against a resident of California
would seem to me to be both unconstitutional insofar as concerns the rights of
such resident, and contrary to the public policy and interests of this state.

   It is, therefore, my opinion that regardless of the determination made
concerning the effect of the Nevada decree upon the marital status of the
parties, plaintiff is entitled to have the merits of her claimed right of
support from defendant litigated by California courts.

   It should be noted, in conclusion, that the findings of the trial court in
this case state as follows: "and the court having heard testimony and having
examined proofs offered by the plaintiff; and the court on its own motion having
refused to hear further evidence; and the court being fully advised in the
premises now makes its Findings of Fact as follows: . . ." (Italics added.) Then
appears the finding, among others, that "defendant herein was not a bona fide
resident of the State of Nevada" when he sought and secured the Nevada divorce
decree. It appears to me that under such circumstances; i.e., where the judgment
roll establishes that the trial court denied defendant an opportunity to present
evidence in his own behalf, we should not indulge the presumption that the
finding against defendant on the issue of  his Nevada residence was supported by
the evidence.  (See O'Connell v. Behan (1912), 19 Cal.App. 111, 118 [124 P.
1038].) Nevertheless, it is in reliance upon such presumption and such finding
that the majority  opinion bases its reversal of the trial court's judgment.

   For the reasons above stated the judgment should be affirmed insofar as
concerns the marital status of the parties but that portion, and that portion
only, of the judgment which denies plaintiff support from defendant should be
reversed and the cause, as to such issue only, remanded to the trial court for a
new trial.


                              35 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             BETTY ESTELLE GREEN, Plaintiff and Appellant, v. RULON
                     CUTLER GREEN, Defendant and Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 26631

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division One

          215 Cal. App. 2d 37; 30 Cal. Rptr. 23; 1963 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      2456


                                 April 11, 1963

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  A. J. McCourtney, Judge pro tem.  *

*   Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

   Action for divorce.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1a) (1b) Divorce--Foreign Decrees--Collateral Attack.  --On a motion for
summary judgment filed by defendant in a divorce action where plaintiff's
affidavits filed in opposition to the motion revealed that her authorization of
counsel and her appearance and personal participation in a divorce action in
another state were not induced by any act of defendant or his counsel or by any
act for which either was responsible, but were the direct result of her own
lawyer's legal advice, which was not shown in her affidavit to be motivated by
fraud, plaintiff's affidavits did not create a situation in which a party could
collaterally attack a divorce decree rendered in a proceeding in which the party
appeared and participated if the appearance was obtained by fraud; thus no
triable issue of fact was presented, plaintiff failed to establish her alleged
cause of action for divorce, and the dismissal of the complaint and entry of
summary judgment for defendant were proper.

(2) Judgments -- Summary Judgments -- Issues Precluding Judgment.  --In
considering a motion for summary judgment, the trial court's function is to
ascertain whether a triable issue of fact exists.

(3) Id.--Summary Judgments--Issues Precluding Judgment--Determination of Issue
Finding.  --On a motion for summary judgment, whether a triable issue of fact
exists is determined by the sufficiency of the affidavits filed by the parties
in support of and in opposition to the motion.

(4) Id.--Summary Judgments--Review.  --Since the validity of a summary judgment
is to be determined solely by the sufficiency of the affidavits filed in support
of and in opposition to the motion for summary judgment, an appellate court will
consider no facts other than those before the lower court as shown by the
affidavits and will determine only whether the facts so shown give rise to a
triable issue.

(5) Divorce--Foreign Decrees: Judgments--Summary Judgments--Review.  --On appeal
from a summary judgment entered on an order dismissing a divorce action, any new
matter urged on the court cannot be examined; this applies not only to any
additional facts that might be adduced at a trial or that appellant claims can
be proved, but to appellant's claim, not raised on the motion for summary
judgment and wholly unsupported by appellant's affidavits, that a foreign
divorce decree is susceptible to collateral attack in the foreign state because
the court was without power to grant a divorce on the basis of the pleadings
submitted to the court in that proceeding.

(6) Judgments--Summary Judgments--Hearing and Determination.  --A party opposing
a motion for summary judgment has the burden of showing the existence of a
triable issue of fact.

(7) Id. -- Summary Judgments -- Hearing and Determination -- When Motion
Properly Granted.  --Where plaintiff's affidavits filed in opposition to a
motion for summary judgment set forth no facts sufficient to establish an
alleged cause of action, no issue of fact has been raised and summary judgment
is proper.

(8) Divorce--Foreign Decrees: Judgments--Summary Judgments--Review.  --On a
motion for summary judgment by defendant in a divorce action where plaintiff's
affidavits in opposition to the motion fail to show that plaintiff had been
induced by fraud or duress to make her appearance in a divorce action in another
state, the decree entered in the action in the other state must be given full
faith and credit; and where it appeared that plaintiff personally and through
counsel appeared and participated in the divorce action in the other state, had
full opportunity to litigate the jurisdictional issue, and that no proof was
offered that the decree in the other state was susceptible to collateral attack
in that state, the portion of plaintiff's affidavit and declarations of others
showing defendant to be a resident of this state and not a domiciliary of the
other state, did nothing more than create a conflict on the mooted point.

COUNSEL: Gladys Towles Root, Eugene V. McPherson and Philip C. Greenwald for
Plaintiff and Appellant.

Ivan E. Lawrence and Ben Adelman for Defendant and Respondent.

JUDGES: Lillie, J.  Wood, P. J., and Fourt, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: LILLIE

OPINION

     Appeal is from judgment entered on an order dismissing an action for
divorce under section 437c, Code of Civil Procedure.

   Affidavits filed on the motion for summary judgment disclose the following.
The parties were married in 1945, and separated in 1953; on August 4, 1953,
appellant wife sued for divorce (No. D455586), and on August 13, 1953, obtained
a pendente lite order requiring respondent to pay child support and alimony.  On
March 29, 1954, the parties entered into a property settlement agreement. In
April they reconciled; the reconciliation lasted almost four years, during which
time respondent supported appellant.  They separated in December 1957 when
respondent moved to Nevada where he engaged in his occupation as a builder; in
February 1958 he sued for divorce (No. 88744) in Las Vegas.  In Los Angeles
appellant was served with the Nevada action; on advice of her local counsel to
contest it, she hired a Nevada attorney, who filed pleadings on her behalf.  On
July 29, 1958, she went to Las Vegas and personally and through her counsel
participated in the trial; she testified but offered no objection to, or
evidence to offset, respondent's allegation and testimony of  domicile in
Nevada.  On her own testimony and "as alleged in her defense and counterclaim"
(findings of fact and conclusions of law, Nevada court, July 31, 1958, par. 4),
and on respondent's testimony that he had established residence in Nevada and
the court's finding thereon (par. 1), the Nevada court on July 31, 1958, granted
appellant a divorce. The decree, entered August 1, 1958, awarded her community
property, attorneys' fees, child custody and $ 100 per month child support.
Respondent has since complied therewith; until March 1961, appellant also has
relied thereon accepting the award of community property and child support
thereunder without comment.

   Almost three years later, and in March 1961, she caused a writ of execution
in the sum of $ 8,383.68 (arrearage claimed under pendente lite order of August
13, 1953) to be levied against respondent's property.  On July 14, 1961, the
court on respondent's motion dismissed her divorce action (No. D455586); and on
his motion to quash the writ the court on September 22, 1961, found appellant's
right to support under the pendente lite order of August 13, 1953, terminated
August 1, 1958 (the date of entry of the Nevada decree) and that under the writ
of execution only $ 2,000 was due.  (The order is the subject of appeal No.
26341, * this day decided; the order is affirmed.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*   Green v.
Green, ante, p. 31.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Three days later, and more than three years after the entry of her Nevada
decree, appellant, on September 25, 1961, filed the within new complaint for
divorce in which she alleged the parties separated in 1953, and fraud in the
execution of the property settlement agreement on March 29, 1954; she mentioned
neither the four-year reconciliation beginning in April 1954, nor her Nevada
divorce. Thereafter, respondent moved the lower court for summary judgment. Both
he and his counsel claimed that her complaint was filed in bad faith with
malicious intent to coerce payment of the balance of the $ 8,383.68.

   Appellant opposed the motion with several affidavits; only her own sets up
facts of her appearance in the Nevada action.  She declared: that in January
1955 she learned respondent had secreted assets when he executed the property
settlement agreement of March 1954; that during the next four years he failed to
support her, belittled her and threatened to leave her destitute; that in 1957
(while still living with respondent), "by reason of defendant's continuous
harassment, dire financial and living distress" she became "so mentally upset,
disturbed and emotionally troubled" that she "was unable to comprehend, to act
or think intelligently or know what to do"; that at this time she consulted two
attorneys; that thereafter, in December 1957, respondent left, telling her he
was leaving California "for good" and going to live in Nevada; that in February
of 1958, in Los Angeles, she received the Nevada divorce papers and immediately
went to a lawyer who declined to represent her but advised her to ignore the
Nevada action and secure a lawyer to reopen her Los Angeles case; that she then
retained local counsel, Edward Rosslyn, to represent her and instructed him to
reopen the pending Los Angeles case; that he prepared papers which she signed
believing they were for the Los Angeles proceedings; that later Rosslyn advised
her it was essential to appear in the Nevada action, which she did not want to
do; that Rosslyn informed her he had hired a Nevada attorney for her; that this
was the first knowledge she had that an appearance had been made for her in the
Nevada action; that the retaining of Nevada counsel and the filing of papers in
the Nevada proceedings were done without her knowledge or consent; that "upon
the urging of attorney Rosslyn" she personally appeared in the Nevada court and
was awarded a divorce.

   Appellant contends the trial court erred in granting the motion for summary
judgment in that her affidavits raised a triable issue of fact -- whether she
had been induced by fraud or duress to make her appearance in the Nevada action.
While, on its face, appellant's complaint does not challenge the validity of the
Nevada decree, it must be conceded that if the decree be given full faith and
credit, appellant has not since August 1, 1958, been married to respondent and
the complaint was properly dismissed.  Appellant has sought to pattern her
affidavit to fit the exception stated in Gromeeko v. Gromeeko, 110 Cal.App.2d
117 [242 P.2d 41], and Estate of Raynor, 165 Cal.App.2d 715 [332 P.2d 416], but
assuming all facts alleged therein to be true, it raises no triable issue of
fact, and the general rule of Sherrer v. Sherrer, 334 U.S. 343 [68 S.Ct. 1087,
92 L.Ed. 1429, 1 A.L.R.2d 1355], and Coe v. Coe, 334 U.S. 378 [68 S.Ct. 1094, 92
L.Ed. 1451, 1 A.L.R.2d 1376], and the California authorities following these
cases controls.

   The Supreme Court in Sherrer v. Sherrer (1947) 334 U.S. 343 [68 S.Ct. 1087,
92 L.Ed. 1429, 1 A.L.R.2d 1355], ruled  "that the requirements of full faith and
credit bar a defendant from collaterally attacking a divorce decree on
jurisdictional grounds in the courts of a sister State where there has been
participation by the defendant in the divorce proceedings, where defendant has
been accorded full opportunity to contest the jurisdictional issues, and where
the decree is not susceptible to such collateral attack in the courts of the
State which rendered the decree." (Pp. 351, 352.) In Sherrer, supra, defendant
answered his wife's Florida divorce action and testified at the trial, but his
counsel did not cross-examine her or offer rebuttal evidence to offset her
testimony of Florida residence; she was granted a divorce. Later, in a
proceeding in Massachusetts, the domicile of the parties, defendant challenged
the Florida decree; the Massachusetts court found it to be void.  The United
States Supreme Court reversed the ruling, found the determination of the
jurisdictional issue of the wife's domicile to be res judicata and held that the
Florida decree was entitled to full faith and credit in Massachusetts.  In the
companion case of Coe v. Coe, 334 U.S. 378 [68 S.Ct. 1094, 92 L.Ed. 1451, 1
A.L.R.2d 1376], is a factual situation similar to the one at bar.  The husband,
domiciled in Massachusetts, filed for divorce in Nevada.  The wife went to
Nevada to contest the action and answered the same, but admitted the allegation
of defendant's residence;  both parties were present at the trial and the wife
was granted a divorce. Later in Massachusetts she brought contempt proceedings
against him for failure to comply with a prior support order of the
Massachusetts court; the Supreme Court reversed the state court ruling which
refused to give the Nevada decree full faith and credit.  (334 U.S. 378.)

   California has followed the rule of Sherrer v. Sherrer, supra, and Coe v.
Coe, supra; and of these cases our Supreme Court has said: "The test thereof is
not whether the issue of jurisdiction was actively litigated in the court
rendering the divorce decree. It is sufficient if the defendant has participated
in the proceedings and has full opportunity to litigate the issue.  If so, the
decree is binding even though a relitigation of the question of jurisdictional
residence requirements in another state might result in a finding that the
domiciliary claim was fraudulently asserted for the purpose of obtaining a
decree which as a matter of policy could not be procured in the state of actual
domicile. Therefore where, as here, the finding of the requisite jurisdictional
facts was made in divorce proceedings in another state in which the defendant
appeared and participated, and the decree has become final, it must be  given
full faith and credit in the courts of this state." ( Heuer v. Heuer, 33 Cal.2d
268, 271 [201 P.2d 385]; also cited in Estate of Raynor, 165 Cal.App.2d 715 [332
P.2d 416].)

   However, "[one] recognized exception to the rule enunciated in the Sherrer
and Coe cases is where the appearance of the defendant is induced by fraud or
duress. This rule is recognized in California.  (See Gromeeko v. Gromeeko, 110
Cal.App.2d 117 [242 P.2d 41]; Hayden v. Hayden, [sic], supra [Haden v. Haden,
120 Cal.App.2d 722 (262 P.2d 73)].)" ( Estate of Raynor, 165 Cal.App.2d 715,
721-722 [332 P.2d 416].) Appellant relies particularly on Gromeeko v. Gromeeko,
110 Cal.App.2d 117 [242 P.2d 41], in which the wife attacked the husband's
Nevada decree on the ground her appearance in that proceeding was induced by his
fraud and duress. He told her that one Elena was pregnant by him; and falsely
represented to her that he loved her, but because of the embarrassment,
financial ruin and ostracism they would suffer if he did not do so, he had to
divorce her in Nevada and temporarily marry Elena, and that he would thereafter
divorce Elena and remarry her.  A resident of San Francisco, he sued in Nevada
and was granted a divorce. Because she was "terrified" by what he told her,
believed his representations and promises, and became hysterical and mentally
incapacitated by his portrayal of ruin if he did not divorce her, her husband
was able to, and did, exert sufficient "influence and control" (p. 120) over her
to compel her to execute "certain documents (including an authorization of
counsel to represent her) at his demand" (p. 122) and appear in and answer the
Nevada proceeding.  Said the court at pages 122-123: "It is true that if
plaintiff did appear and participate in the Nevada action, she could not later
collaterally attack the decree rendered therein upon issues (such as Andrew's
acquisition of residence in Nevada) litigated and decided therein ( Heuer v.
Heuer, 33 Cal.2d 268 [201 P.2d 385]; Estate of Schomaker, 93 Cal.App.2d 616 [209
P.2d 669]; Daut v. Daut, 98 Cal.App.2d 375 [220 P.2d 63]). In each of those
cases, as in Sherrer v. Sherrer, 334 U.S. 343 [68 S.Ct.  1087, 1097, 92 L.Ed.
1429, 1 A.L.R.2d 1355], and Coe v. Coe, 334 U.S. 378 [68 S.Ct. 1094, 1097, 92
L.Ed. 1451, 1 A.L.R.2d 1376], the party who later unsuccessfully sought
collaterally to attack a foreign decree did in fact personally appear in the
foreign divorce action.  In contrast, in the present action, the plaintiff seeks
to show that she did not authorize anyone to appear  for her in the Nevada
action, that her seeming appearance therein was the result of fraud practiced
upon her and the Nevada court by the defendant herein.  If she proves these
allegations she will be in a position to tender proof (1) that her signing of
the dismissal of her earlier California divorce action was done under
circumstances which negative that act as an estoppel against the position she
takes in this action, (2) that Andrew did not acquire a Nevada residence, and
(3) that the Nevada decree was procured through collusion and fraud.  (See Wolff
v. Wolff, 134 N.J.Eq. 8 [34 A.2d 150.)" (Italics added.)

   A similar claim of fraud was made by the wife, but not sustained, in Estate
of Raynor, 165 Cal.App.2d 715 [332 P.2d 416]. She asserted that her signature to
her appearance and waiver filed in the Nevada action "was procured by fraud of
Cal (husband)." (Italics added.) (P. 717.) And in Aldabe v. Aldabe, 209
Cal.App.2d 453 [26 Cal.Rptr. 208], the acts of fraud which appellant claimed
resulted in no "real" participation by her in the Nevada action and prevented
her from having full opportunity to litigate the issue of jurisdiction "were not
solely the product of the conduct of her own attorney.  They were participated
in by Charles (husband) and by Charles' attorney." (209 Cal.App.2d 453, 473.)
For 17 years the parties lived on a ranch partly in California and partly in
Nevada; it is undisputed that their residence was physically located in
California.  While she told this fact to her own counsel, Streeter, he
nevertheless told her she could secure a divorce in Nevada, prepared the divorce
papers accordingly and filed suit therein.  Her husband filed an answer and
counterclaim in the Nevada action through his attorney, Adams, who had
previously represented the Aldabe family, alleging both parties to be residents
of Nevada.  Shortly thereafter she discharged Streeter as her counsel and
through Attorney Smith filed a divorce action in California.  She asked Streeter
to dismiss the Nevada action.  He claims he told her he could not because of the
counterclaim on file.  Thereafter, without authorization of appellant, knowing
he no longer represented her and without her knowledge and consent, Streeter
entered into a stipulation with Adams dividing certain monies the latter held in
trust for the parties, for their fees, and permitting the husband's counterclaim
in the Nevada action to be amended to allege the ranch to be his separate
property.  Adams then instituted an ex parte proceeding in the Nevada court to
restrain appellant from proceeding  with the California action, and Streeter,
without appellant's authority, knowledge or consent, stipulated the divorce
could be heard in Nevada.  When the action was heard in the Nevada court, Adams
gave notice to Streeter; neither appellant nor Smith were notified and,
believing the action had been dismissed by Streeter upon her request, did not
appear.  However, Streeter appeared at the Nevada trial and withdrew after
advising the court both parties resided in Nevada and deprecating appellant's
California suit.  The husband testified he lived on a ranch partly in California
and partly in Nevada and voted and registered his motor vehicles in Nevada but
said nothing about actually residing in California, which Streeter, he and his
attorney well knew.  The Nevada court found both parties were residents and
awarded him the divorce and the ranch. On the husband's motion to terminate
alimony pendente lite and dismiss the divorce action in California, appellant
made an offer of proof that she was induced to file her suit in Nevada by the
misrepresentations and advice of her own counsel, Streeter, and her husband's
lawyer, Adams, who knew of his California residence, that she could receive a
divorce in Nevada; that their subsequent actions -- Streeter's failure to
withdraw as her attorney and his continuing to purport to represent her, his
entry into a stipulation without her authorization, knowledge and consent, his
failure to notify her of the Nevada trial and his unauthorized representation to
the Nevada court the parties were domiciled in Nevada and she did not intend to
appear -- were calculated to and did prevent her from having an opportunity to
contest the issues in Nevada; and that Streeter, Adams and her husband
perpetrated a fraud on the Nevada court representing to it he had a Nevada
domicile, knowing he did not.  The offer of proof was rejected; in reversing the
order terminating temporary alimony and the judgment of dismissal, the court
held that inasmuch as the evidence would have justified the trier of fact to
find that appellant's "participation" in the Nevada court was not "real" and did
not accord her "full opportunity to contest the jurisdiction issue," and
inasmuch as the absence of proof of domicile appears on the face of the record
in the Nevada proceeding (before the lower court) subjecting the decree to
collateral attack in the Nevada court, the rule in the Sherrer case, supra,
could not apply and the lower court erred in the rejection of the evidence.

   In the Gromeeko, Raynor and Aldabe cases, the claimed  duress or fraud which
induced the wife to appear in the foreign action was the direct result of either
the husband's misrepresentations, personal influence over her, promises, advice
or demands, or those of his attorney, or the fraudulent imposition of her own
counsel designed to induce the wife's conduct in connection with the Nevada
proceeding.   This is quite a different situation than the one presented herein
by appellant's affidavits which clearly reveal that her authorization of Nevada
counsel and her appearance and personal participation in the Nevada divorce were
not induced by any act of respondent or his counsel or by any act for which
either was responsible; but were the direct result of legal advice of her own
lawyer, which her affidavit does not show was motivated by fraud.

     "The trial court's function in considering a motion for summary judgment is
to ascertain whether there exists a triable issue of fact. ( McHugh v. Howard,
165 Cal.App.2d 169 [331 P.2d 674]; Dawson v. Rash, 160 Cal.App.2d 154 [324 P.2d
959]; Doyle v. Hibernia Bank, 156 Cal.App.2d 16 [319 P.2d 412]; Enos v. Foster,
155 Cal.App.2d 152 [317 P.2d 670].)   Whether a triable issue of fact exists is
determined by the sufficiency of the affidavits of the parties.  ( Doyle v.
Hibernia Bank, supra; Code Civ. Proc., § 437c; Dorsey v. City of Los Angeles,
132 Cal.App.2d 716 [282 P.2d 997].)" ( Beach v. Arblaster, 194 Cal.App.2d 145,
160 [14 Cal.Rptr. 854].)   Since the validity of a summary judgment is to be
determined solely by the sufficiency of the affidavits ( McComsey v. Leaf, 36
Cal.App.2d 132 [97 P.2d 242]; Dudum v. City of San Mateo, 167 Cal.App.2d 593
[334 P.2d 968]), this court will consider no facts other than those which were
before the lower court; "[we] are limited to the facts shown by the affidavits (
Kimber v. Jones, supra, 122 Cal.App.2d 914 [265 P.2d 922]), and are to determine
only whether the facts so shown give rise to a triable issue ( Coyne v.
Krempels, supra, 36 Cal.2d 257 [223 P.2d 244].)" (Italics added.) ( Dudum v.
City of San Mateo, 167 Cal.App.2d 593, 598 [334 P.2d 968].)   Thus any new
matter urged upon us cannot be examined; this applies not only to any additional
facts "which might be adduced at a trial" or she claims she can prove (A.O.B.,
pp. 6, 9), but to appellant's present claim, not raised on the motion and wholly
unsupported by her affidavits, that the Nevada decree is susceptible to
collateral attack in Nevada (A.O.B., p. 9) because the court "was without power
to grant Appellant a divorce on the basis of the pleadings submitted to the
court in the Nevada proceeding." (A.O.B., p. 10.) (Incidentally,   the findings
of fact and conclusions of law of the Nevada court do not bear this out.  (Par.
4.))  Moreover, the party opposing the motion has the burden of showing the
existence of a triable issue of fact. ( Miller v. Joyce, 138 Cal.App.2d 356 [291
P.2d 963].)   If appellant's affidavits set forth no facts sufficient to
establish her alleged cause of action, no issue of fact has been raised and
summary judgment is proper ( Hardy v. Hardy, 23 Cal.2d 244, 248 [143 P.2d 701]);
and so it is in the case at bar.   Assuming all facts set up in appellant's
affidavits to be true, we conclude that they, in no respect, create a situation
to which the exception to the rule of the Sherrer and Coe cases, supra, applies;
thus no triable issue of fact has been presented, appellant has failed to
establish her alleged cause of action, and the dismissal of the complaint and
entry of summary judgment were proper.  This appeal is predicated mainly on the
two cases of Gromeeko v. Gromeeko, 110 Cal.App.2d 117 [242 P.2d 41], and Aldabe
v. Aldabe, 209 Cal.App.2d 453 [26 Cal.Rptr. 208]. But appellant's position is
without merit, for while the evidence in those cases was such that the lower
court could have found that the wife was induced by fraud or duress to appear
and participate in the Nevada action, in the instant case, limited by the facts
asserted in her affidavit and assuming them to be true, she has failed to make
any factual showing of either fraud or duress or that the Nevada decree might be
subject to collateral attack in Nevada.

   Appellant's affidavit, given all possible credence, fails to support her
claim that she was induced by respondent's fraud and duress to appear in the
Nevada proceeding.  She alleges nothing to show she was in any way coerced,
compelled, influenced, induced, or imposed upon by respondent to appear in the
Nevada action.  Her "mental duress," which she alleges consisted of financial
distress caused by respondent's failure to properly support her, not only
appears to be entirely unrelated to her appearance in the Nevada proceeding but
began in January 1955, almost three years before their separation; and while she
claims it continued past their separation through the "Nevada episode," her
situation was not unlike that of thousands of women separated from their
husbands, in which there is not enough money to support two households.
(However, she admits he paid her $ 650 during the seven months pending the
Nevada divorce and she occupied the home therein later awarded to her.) But
appellant does  not claim, nor do her facts show, that at any time before or
from December 1957 to July 29, 1958, respondent or his counsel ever saw
appellant, discussed with her a Nevada divorce, made any demands upon her, gave
her any advice or counsel, made any promises, threats or misrepresentations to
her concerning the divorce, told her to do any act in connection with the
proceeding, asked her to execute any papers, in any manner imposed upon her or
had any influence or control over her.  The only thing she alleges he did
pending the Nevada divorce, besides failing to give her the support to which she
felt she was entitled, consisted of calling her "on several occasions," at which
time he "laughed" about her financial distress.  A lawyer she personally chose
gave her legal advice, and of her own free will she followed it -- appeared in
the Nevada proceeding, hired a Las Vegas lawyer, travelled to Nevada, actively
participated in the trial, testified on her own behalf, had full opportunity to
contest the issue of jurisdiction, and secured a divorce upon her own request.
(Findings of fact and conclusions of law, Nevada court.) There appears to have
been no rush, pressure or emergency involved in the Nevada proceeding;
appellant, 500 miles away from respondent in Las Vegas, had six months in which
to decide what she wanted to do about the Nevada action; she did what any normal
person would have done -- consulted counsel and followed his advice. While
appellant has not argued that her lawyers were guilty of fraud or duress, she
has intimated the same in framing her contention on page 6 of her opening brief.
However, on the facts she has alleged in her affidavits she could not seriously
advance such a position, for while she may not have wanted to pursue the course
of legal action made necessary by respondent's divorce proceeding and which her
attorneys advised her to take to protect her rights in the Nevada court, or she
now regrets having appeared and participated in Nevada and secured the divorce,
or her present counsel, who represents her for the first time on this appeal, in
the light of recent developments, disagrees with the advice her former counsel
gave her, it nevertheless appears that her lawyers were competent, acted in her
best interest and advised her in the utmost good faith.  Her affidavit shows
neither fraud nor duress on their part, and in no respect approaches the
situation found in Aldabe v. Aldabe, 209 Cal.App.2d 453 [26 Cal.Rptr. 208].

     Having concluded that appellant's affidavits fail to show she had been
induced by fraud or duress to make her appearance in the Nevada action, the
decree must be given full  faith and credit under the Sherrer and Coe cases,
supra; and it appearing that appellant personally and through counsel appeared
and participated in the Nevada action and had full opportunity to litigate the
jurisdictional issue ( Heuer v. Heuer, 33 Cal.2d 268 [200 P.2d 385]), and that
no proof was offered that the Nevada decree is susceptible to collateral attack
in Nevada, that portion of her affidavit and the declarations of Dell'era and
Arnold showing respondent to be a resident of Reseda, California, and not a
domiciliary of Nevada, do "nothing more than create a conflict upon the mooted
point." (Baldwin v.  Baldwin, 28 Cal.2d 406, 410 [170 P.2d 670];  Heuer v. Heuer
, 33 Cal.2d 268 [201 P.2d 385].)

   In view of our conclusion, we deem an extended discussion of appellant's lack
of diligence in asserting "fraud or duress" and any resulting prejudice to
respondent, to be unnecessary.  However, inasmuch as nothing in her affidavit
suggests that her "mental duress" lasted one day beyond the date of the Nevada
trial, borrowing the language in Haden v. Haden, 120 Cal.App.2d 722 [262 P.2d
73], we comment that she waited three years to expend the fruits of the Nevada
decree before "charging she had been swindled by duress and a fraud had been
committed on the court of Nevada." (P. 726.)

   For the foregoing reasons the judgment is affirmed.


                              36 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            JOSEPH COHEN, Respondent, v. KATHRYN B. COHEN, Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 14894

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division One

          73 Cal. App. 2d 330; 166 P.2d 622; 1946 Cal. App. LEXIS 839


                               February 28, 1946

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County and from orders striking affidavits, pleadings and exhibits from the
files and refusing relief from a default.  Charles S. Burnell, Judge.

   Action for divorce.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Guardian and Ward--Guardians Ad Litem--Powers--Consent to Divorce.  --It was
improper to grant a divorce where consent thereto was given by a guardian ad
litem for the wife without her express consent; the pleadings were not
personally verified (Civ. Code, § 128); she had communicated to the court before
it rendered judgment that it was her desire that the marriage should not be
dissolved; and where there was medical testimony that "she is sane enough so
that no court in this country would ever declare her insane."

(2) Divorce--Public Policy--State as Quasi Party.  --The state has an interest
in the marital status, its continuance and its dissolution. The marriage
contract can be dissolved only for the grave causes recognized and sanctioned by
law and not upon the whim or caprice, or by the consent or collusion of the
contracting parties.

(3) Guardian and Ward--Guardians Ad Litem--Powers--Consent of Ward.  --In an
action for divorce, it was error for the trial court to permit the filing of an
amended cross-complaint by a guardian ad litem where, if she was incompetent,
she was incapable of giving consent to the proceedings or, if she was sane, her
personal oath to the proceedings should have been obtained. (Civ. Code, § 128.)

(4) Divorce--Interlocutory Decree--Effect on Property Rights.  --In an action
for divorce, the trial court may, in its discretion, determine the property
rights of the parties in the interlocutory decree, if it does not unduly
prejudice either party, and the court may specify that this determination should
not become effective or final until the entry of the final decree.

(5) Id.--Appeal--Determination--Effect on Payments Made.  --A party to a divorce
action who has made payments pursuant to an interlocutory decree will not be
prejudiced as to such payments by a reversal of that judgment and, upon retrial,
the court may take this into consideration in the rendition of its judgment.

COUNSEL: Lasher B. Gallagher for Appellant.

Howlett & Williams for Respondent.

JUDGES: White, J.  York, P. J., concurred.  Doran, J., concurred in the
judgment.

OPINION BY: WHITE

OPINION

     Respondent, Joseph Cohen, commenced this litigation by filing in the
Superior Court of Los Angeles County a complaint for divorce. Appellant wife, in
addition to her answer denying the charges of cruelty set forth by respondent,
filed a cross-complaint seeking separate maintenance and a division of the
community property.  Respondent also filed a second action by which he sought to
set aside certain transfers of real and personal property theretofore made by
him to appellant.  The two cases were consolidated for trial.  On April 29,
1943, respondent, by leave of court,  filed a "supplemental" complaint for
divorce which set forth 58 alleged acts of cruelty on the part of appellant.
Appellant failed to answer the supplemental complaint, and on September 21,
1943, her default was duly entered.  On September 28, 1943, Attorney John E.
Glover, who had previously represented appellant (but who was not her counsel at
the time her default was entered), filed a petition for the appointment of
himself as a guardian ad litem of appellant, alleging that she "is totally
incapable of conducting the defense or prosecution of the within action"; and
upon presentation of this petition to the court (not the department of the judge
who tried the case), an order was made appointing Mr. Glover guardian ad litem
of appellant and substituting him as defendant in the cause.  So far as appears
from the record, this petition was filed and the order was made without notice
to or appearance by appellant personally.

   At the opening of the trial, appellant being now represented by Mr. Glover,
it was stipulated that her default be set aside, and Mr. Glover thereupon filed
in her behalf an amended  cross-complaint for divorce and a "supplement to
amended cross-complaint." The allegations of these pleadings were by stipulation
deemed denied by respondent.

   Following submission of the case, but before entry of judgment, the record
discloses that appellant, through her attorney and guardian ad litem, Mr.
Glover, moved to vacate the order of submission, withdraw her amended
cross-complaint (for divorce) and reinstate her original cross-complaint (for
separate maintenance).  This motion, submitted upon the affidavit of Attorney
Glover, was denied.  Thereafter, on March 13, 1944, the court made findings of
fact and conclusions of law, and adjudged that appellant was entitled to a
divorce upon the ground of desertion (the ground stated in her "supplement to
amended cross-complaint").  The court further ordered that respondent pay to
appellant the sum of $ 7,732.50 plus $ 200 per month for 24 months, and pay to
appellant's attorney a fee of $ 2,500.  Certain real property of respondent was
impressed with a lien to secure the payments required by this interlocutory
judgment.

    Mrs. Cohen, having obtained new counsel (her fourth or fifth change of
attorneys), filed notice of appeal from (1) the interlocutory judgment; (2) an
order of April 20, 1944, "which order struck from the files all the affidavits
and attached exhibits filed by defendant and cross-complainant in support of her
motion for a new trial"; and (3) an order of April 24, 1944, "which denied the
motion of the defendant and cross-complainant to be relieved of her default for
failure to file her supporting affidavits on motion for a new trial within the
time allowed by law."

   After the filing of the notice of appeal Mrs. Cohen discharged her counsel
and appeared in propria persona. Upon the lodging of the record on appeal in
this court, she appeared by her present counsel and filed an application for
leave to produce additional evidence, consisting of (1) the judgment, now final,
in favor of appellant in the consolidated action whereby respondent sought to
set aside certain transfers of property to her, and (2) evidence as to
additional assets of respondent not disclosed at the trial.  Since the case must
be reversed and retried, the additional evidence would serve no useful purpose
in this court.

   Appellant's contentions on appeal may be divided into two categories: (1) An
attack upon the validity of the appointment of the guardian ad litem , the
granting of a divorce upon the  cross-complaint signed by the guardian, and the
refusal of the court to permit the withdrawal of the cross-complaint for divorce
and the reinstatement of the cross-complaint for separate maintenance only; and
(2) an attack upon the findings and judgment of the court with respect to the
property rights of the parties.  The second group of contentions need not be
considered, as the conclusions reached by this court on the first group require
that the judgment be reversed and all issues set at large for retrial.

   As heretofore indicated, defendant wife by her pleadings originally sought
separate maintenance and a division of the community property.  About the time
that plaintiff husband filed his supplemental complaint for divorce the wife had
discharged her attorneys and was appearing in propria persona; she failed to
answer the supplemental complaint and her default was entered.  Shortly before
the trial she reengaged her former counsel, who presented to the court his
verified petition, alleging "that said Kathryn B. Cohen, since the inception of
said proceedings, has had five separate and distinct law firms or attorneys
representing her in connection with said proceedings, and she now appears in
propria persona. . . .  That your petitioner is informed and believes . . . that
said Kathryn B. Cohen, from the causes set forth in the affidavit of Dr. David
Harold Fink hereto attached and made a part hereof, is unable unassisted to
properly manage and take care of her property, and is totally incapable of
conducting the defense or prosecution of the within action, which action
involves substantial property interests.  . . ." The affidavit of Dr. Fink
stated that the wife was "suffering from severe situational neurosis, caused in
part, according to her statements, by her husband's desertion for another woman.
. . .  That the said Kathryn B. Cohen, by reason of the aforementioned
situational neurosis, coupled with an emotional upset, is unable unassisted to
properly manage and take care of her property, and totally incapable of
conducting the defense or prosecution of the aforementioned litigation." During
the course of the trial Dr. Fink was called to the stand by Mr. Cohen's counsel,
and he then testified in part as follows:

   "THE COURT: Would you say she was sane or insane?

   "A. Well, I would say she was on the border line.  She is sane enough so that
no court in this country would ever declare her insane, and yet she is not sane
enough to take any kind of  professional advice.  . . .  She requires
psychiatric care under sanitarium conditions."

   The trial of the cause occupied from October 7 to October 13, 1943.  On
December 30, 1943, Mrs. Cohen's guardian ad litem moved the court to vacate the
order of submission and allow the withdrawal of the cross-complaint for divorce
and the reinstatement of the cross-complaint for separate maintenance. This
motion was submitted upon an affidavit of the guardian ad litem as follows:

   "That your affiant has been requested by said Kathryn B. Cohen to take the
necessary legal steps to effect a withdrawal of her cross-complaint, wherein she
seeks, among other things, a dissolution of the marriage of the above named
parties, and a reinstatement of her original cross-complaint for separate
maintenance, stating in substance that your affiant is insisting and compelling
her to sue for divorce  against her will and wishes; that it is her, the said
Kathryn B. Cohen's life, and that she loves her husband."

   This motion was denied by the trial court.  Thereafter, on January 27, 1944,
the trial court rendered its decision granting a divorce to appellant, but
formal findings and judgment were not entered until March 17, 1944.  On May 18,
1944, appellant's motion, in the law and motion department of the superior
court, to discharge her guardian ad litem was denied without prejudice.  Again,
on June 2, 1944, appellant and her guardian ad litem presented a motion to
discharge Mr. Glover as guardian ad litem.

   This motion was granted.  In support of the motion Dr. Fink made an affidavit
to the effect "that it is the opinion of your affiant, based upon his knowledge
and experience, personal contact with said Kathryn B. Cohen; that Mrs. Kathryn
B. Cohen is sane and mentally competent and therefore requires no guardianship
in the above entitled matter, or for any other reason, or at all."

   Under the point that "the trial court erred in appointing a guardian ad litem
for the defendant," appellant contends that the record contains nothing to show
that she ever at any time personally agreed to seek or actually sought or
authorized her attorney to obtain a divorce; that the prosecution of a suit for
divorce through a guardian ad litem is contrary to public policy, the wife being
entitled to decide that question for herself; and that the appointment of a
guardian ad litem without notice to her, followed by the filing of amended
pleadings seeking a divorce rather than separation, constituted a  denial of her
right of decision in contravention of the due process clauses of the state and
federal Constitutions.

     The weight of authority would seem to be that a suit for divorce must be
regarded as one which is so strictly personal that it cannot be maintained at
the pleasure of a guardian or committee of an insane spouse.  ( Mohrmann v. Kob,
291 N.Y. 181 [51 N.E.2d 921, 149 A.L.R. 1274]; Hinkle v. Lovelace, 204 Mo. 208
[102 S.W. 1015, 120 Am.St.Rep. 698, 11 L.R.A.N.S. 730].) For both majority and
minority expressions see cases in 70 American Law Reports 964 and 149 American
Law Reports 1284.  Assuming that situations could or should arise in which
consent to a divorce might be given by a guardian in behalf of an incompetent,
the present case is not one of them, and the facts disclosed herein plainly call
for a reversal of the judgment.  It was the privilege of appellant as the
allegedly aggrieved party to decline to seek a divorce, and regardless of the
motives behind her attitude it was not within the province of her counsel, her
guardian or the court to force one upon her.  As heretofore indicated, her
desires in this regard were communicated to the court prior to the rendition of
its decision.

   It is urged that appellant is estopped by her conduct in permitting the
divorce pleadings to be filed and not objecting to being represented by a
guardian ad litem, and that respondent is an innocent victim of a situation over
which he had no control.  The record, however, discloses that the circuitous
procedure adopted in this case whereby a divorce was sought without the express
consent of the wife was agreed to by respondent's counsel (not his counsel upon
this appeal).  Section 128 of the Civil Code provides that in an action for
divorce a cross-complainant must personally verify the cross-complaint. The
pleadings here involved were not verified, but it was stipulated that they be
admitted "with the same force and effect as if they had been verified."

     The state has an interest in the marital status, its continuance, and its
dissolution. (27 C.J.S.  528, 529; Elms v. Elms, 4 Cal.2d 681 [52 P.2d 223]; In
re Lazar, 37 Cal.App.2d 327, 330 [99 P.2d 342].) The state recognizes the family
as the foundation stone of the social order.  Because under the American
philosophy of government the state itself springs from the family, it can only
exist so long as the solemnity of marriage and the stability of the family and
home ideal endure.  Therefore the contract of marriage cannot be dissolved  upon
the whim or caprice, or by the consent or collusion, of the contracting parties.
Only for the grave causes recognized and sanctioned by law can the marriage bond
be dissolved. In the case of In re Lazar, supra, at page 330, it was said:

   "The state, while not a party in a divorce action, has an interest in the
contract and relationship of marriage, which is not subject to dissolution upon
the whim or caprice of one of the contracting parties or even upon their mutual
consent.  It may  be dissolved only for causes sanctioned by law.  In Grannis v.
Superior Court, 146 Cal. 245, 252, 253 [79 P. 891, 106 Am.St.Rep. 23], the court
said: 'The parties to such an action have not the right to control procedure as
in other actions.  The court is not bound by admissions in the pleadings nor by
the stipulations of the parties, nor is its inquiry as to the facts limited by
the pleadings.  . . .  The rule in actions affecting property, that the parties
interested may control the disposition of the interests involved, and that the
judgment of the court will be made to conform to such disposition, when
ascertained, has no application to divorce cases.' (Greenhood on Public Policy,
490; Roberts v. Roberts, 83 Cal.App. 345 [256 P. 826]; Deyoe v. Superior Court,
140 Cal. 476 [74 P. 28, 98 Am.St.Rep. 73]; Maynard v. Hill, 125 U.S. 190 [8
S.Ct. 723, 31 L.Ed. 654].)"

   And in Rehfuss v. Rehfuss, 169 Cal. 86, 92 [145 P. 1020], the court declared:

   "An action for divorce concerns not only the parties immediately interested,
but also the state.  The attorneys in the case represent the respective parties
-- the court in a sense represents the state.  It is the duty of the court,
representing the state, in accordance with the letter and policy of the law, to
guard strictly against fraud, collusion, or imposition when the husband or wife
seeks to dissolve the bonds that bind them together.  . . .  'The state has an
interest in the maintenance of the marriage tie, which neither the collusion nor
the negligence of the parties can impair.' Where it becomes manifest to the
court before it loses jurisdiction of the case, that a judgment decreeing a
divorce has been obtained by collusive agreement between the parties, or through
fraud practiced upon the court, the court has the inherent power to set aside
the judgment."

     So in the case at bar, it was error for the court to permit the filing of
the amended cross-complaints by the guardian ad litem.  If appellant was
incompetent, she was  incapable of consenting to a divorce; if, as testified by
Dr. Fink at the trial, she was "sane enough so that no court in this country
would ever declare her insane," her personal oath to the divorce pleadings
should have been obtained.  At no time during the trial, so far as the record
discloses, was the wife asked by her guardian, opposing counsel or the court,
whether she desired a divorce or whether she had read her amended pleadings.

   The conclusions at which we have arrived on this phase of the case render it
unnecessary to give extended consideration to other contentions of appellant, as
upon the record here presented the cause should be remanded for a new trial upon
all of the issues.   It is only necessary to note, in this connection,
appellant's contention that the trial court erred in finally determining the
property rights of the parties by the interlocutory decree. The case of Leupe v.
Leupe, 21 Cal.2d 145 [130 P.2d 697], holds: "An immediate disposal of property
upon an interlocutory decree of divorce is thus within the jurisdiction of the
trial court." (Emphasis added.) "It has been held in certain cases that the
trial court should not assign and dispose of the community or homestead property
immediately by an interlocutory decree of divorce, but should wait until such
time as the marriage is absolutely dissolved. (Citing cases.) These cases,
however, dealt with direct appeals from interlocutory decrees in which error
only was claimed and do not involve questions of jurisdiction or the effect of
such decrees after the time for appeal has passed.  Furthermore, it has been
said that the court generally should determine the property issues at the same
time it determines the issues with respect to the divorce,  although" (following
emphasis added) "the court may specify that its determination should not become
effective or final until the entry of the final decree.  (Citing cases.) This
practical solution of the problem was recognized and approved in the Remly and
Strupelle cases, supra.  We need not decide in this case whether it was error to
make an immediate assignment of property in the interlocutory decree or whether
the right to so dispose of the property of the parties was within the discretion
of the court." The trial court may, therefore, in its discretion, determine the
property rights of the parties in the interlocutory decree, provided such a
course does not operate to the undue prejudice of either party.

     While it may be that pursuant to the interlocutory  judgment of divorce
entered herein plaintiff has paid to defendant wife certain sums of money,
nevertheless no prejudice will ensue to plaintiff in that regard by reason of a
reversal of the judgment which sets at large all of the issues raised by the
pleadings, and upon a retrial the  court may take into consideration in the
rendition of its judgment such benefits, if any, as have enured to defendant
wife by reason of the interlocutory judgment of divorce which is the subject of
this appeal.

   The interlocutory judgment of divorce granted herein and entered March 15,
1944, docketed March 16, 1944, in Book 1412, Page 116, of Judgments, is
reversed, and the cause remanded for a new trial in accordance with the views
herein expressed.  The attempted appeals from the order of April 20, 1944,
striking from the files all affidavits, pleadings and exhibits filed by the
defendant in support of her motion for a new trial, and from the order of April
24, 1944, denying the motion of defendant to be relieved of her default for
failure to file within the time prescribed by law her supporting affidavits on
motion for a new trial, are, and each is, dismissed.  The application for leave
to produce additional evidence is denied.


                              37 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              IRENEO ROTEA, Respondent, v. TERESA ROTEA, Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 16828

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Three

          93 Cal. App. 2d 827; 209 P.2d 963; 1949 Cal. App. LEXIS 1470


                               September 30, 1949

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County and from an order denying a new trial.  Ingall W. Bull, Judge.

   Action to quiet title to an undivided one-half interest in house and lot.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Vendor and Purchaser--Bona Fide Purchasers--Notice--Burden of Proof.  --A
transferee of real property under a quitclaim deed who has knowledge of his
transferor's pending divorce action, has the burden of establishing that he was
without notice of the claim of his transferor's wife that the property should be
awarded to her.

(2) Id.--Bona Fide Purchasers--Trial--Findings.  --A finding in a quiet title
action, that a transferee of real property under a quitclaim deed, had not
received the deed with full knowledge of the claim of his transferor's wife that
the property was community, was not an adequate finding as to whether the
transferee was a bona fide purchaser.

(3) Id.--Bona Fide Purchasers--Notice.  --A transferee of real property under a
quitclaim deed who is not a bona fide purchaser without notice that his
transferor's wife claims an interest therein in a pending divorce action, takes
the property subject to the anticipated judgment in the divorce action.

(4) Divorce--Disposition of Property--Rights of Third Parties.  --Unless invalid
on its face, an interlocutory decree of divorce cannot, as to real property
awarded thereunder, be attacked in a subsequent quiet title action by a third
person receiving a quitclaim deed for the realty.

(5) Husband and Wife--Property--Determination of Character--Parol Evidence.
--Although title to real property was acquired under a joint tenancy deed, it
may be shown by parol evidence that the property is community.

(6) Divorce--Disposition of Property--Determination of Character of Property.
--Where the pleadings in a divorce action present the issue as to whether
property is community, the court may therein determine the title to the
property.

(7) Vendor and Purchaser--Bond Fide Purchasers--Notice.  --A transferee of real
property under a quitclaim deed, who has knowledge that his transferor's wife
claims an interest therein in the transferor's pending divorce action, stands in
the same position as to the effect of the judgment in the divorce action, on the
title to the property, as would the transferor if the deed had not been given.

COUNSEL: Claude A. Watson, Edward P. Hart and Henry F. Walker for Appellant.

Willedd Andrews for Respondent.

JUDGES: Wood, J.  Shinn, P. J., and Vallee, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: WOOD

OPINION

     Action to quiet title to an undivided one-half interest in a house and lot.
 Defendant appeals from the judgment in favor of plaintiff.

    Ireneo Rotea, the plaintiff, who is a brother of Tiburcio Rotea, claimed
title under a quitclaim deed executed by Tiburcio.  Teresa Rotea, the defendant,
who was formerly the wife of Tiburcio Rotea, claimed title under a divorce
decree which awarded the property to her.  Prior to the time Teresa and Tiburcio
were married she had entered into a contract for the purchase of the property
here involved, and at the time of the marriage she had paid about $ 1,100 on the
purchase price but at said time the payments under the contract were in default
to the extent of approximately $ 300.  After the marriage the said arrearage
under the contract, and also certain improvements on the property, were paid
from the earnings of Tiburcio.  Thereafter, in 1934, the property was conveyed
by grant deed to Teresa and Tiburcio as joint tenants.  In September, 1946,  she
commenced a divorce action, upon the ground of extreme cruelty, and alleged that
the property involved here was community property, and she asked that it be
awarded to her.  Tiburcio answered, denying that it was community property; and
he filed a cross-complaint alleging that the property was held by them in joint
tenancy, and he asked for an equal division of the property.  She answered the
cross-complaint and alleged that it was her separate property.  This reference
to those pleadings is for the purpose of indicating that the divorce action
presented questions as to the character and ownership of the property involved
here.

   The plaintiff, Ireneo, lived at the home of Tiburcio and Teresa (the property
involved here) during 1945 and 1946, and he lived in said house thereafter until
the trial of this quiet title action was commenced (Mar. 24, 1948).  On August
30, 1947, Tiburcio delivered to Ireneo a quitclaim deed, whereby Tiburcio
quitclaimed to Ireneo an undivided one-half interest in said property.  The deed
recited that the consideration for it was $ 1,500.  Ireneo testified that he
paid medical bills, alimony payments, attorney's fees and costs for Tiburcio
amounting to $ 997, and that he had paid other bills for his brother amounting
to approximately $ 700; and that these payments were the consideration for the
deed. The divorce case was tried on December 9, 1947, and on said day an
interlocutory judgment of divorce was awarded to Teresa.  That judgment became
final before the commencement of this quiet title action on January 23, 1948.
The judgment in the divorce action recited, in part, as follows:  ". . . the
defendant having stipulated and consented in open court to a partition of the
real property hereinafter described, and said defendant having stipulated and
consented to the award by the court of said real property, upon the condition
that the plaintiff pay to the defendant the sum of $ 1500.00, the court having
received and approved said stipulation and consent.  It is therefore . .  .
decreed that the real property [property involved here] . . . is hereby awarded
to the plaintiff, Teresa Rotea, upon the condition that the plaintiff pay to the
defendant, Tiburcio Rotea, the sum of $ 1500.00 on or before February 9, 1948.
It is further . . . decreed that upon the payment of said $ 1500.00 by the
plaintiff to the defendant, the defendant shall cause to be delivered to the
plaintiff any . . . documents which may be necessary to vest title of said real
property in the name of the plaintiff . . . .  It is further . . . decreed that
the defendant vacate said real property on or before February 9, 1948, and
surrender to the plaintiff possession of said real property together with the
keys thereto on or before February 9, 1948."

   The time for payment of the $ 1,500 was extended by the court, permission was
granted to deposit said amount with the clerk of the court, and said amount was
so deposited on March 25, 1948.

   As above stated, respondent herein (Ireneo) relies upon his quitclaim deed as
the basis for the judgment which was in his favor.  He argues that, since the
property had been conveyed to Tiburcio and Teresa in joint tenancy, the property
was held by them in joint tenancy, and the court did not have power in the
divorce action to make an award of such property; and that he is not bound by
the judgment therein because he was not a party to that action.

   Appellant contends that since the divorce decree had become final it was a
determination of the matter of title as between her (Teresa) and Tiburcio; that
since the divorce action involved issues as to whether the property was separate
or community or joint tenancy property, and since findings in the divorce action
were waived, and since all intendments are in favor of the judgment therein, it
is to be assumed that the trial court in the divorce action found that it was
community property. It is also contended that Ireneo took his deed with notice
of the divorce action and subject to the judgment therein; that since no
invalidity of the divorce decree  appears upon its face, that decree cannot be
attacked in this proceeding.

    Ireneo testified that in September, 1946, after the divorce papers had been
served on Tiburcio, he (Tiburcio) told him that if he would help Tiburcio pay
all the expenses, the attorney's fees, and the costs, he (Tiburcio) would "sign
his half interest in the place" to Ireneo in repayment of these amounts and
other amounts which he had previously paid for him; that he (Ireneo) paid those
bills; that he received the quitclaim deed on August 30, 1947, and he lived in
the house from that time until the day the trial of the present action commenced
(Mar. 24, 1948); that he did not leave the place voluntarily, but the sheriff
told him on that morning that he was taking possession of the property under a
writ issued in the divorce case; that in 1946 he was in the business of helping
Mexicans to become American citizens, and that he was paid by those whom he
helped; that he was present in court at proceedings in the divorce case in
November, 1946, in June, 1947, and in October, 1947; and that, in connection
with proceedings in the divorce case, he was in the corridor outside the
courtroom in September, 1947, and on the 8th and 9th days of December, 1947.  He
also testified that he retained and paid the attorney who represented Tiburcio
in the divorce case.

   Tiburcio corroborated Ireneo's testimony regarding the payments and the deed.
He also testified that he had been sick and unable to work since September,
1947.

   A representative of Tiburcio's employer testified that the employer paid
Tiburcio as follows: $ 2,407.34 in 1945; $ 1,971.57 in 1946; and $ 2,646.28 in
1947 (to Sept. 29th).

   Teresa testified that Ireneo lived at the home of Teresa and Tiburcio during
1945 and 1946; and that during that time he was not employed and he was
supported by Tiburcio.

     It is undisputed that for approximately a year before Ireneo received his
quitclaim deed he had actual knowledge of the pendency of the divorce action.
Before he received his deed he had employed the attorney for Tiburcio and had
attended court proceedings in the divorce action. The burden was upon Ireneo to
establish his status of bona fide purchaser without notice of Teresa's claim
that the property should be awarded to her.  (See McLane v. Storr, 75 Cal.App.
2d 459, 464 [171 P.2d 534].) There was no finding that Ireneo was a bona fide
purchaser without such notice.   The court did find "that the claims referred to
in the Answer of the defendant are not true." One of the allegations of the
answer was that "plaintiff received a deed from said Tiburcio Rotea with full
knowledge of defendant's claim that said property was community property and
without the consent or permission or signature of defendant herein." It
therefore appears that the court did find that it was not true that Ireneo
received a deed from Tiburcio with full knowledge of defendant's claim that said
property was community property. Such a finding is not an adequate finding as to
whether Ireneo was a bona fide purchaser. In Olson v. Cornwell, 134 Cal.App. 419
, it was said at page 429 [25 P.2d 879]: "[If] there is evidence upon the
question of constructive notice it is not sufficient to find merely that a
defendant had no actual notice of the existence of an unrecorded instrument, but
the court must also find upon the question of constructive notice; otherwise the
judgment in favor of a defendant cannot be sustained."  A finding that Ireneo
was a bona fide purchaser would not have been sustained by the evidence.  He did
not testify that he did not have knowledge, before he received his deed, that
she was claiming the property.  He took his quitclaim deed from Tiburcio subject
to the judgment thereafter to be rendered in the divorce action. The
interlocutory decree of divorce states that Tiburcio stipulated and consented to
a partition and award of the real property by the court upon the condition that
Teresa pay Tiburcio $ 1,500.  By the decree therein, upon such stipulation and
consent, the property was awarded to Teresa upon said condition.  Although the
condition was not complied with in the time stated in the decree, the time for
compliance was extended and the $ 1,500 was deposited in court.  That decree
became final before  this action was commenced.  The title to the property here
involved, as between Teresa and Tiburcio, was determined finally by that decree.
Ireneo's quitclaim deed was subject to the final judgment therein that the
property was awarded to Teresa.  He was not a bona fide purchaser without notice
of her claim that the property should be awarded to her.

     As stated in McGee v. Hoffman, 46 Cal.App. 508 at page 511 [189 P. 298]:
"This interlocutory decree cannot be attacked in this proceeding unless its
invalidity is apparent upon its face." It does not appear from the face of the
divorce decree, or at all, that there is any invalidity therein.

     Respondent asserts that the trial court in the divorce action did not have
power to award the property, even to Teresa,  because the property was in joint
tenancy. Even though the title to real property is acquired under a joint
tenancy deed, it may be shown by parol evidence that the property is in fact
community property. ( Huber v. Huber, 27 Cal.2d 784, 788 [167 P.2d 708].)   As
above stated, the pleadings in the divorce action presented the issue as to
whether the property here involved was community property. As above shown,
Tiburcio and Teresa stipulated in the divorce action that the court therein
might award the property to plaintiff upon the condition that plaintiff pay $
1,500 to defendant.

     Ireneo, by reason of his quitclaim deed from Tiburcio, stands in the same
position with reference to the title to the property that Tiburcio would have
stood in if he had not made the quitclaim deed. According to the provisions of
the judgment in the divorce action, Tiburcio has a lien upon the property in the
amount of $ 1,500.  That amount has been deposited by Teresa with the clerk of
the superior court, but the record on appeal does not show upon what conditions
it was deposited. The judgment in the present action, that Ireneo is now and
since August 30, 1947, has been the owner of and entitled to the possession of
an undivided one-half interest in said real property involved herein, should be
reversed; and further proceedings should be had in the superior court, not
inconsistent with the views expressed in this opinion, quieting the title to
said property, and determining the issue as to whom the $ 1,500 is payable if
said amount has not been paid, and determining the issue as to who has a lien
upon the property to secure the payment of said amount if said amount has not
been paid.

   The purported appeal from the order denying the motion for a new trial is
dismissed.  The judgment is reversed, with the direction that further
proceedings be had in the superior court, not inconsistent with the views
expressed herein, determining the issues involved.


                              38 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              ELLA CHURCHILL BABCOCK, Appellant, v. F. W. BABCOCK,
                                   Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 14081

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Three

           63 Cal. App. 2d 94; 146 P.2d 279; 1944 Cal. App. LEXIS 917


                               February 29, 1944

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied March 21, 1944,
and Respondent's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court was Denied April
27, 1944.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County and from an order denying a new trial.  Thurmond Clarke, Judge.

   Action to set aside a final divorce judgment and for divorce.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Judgment--Relief from Fraudulent Decree--Action--Complaint.  --A
cause of action for setting aside a divorce decree is stated where it is alleged
that, after entry of an interlocutory decree of divorce and a subsequent
reconciliation of the parties, the defendant procured the entry of a final
decree on an affidavit that there had been no reconciliation.

(2) Id.--Judgment--Relief from Fraudulent Decree--Action--Defenses.  --In an
action to set aside a divorce decree on the ground that it was entered on a
false affidavit of no reconciliation, no defense is stated in an answer alleging
merely the entry of the interlocutory and final decrees, not appealed from,
modified or vacated.

(3) Judgments--Res Judicata--Proof--Burden of Proof.  --A defendant relying on a
defense of estoppel by judgment has the burden of proving that the issue in
question was tried and determined.

(4) Divorce--Judgment--Res Judicata.  --A finding or conclusion in a second
divorce action that the interlocutory decree in the first action was in full
force and effect is not an adjudication as to a subsequent reconciliation so as
to preclude a third action to set aside the final decree in the first action on
the ground that it was entered pursuant to a false affidavit of no
reconciliation.

(5) Id.--Judgment--Res Judicata.  --A judgment against the plaintiff in a
divorce action is a bar to a cause of action existing when the action was
brought.

(6) Id.--Judgment--Res Judicata--Property Rights.  --The litigation of community
property rights is not essential to a divorce action; and if they are not
covered by it, an adjudication may be had in an independent action.

COUNSEL: Saul S. Klein for Appellant.

P. V. Davis and Ben C. Cohen for Respondent.

JUDGES: Bishop, J. pro tem.  Desmond, P. J., and Shinn, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: BISHOP

OPINION

     Three successive actions brought by the same plaintiff against the same
defendant furnish the threads in which the problems of this appeal are enmeshed.
The first of these was an action for divorce brought on the ground of cruelty in
Santa Barbara County in 1926 and in which, before the year was over, an
interlocutory decree was entered granting the plaintiff a divorce. Four years
later the second action, also for a divorce, charging the defendant with
cruelty, was commenced, this time in Los Angeles County.  Plaintiff was
unsuccessful in this second suit, a judgment denying her a second divorce being
entered in 1932.  In 1935 a final decree of divorce was entered  in the Santa
Barbara action, upon defendant's motion, and it was to have this final decree
set aside, as well as to secure a fresh decree, based on defendant's claimed
desertion, that the present suit was instituted in 1941.  The defendant
presented two affirmative pleas of res judicata, to this third action, and the
trial was limited to a consideration of these pleas.  They were found to state
the truth and the trial court determined that they constituted a complete
defense to plaintiff's entire action.  This determination, we have concluded,
was too broad, so that the resulting judgment of dismissal, from which the
plaintiff has appealed, should be reversed.

     The second cause of action in the instant case alleged that shortly after
the entry of the interlocutory decree, in the Santa Barbara action, the parties
to it became reconciled and resumed marital relations, yet the defendant in 1935
filed an affidavit that there had been no reconciliation, and so procured the
entry of a final decree. These facts make out a case for the setting aside of
the judgment.  ( McGuinness  v. Superior Court (1925), 196 Cal. 222, 229 [237 P.
42, 40 A.L.R. 1110]; Gump v. Gump (1940), 42 Cal.App.2d 64 [108 P.2d 21], and
cases cited.)

     It is quite obvious that the first affirmative defense does not state a
defense to this second cause of action, for in that defense the defendant does
no more than  set up the bringing of the Santa Barbara action, the entries of
the interlocutory and of the final decrees, and that, as to each decree, it "has
not been appealed from, annulled, vacated or modified in any manner whatsoever
and ever since [its entry] said decree has been and now is in full force and
effect."

   The second affirmative defense is not so easily disposed of.  In it the
defendant calls attention to the bringing of the second action and alleges that
in that action he had, by way of an affirmative defense, pleaded that an
interlocutory decree had been entered in the Santa Barbara action and that it
remained in full force and effect.  He further alleged that the trial court
found this plea to be true and denied the plaintiff a divorce. Later we shall
note the exact wording of the plea and of the finding.  Enough has been said to
indicate that our task is to determine whether or not the plaintiff is precluded
by the adjudication in the second divorce action  from proving the
reconciliation and resumption of marital relations.

   To begin with it is clear that as the second count of the present suit, by
which the plaintiff seeks to set aside the final decree, is a different cause of
action from that presented by the second divorce suit, if the adjudication in
the second suit operates to prevent the plaintiff from proving her case in the
present action, it is by way of an estoppel and not by way of a bar.  ( Bank of
America, etc. Assn. v. McLaughlin (1937), 22 Cal.App.2d 411, 416 [71 P.2d 291,
72 P.2d 554]; Panos v. Great Western Packing Co. (1943), 21 Cal.2d 636, 638 [134
P.2d 242].) This distinction is not of academic interest only.  It has this
practical consequence, recognized in the Bank of America case, just cited, and
stated in the comment following section 68 of the Restatement of the Law of
Judgments in these words: "It is important to distinguish the effect of a
judgment as a merger of the original cause of action in the judgment or as a bar
to a subsequent action upon the original cause of action from its effect by way
of collateral estoppel in a subsequent action between the parties based upon a
different cause of action. If a judgment is rendered in favor of the plaintiff,
the cause of action upon which the judgment is based is merged in the judgment,
and the plaintiff cannot thereafter maintain an action on the original cause of
action (see sec. 47).  If the judgment is rendered in favor of the defendant on
the merits, the original cause of action is barred by the judgment (see sec.
48).  In either case the original cause of action is extinguished by the
judgment no matter what issues were raised and litigated in the action, or even
if no issues were raised or litigated and judgment was rendered by default.

   "On the other hand, where the subsequent action is based upon a different
cause of action from that upon which the prior action was based, the effect of
the judgment is more limited.  The judgment is conclusive between the parties in
such a case as to questions actually litigated and determined by the judgment.
It is not conclusive as to questions which might have been but were not
litigated in the original action.  This is the doctrine of collateral estoppel."

      Our problem narrows; we now see that it is to determine whether the
question of the reconciliation of the parties had  been actually tried and
determined in the second divorce action. The burden of proving that it was tried
and determined was, of course, upon the defendant.  (Code Civ. Proc., sec. 1981;
Rideaux v. Torgrimson (1939), 12 Cal.2d 633, 638 [86 P.2d 826].) In an endeavor
to discharge his burden the defendant introduced the file of that action.  That
file fails to show that the question of reconciliation was either tried or
determined.

     Plaintiff's complaint, there, alleged many acts of cruelty as the basis for
her prayer for a divorce. The answer denied these allegations and they were,
incidentally, found to be untrue.  The answer, as will be remembered, also set
forth, as an affirmative defense, that an interlocutory decree for divorce had
been entered in the Santa Barbara action and then continued in these words:
"That said interlocutory decree has not been annulled, vacated or set aside and
is now in full force and effect." Judge Sheldon, the trial judge, found it to be
true "that said interlocutory decree has not been annulled, vacated or set aside
and is now in full force and effect." If the fact which plaintiff must prove in
support of her second count has already been adjudicated adversely to her, the
adjudication is encompassed in the finding just quoted.

   We have come to the conclusion that the finding is not an adjudication
precluding the plaintiff from proving her case.  We are of the opinion that the
conduct of  the parties subsequent to the entry of an interlocutory decree,
while it may affect their right to a final decree, does not effect a change in
the interlocutory decree; it remains "in full force and effect." By section 131
of the Civil Code it is provided that "If [the court] determines that the
divorce ought to be granted, an interlocutory judgment must be entered,
declaring that the party in whose favor the court decides is entitled to a
divorce." (Emphasis is ours.) By virtue of section 132 of the same code, and not
because of any provision to be inserted in the interlocutory decree, a final
judgment is not to be entered until one year has expired after the entry of the
interlocutory decree. In other words, the interlocutory decree determines, as of
its date, that the parties are entitled to a divorce; they cannot obtain the
divorce for a year, and intervening events, not affecting the standing of the
interlocutory decree, may deny it to them when the year is up.

    There are several cases which illustrate this principle.  It is given
expression in these words in Borg v. Borg (1938), 25 Cal.App.2d 25, 29 [76 P.2d
218] (the emphasis being that of the court) declaring that an interlocutory
decree "is a final judicial determination that, as of the date of its entry, the
parties were entitled to a dissolution of the status of married persons.  . . .
In so far as the interlocutory judgment decrees a dissolution of the marital
status its operation is suspended for a full year thereafter.  The right of the
prevailing party to have a final decree entered at that time is then dependent
upon conditions arising after the entry of the interlocutory decree. . . ." In
Gloyd v. Superior Court (1919), 44 Cal.App. 39, 42 [185 P. 995], it was decided
that the death of the plaintiff terminated the right of the defendant to have a
final decree entered, not on the ground that the death affected the
interlocutory decree itself, but because it dissolved the marriage.  In Dell v.
Superior Court (1921), 53 Cal.App. 436, 438 [200 P. 85], we find that a wife, in
whose favor an interlocutory decree of divorce had been entered, was attempting
to have it set aside on the ground that she and her husband, subsequent to the
decree, had become reconciled and lived together again as man and wife.  In
holding that the lower court was without jurisdiction to entertain the wife's
motion the appellate court expressed the view that the "integrity" of the
interlocutory decree "is unaffected by subsequent relations of the parties." In
Carp v. Superior Court (1926), 76 Cal.App. 481, 485 [245 P. 459], the plaintiff
sought by a writ of mandate to compel the entry of a final decree. The
defendant, it appears, had brought an action to set aside the interlocutory
decree on the grounds of extrinsic fraud.  Judgment had gone against her and she
had appealed.  Not on the theory that her so far unsuccessful but pending effort
to set aside the interlocutory decree had affected it in any way, but on the
ground that the court had the discretion and it was proper that it should
withhold a final decree until the result of the wife's effort was finally known,
the writ of mandate was denied.  A petition for a similar writ was also denied
in Weeks v. Superior Court (1921), 187 Cal. 620, 622 [203 P. 93], because the
petitioner was in contempt, the Supreme Court saying: "It is within
contemplation of the section [Civil Code, sec. 132] that facts arising
subsequently to the granting of the interlocutory  judgment should have their
influence in determining the right to a final decree."

   We conclude, therefore, in the light of the principle just noted, that
whether it is to be treated as a finding of fact or a conclusion of law, the
finding made by Judge Sheldon that the Santa Barbara interlocutory decree was
still in full force and effect does not of itself warrant the conclusion that
Judge Sheldon had been confronted with the contention that the parties had
become reconciled and resumed their marital relations, and had resolved the
issue against the plaintiff.

   It is possible that the question of the reconciliation of the parties was a
subject of attention at the trial of the second divorce action, for the
plaintiff may have attempted to counter the effect of the existing interlocutory
decree by proving that a reconciliation had been effected.  If the matter was
tried it avails the defendant nothing in this case, however, for he introduced
no evidence at the trial of the present case other than the file, to which we
have already referred, which would serve to disclose the issues actually tried
in the second divorce case; and, as we have seen, the file fails to reveal that
the issue which the plaintiff now seeks to have determined had previously
engaged the attention of the court.

     We now turn to plaintiff's first cause of action with the knowledge that
the final decree in the Santa Barbara case may be set aside.  Even so, we find
the first  cause of action barred.  It pleads a cause of action for a divorce on
the ground of desertion.  This is the pertinent paragraph: "V. That during the
middle of July, 1928, defendant wilfully deserted plaintiff, and during the time
subsequent thereto has refused to return and live with plaintiff." In the second
suit for divorce the complaint alleged, "For statistical purposes": "2. Date of
separation -- Approximately the middle of July, 1928." This allegation was
denied, but found to be true.  Now it is true that the ground upon which the
divorce was sought, in the second case, was cruelty. But the ground upon which a
divorce is now sought was in existence at the time the second action was
brought, in 1930, and a divorce denied; the plaintiff may not now secure a
divorce on a ground then existing.  The former judgment is a bar, not a
collateral estoppel. ( Helpling v. Helpling (1920), 50 Cal.App. 676, 681 [195 P.
715]; Cardinale v. Cardinale  (1937), 8 Cal.2d 762, 767 [68 P.2d 351]; see,
also, Little v. Smith (1920), 47 Cal.App. 8, 12 [189 P. 1059] and Panos v. Great
Western Packing Co., supra, 21 Cal.2d 636, 638 [134 P.2d 242].)

     With respect to this cause of action, the one for a divorce, the plaintiff
makes some argument that the judgment of dismissal deprived her of her day in
court respecting any community property that the parties may have.  The matter
of community property was expressly involved in the second divorce action, and
it was found that there was none of more than nominal value.  Since an
interlocutory decree does not put an end to the marriage relation ( Nelson v.
Nelson (1936), 7 Cal.2d 449, 453 [60 P.2d 982]) community property may be
acquired up to the entry of a final decree ( Brown v. Brown (1915), 170 Cal. 1,
7 [147 P. 1168]). The plaintiff, therefore, may have rights which have arisen
since the second divorce action, rights which have not been adjudicated.  She is
in no position, however, to complain that she is being deprived of an
opportunity to enforce those rights by having her present divorce cause barred.
The litigation of community property rights is not essential to a divorce
action, and if they are not covered by it an adjudication may be had in an
independent action.  ( Callnon v. Callnon (1935), 7 Cal.App.2d 676, 680 [46 P.2d
988], and cases cited.) Respecting community property the plaintiff in her
present suit alleged: "IV. That plaintiff is uninformed as to the existence of
any community property and asks that the same be ascertained and divided equally
between the parties hereto." The cause of action remains essentially one for
divorce, in which the question of property interests is quite incidental. It is
proper to hold the action to be barred although as an incident to the decision
the action is made unavailable as a vehicle for presenting the incidental
question.

   The judgment is reversed.  The appeal from the order denying a new trial,
that not being an appealable order, is dismissed.


                              39 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              ELAINE T. SMITH, Appellant, v. SIDNEY V. SMITH, Jr.,
                                   Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 6100

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, THIRD APPELLATE DISTRICT

           31 Cal. App. 2d 272; 87 P.2d 863; 1939 Cal. App. LEXIS 628


                           February 28, 1939, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:      APPEAL from an order of the Superior Court of Yuba County
modifying a final decree of divorce with respect to custody of a minor child.
Raglan Tuttle, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Minors--Custody--Judgments--Modification--Fitness of Parent--
Findings--Evidence.  --In this proceeding to modify a final decree of divorce
which awarded the custody of the minor child of the parties to plaintiff until
the further order of the court, where it appeared that plaintiff's conduct would
be detrimental to the welfare of the child, a finding that plaintiff was an
unfit person to retain the custody of the child had sufficient evidentiary
support.

(2) Id.--Minors--Custody--Fitness--Findings--Evidence.  --In this proceeding,
where plaintiff's sister, to whom the custody of the child was awarded, was a
witness at the hearing, and the court had an opportunity of observing her
conduct and appearance, and her character was not questioned, it could not be
said that the evidence did not support a finding that she was a fit and proper
person to assume the custody of the child.

(3) Id.--Minors--Custody--Appointment of Guardian--Courts--Jurisdiction.  --In
said proceeding, although it appeared that following the award of custody of the
child to plaintiff by the final decree of divorce, plaintiff was appointed
guardian of the person and estate of the child by a probate court in another
county, the divorce court retained jurisdiction to modify the final decree with
relation to the custody of the child, where section 138 of the Civil Code
authorized the divorce court to modify its decree for the welfare of the child
at any time during minority, and the appointment of the guardian was primarily
to take charge of a small estate which it was expected the child would inherit.

COUNSEL: Charles A. Wetmore, Jr., Edward F. Treadwell and Treadwell & Laughlin
for Appellant.

Loyd E. Hewitt and James R. McBride for Respondent.

JUDGES: THOMPSON, J. Pullen, P. J., concurred.

OPINION BY: THOMPSON

OPINION

     The facts are stated in the opinion of the court.

   THOMPSON, J. -- The plaintiff has appealed from an order modifying a final
decree of divorce with respect to the custody of a minor daughter.

   The parties to this action were divorced by a decree rendered by the Superior
Court in Yuba County, October 24, 1927. The final decree awarded the custody of
their infant daughter, Elaine, to her grandmother, Anna Trenberth. December 16,
1932, that decree was modified by granting the custody of the child to her
mother "until the further order of the court". From time to time the decree was
modified with respect to the amount of maintenance which the defendant was
required to pay for the care of the child. November  2, 1933, while the mother
still had custody of the girl, she was appointed guardian of her person and
estate by the Probate Court of Alameda County. The child then had the prospect
of inheriting a small estate.

   February 5, 1937, the defendant cited plaintiff to show cause why she should
not be deprived of the custody of their child on the ground that she was an
unfit person to retain her care and training. That proceeding was heard on the
affidavits of the respective parties and upon oral evidence which was also
adduced. The plaintiff's affidavit incidentally averred that she was appointed
guardian of the person and estate of their daughter, Elaine, by the Superior
Court of Alameda County on November 2, 1933. No further proof of that
appointment was adduced. The plaintiff, however, objected to the jurisdiction of
the Yuba County court to interfere with the custody of the child since she was
awarded to her in the guardianship matter. The objection was overruled.

   Five witnesses were examined regarding the fitness of the respective parties
to assume or retain custody of the minor. July 1, 1937, the court adopted
findings determining that neither spouse was qualified or fit to assume the
custody of the child. The custody of the daughter, Elaine, who was then thirteen
years of age, was awarded to Ethel Rodda, the wife of John E. Rodda, whom the
court found to be a fit and proper person to entrust with the child's care. Mrs.
Rodda is a sister of the plaintiff. From that order modifying the final decree
of divorce the plaintiff has appealed.

     It is contended the evidence fails to support the finding that plaintiff is
not a fit or proper person to have the custody of her minor child, and that the
decree of the Probate Court of Alameda County appointing plaintiff as guardian
of the person and estate of her daughter ousted the Yuba County court of
jurisdiction to subsequently modify the final decree of divorce with respect to
the custody of the child.

   The record contains an abundance of evidence in support of the order
modifying the final decree of divorce by depriving the appellant of the custody
of the minor on account of her unfitness to retain her care. The evidence
conclusively shows that the conduct of the mother would be detrimental to the
welfare of the child. Both Mr. and Mrs. Rodda and Jack Menz testified to facts
clearly indicating that the conduct  and influence of the plaintiff would be
most harmful to the child. It is not necessary to recite the facts upon which
the court concluded the mother is unfit to retain the custody of her daughter.
The record leaves no doubt of the correctness of the finding in that regard.

     There is no merit in the claim that the evidence does not support the
finding that Mrs. Ethel Rodda, to whom the child was awarded, is a fit and
proper person to assume her custody. She was a witness at the hearing. The court
then had an opportunity of observing her conduct and  appearance. Her character
was not questioned. In Jones on Evidence, third edition, page 208, section 158,
it is said:

   "The law presumes the character of a party to be good until the contrary is
shown and he can safely rest on that presumption."

   Moreover, the appellant waived that assignment of lack of evidence by failing
to present the issue in her briefs on appeal.

     We are of the opinion the Yuba County court which rendered the final decree
of divorce in this case, by the terms of which the minor child of the spouses
was awarded to her mother, retained jurisdiction to modify that decree with
relation to the custody of the child, notwithstanding the subsequent appointment
of the mother as guardian of the person and estate of her daughter by a probate
court in another county. ( Sec. 138, Civ. Code; Foster v. Foster, 8 Cal. 2d 719,
726 [68 P.2d 719].) Section 138, above cited, specifically provides that the
court which grants a divorce may at any time during the minority of a child of
the marriage make or modify an order for the care, custody, maintenance or
support of the minor when it appears to be for the temporal, mental or moral
welfare of the child to do so. That principle recognizing the jurisdiction of a
divorce court to modify its decree with relation to the custody of minor
children for their welfare is so thoroughly established as to require no further
authorities to support the assertion. Our statute preserves the authority of a
divorce court over minor children of the separated spouses because society is
interested in protecting them from harmful influences which affect their mental
or moral welfare. This control is retained to sustain the character of their
citizenship and to prevent them from becoming public charges.

    It is true that for other specific purposes, under proper circumstances, the
juvenile court may assume jurisdiction and award the custody of delinquent or
dependent children to the probation officer, as provided by section 700 of the
Welfare and Institutions Code of California. Division IV of the Probate Code
authorizes the appointment of guardians of the persons and estates of minor
children under circumstances therein specified. A writ of habeas corpus may also
properly issue to determine the custody of a minor under proper circumstances.
Subject to certain restrictions recognized by the law, each of the proceedings
above mentioned may be properly maintained to determine the custody of minor
children. It is true that a delinquent or dependent child may be declared a ward
of the court under the Juvenile Court Act, even though the child has been
previously awarded to the mother in a divorce proceeding. It may also be true
that when a juvenile court first assumes jurisdiction over a delinquent or
dependent child a divorce court has no authority to subsequently award the
custody of the child to a person contrary to the order of the juvenile court.
(78 A. L. R. 317, note; 11 A. L. R. 147, note.) However, in the case of Ross v.
Ross, 89 Colo. 536 [5 P.2d 246, 78 A. L. R. 313], it was held that the pending
of proceedings in the juvenile court did not prevent a divorce court from
modifying its final decree with respect to the custody of the same child.

   Delinquent and dependent children come peculiarly within the jurisdiction of
the juvenile court. Such proceedings are quasi criminal in their nature. But
ordinarily a divorce court does not lose jurisdiction to modify its decree of
divorce with respect to the custody of minor children of the marriage for their
mental or moral welfare, by the mere subsequent appointment of a guardian of the
person and estate of the child. The purpose of the appointment of the guardian
in the present case was primarily to take charge of a small estate which it was
expected the child would inherit. The mother had been previously awarded custody
of her daughter in the divorce proceeding. Certainly the appointment of the
guardian did not have the effect of thereafter ousting the divorce court of
jurisdiction to modify its final decree with respect to the custody of the child
for its welfare. The application for a mere change of the custody of a minor
should ordinarily be made to the court which renders the decree of divorce. (9
R. C.  L. 477, sec. 291; 19 C. J. 532, sec. 811.) In the authority last cited it
is said:

   "An application for a modification of a decree as to the custody of the
children should be made to the court in which the decree was rendered."

   It has also been held that the authority of a divorce court over the custody
and care of the minor children of the marriage may not be interfered with by
means of habeas corpus.  (82 A. L. R. 1146, note; 76 A. L. R. 657, note.) In re
Morgan, 117 Mo. 249 [21 S.W. 1122], the court said:

   "The general rule is that, where one court has acquired jurisdiction over the
parties and subject-matter of the suit, other courts will not interfere by the
writ of habeas corpus, while the suit is pending and undetermined."

   Even though a court by means of habeas corpus does assume to determine the
right of custody of a minor child, that order does not become res adjudicata to
prohibit a divorce court which previously assumed jurisdiction of the child from
modifying its final decree of divorce with respect to the child's custody, at
least, for the welfare of the child on account of conditions which are shown to
have changed since the writ of  habeas corpus was granted.  (110 A. L. R. 745,
note; Stewart v. Stewart, 32 Idaho 180 [180 P. 165].) In the case last cited it
is said:

   "A decision in a habeas corpus proceeding, whereby the custody of a child is
awarded as between its parents, does not make the question of such custody res
adjudicata, where a subsequent change of conditions is shown, nor preclude the
court, in a subsequent suit for divorce between the parties, from making a
further decree in regard to the custody of such child."

   With respect to the right to appoint a guardian of a minor child in spite of
the previous award of the minor to the custody of another person by the terms of
a final decree of divorce, all that our Supreme Court has said is that the
divorce court does not have exclusive jurisdiction over the child. No case which
has been called to our attention holds that the probate court has paramount
jurisdiction over the person of a minor in preference to that of the divorce
court, or that an order appointing a petitioner guardian of the person and
estate of a minor who was formerly awarded in a divorce proceeding to the
custody of another person, thereby  ousts the divorce court of jurisdiction and
prevents it from thereafter modifying the final decree for the welfare of the
child.

   The case of Collins v. Superior Court, 52 Cal. App. 579 [199 P. 352], relied
upon by the appellant, is not in conflict with what we have said regarding the
jurisdiction of a court to modify its final decree of divorce with respect to
the custody of a minor child. In the Collins case the court merely held that a
mandate would issue to require the Superior Court of Monterey County to hear and
determine a petition for the guardianship of a minor who was over fourteen years
of age and who had nominated his father as guardian of his person and estate
notwithstanding the fact that a suit for divorce was then pending in the
Superior Court of Marin County. It does not appear in that case that the Marin
County court had actually awarded the custody of the minor to any person. The
Supreme Court merely held that "the authority of the Superior Court of Marin
County to award the custody of the minor to one of the parties in the divorce
action was not exclusive". The writ of mandate was issued in that case for the
designated reason that the minor "is fourteen years of age, and has the absolute
right to select and nominate his guardian, who, if approved by the court, must
be appointed". ( Sec. 1406, Probate Code.) At least, the Probate Court in
Monterey County had jurisdiction to appoint a guardian of the estate of the
minor, regardless of the jurisdiction of the Marin County court to award the
custody of the minor in the divorce proceeding. In the present case the Yuba
County court previously assumed jurisdiction and actually awarded the custody of
the child to her mother in the divorce proceeding, and therefore retained
jurisdiction to modify that decree for the moral welfare of the minor. The minor
in the present case was under fourteen years of age and therefore possessed no
statutory right to nominate her guardian. She did not attempt to do so.

   The jurisdiction of the probate court in the appointment of the appellant as
guardian of the person and estate of the minor does not appear to conflict with
the right of the divorce court to subsequently modify its final decree by
awarding the child to the custody of Mrs. Ethel Rodda, for the general  welfare
of the minor on account of changed conditions with respect thereto.

   The order is affirmed.

   Pullen, P. J., concurred.


                              40 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             DOROTHY MEHRSTEIN, Plaintiff and Appellant, v. NORMAN
                      MEHRSTEIN, Defendant and Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 29853

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

          245 Cal. App. 2d 646; 54 Cal. Rptr. 65; 1966 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      1502


                                October 17, 1966

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied November 10, 1966.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County terminating a husband's support obligation.  Clinton Rodda, Court
Commissioner, Judge pro tem.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Husband and Wife--Uniform Reciprocal Enforcement of Support Act.  --The
Uniform Reciprocal Enforcement of Support Act provides a means for enforcing the
support obligations of obligors located outside the jurisdiction in which the
dependent spouse or children are present.

(2) Id.--Uniform Reciprocal Enforcement of Support Act.  --Code Civ. Proc., §
1670 provides that enforceable support obligations are those "imposed or
imposable under the laws of any state where the alleged obligor was present
during the period for which support is sought or where the obligee was present
when the failure to support commenced, at the election of the obligee," and
where the laws of both California and another state imposed an obligation of
support on the husband such obligation was properly enforced by the California
court.

(3) Divorce--Foreign Divorce--Effect of Foreign Decree on Personal Property
Rights.  --The concept of divisible divorce is well-established and under this
concept an ex parte divorce decree affects the marital status of the parties but
not their property rights.

(4) Id.--Proceedings--Jurisdiction of Defendant.  --Divorce proceedings in which
the court has not obtained personal jurisdiction over both parties may not
prejudice the property rights of the absent spouse.

(5) Id.--Proceedings--Jurisdiction of Defendant.  --A wife's participation in
reciprocal support proceedings did not subject her to the general jurisdiction
of California courts so as to subject her to a default divorce decree in an
action brought by the husband, where the wife never lived in California, was not
personally served with process in California, and did not enter a personal
appearance in the divorce action, and though the divorce decree could dissolve
the wife's marital status it could not affect her existing right to support.

(6) Id.--Foreign Divorces--Foreign Decrees for Support or Alimony: Husband and
Wife--Uniform Reciprocal Enforcement of Support Act.  --A prior order of support
is unaffected by an ex parte divorce since, under the Uniform Reciprocal
Enforcement of Support Act (Code Civ. Proc., §§ 1650-1692, 9C U.L.A.) the duty
of support is defined to include any duty of support imposed or imposable by
law, or any court order, decree, or judgment, whether interlocutory or final,
whether incidental to a proceeding for divorce, judicial separation, separate
maintenance or otherwise, and the term support is used in a general sense and
includes alimony or child support after divorce.

(7) Id.--Foreign Divorces--Effect of Foreign Decree on Personal Property Rights:
Husband and Wife--Uniform Reciprocal Enforcement of Support Act.  --The basic
concept of divisible divorce is that while ex parte decrees may dissolve the
marital status of the parties, they have no effect on property rights of a
spouse not personally subject to the jurisdiction of the court which rendered
the decree, and where a court in the earlier reciprocal support litigation
weighed the testimony of both parties in an adversary proceeding and determined
the question of desertion, a subsequent ex parte divorce decree could not annul
that determination.

(8) Id.--Custody and Support of Children--Support and Maintenance--Modification
of Allowance.  --A support order is always subject to modification on a showing
of changed circumstances but, where there is no attempt to make such a showing,
a modification will not be made where the basis of the argument for termination
of support is that a divorce decree legally terminated a husband's obligation of
support.

COUNSEL: Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, Edward M. Belasco and Ernest S.
Gould, Deputy Attorneys General, for Plaintiff and Appellant.

Ward & Heyler and Charles A. Druten for Defendant and Respondent.

JUDGES: Fleming, J.  Roth, P. J., and Herndon, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: FLEMING

OPINION

     Appeal from a judgment terminating a husband's support obligation under the
Uniform Reciprocal Enforcement of Support Act.  ( Code Civ. Proc., §§ 1650- 1692
, 9C U.L.A.)

    The parties married in Florida in 1953 and separated in New York in 1958.
They had no children.  In 1963 the wife, a resident of New York, brought suit
for support in New York under the uniform act against her husband, a California
resident. After certification of the case by the New York, the initiating state,
to California, the responding state ( Code Civ. Proc., § 1680), the Los Angeles
Superior Court found the husband owed a duty of support to the wife and ordered
him to pay her $ 40 a month.  ( Code Civ. Proc., §§ 1655, 1670, 1683.)

   Subsequently, the husband filed a complaint for divorce in the Los Angeles
Superior Court and obtained service of the summons and complaint on his wife by
publication.  On February 11, 1965, he secured by default an interlocutory
judgment of divorce on the grounds of desertion and extreme cruelty under a
decree which declared that the wife was not entitled to any sums for her support
and maintenance.  On February 16, 1965, the husband filed a motion in the Los
Angeles Superior Court, presumably served on the District Attorney of Los
Angeles County, for an order terminating the support payments previously ordered
in the reciprocal proceedings.  Under his motion he argued that the divorce
decree established the fact of his wife's desertion, that a husband has no duty
to support a wife who deserts him, and that consequently he was no longer
obliged to support his former wife.  The trial court granted his motion on the
basis of this argument, and the wife, represented by the California Attorney
General, appeals.

     The Uniform Reciprocal Enforcement of Support Act provides a means for
enforcing the support obligations of obligors located outside the jurisdiction
in which the dependent spouse or children are present.  (See, generally, 2
California Family Lawyer (Cont.Ed. Bar) pp. 1495-1538; Ehrenzweig, Interstate
Recognition of Support Duties, 42 Cal.L.Rev. 382.)   Enforceable support
obligations are those "imposed or imposable under the laws of any state where
the alleged obligor was present during  the period for which support is sought
or where the obligee was present when the failure to support commenced, at the
election of the obligee." ( Code Civ. Proc., § 1670.) In the present case, the
laws of both California and New York imposed an obligation of support on the
husband, an obligation properly enforced by the California court in its original
order.  The question before us is the effect of the subsequent divorce decree on
the earlier reciprocal support order, the wife contending that the husband's
duty of support could not be terminated in a divorce  proceeding by a court
which lacked personal jurisdiction over her.

     The concept of divisible divorce is now well established.  ( Hudson v.
Hudson, 52 Cal.2d 735, 739-743 [344 P.2d 295]; Lopez v. Lopez, 63 Cal.2d 735,
737-738 [48 Cal.Rptr. 136, 408 P.2d 744]; Hull v. Superior Court, 54 Cal.2d 139,
147-148 [5 Cal.Rptr. 1, 352 P.2d 161].) Under this concept an ex parte divorce
decree affects the marital status of the parties but not their property rights.
Divorce proceedings in which the court has not obtained personal jurisdiction
over both parties may not prejudice the property rights of the absent spouse. (
Hudson v. Hudson, 52 Cal.2d 735 [344 P.2d 295]; Hull v. Superior Court, 54
Cal.2d 139, 147-148 [5 Cal.Rptr. 1, 352 P.2d 161]; Weber v. Superior Court, 53
Cal.2d 403, 405 [2 Cal.Rptr. 9, 348 P.2d 572].)   In this case, the wife never
lived in California, was not personally served with process in California, and
did not enter a personal appearance in the divorce action.  Her participation in
the reciprocal proceedings did not subject her to the general jurisdiction of
the California courts, for the act specifically states that participation in any
proceeding under its title does not confer jurisdiction over the parties in any
other proceeding.  ( Code Civ. Proc., § 1690.) Accordingly, while the divorce
decree could dissolve the wife's marital status, it could not affect her
existing right to support.  ( Vanderbilt v. Vanderbilt, 354 U.S. 416, 418-419 [1
L.Ed.2d 1456, 77 S.Ct. 1360]; Hudson v. Hudson, 52 Cal.2d 735, 745 [344 P.2d
295]; Hull v. Superior Court, 54 Cal.2d 139, 147 [5 Cal.Rptr. 1, 352 P.2d 161].)

     The husband argues that the divorce decree effectively terminated his duty
of support, because the reciprocal support order was equivalent to an order for
separate maintenance, and separate maintenance is dependent on the continuation
of the marital status, which, however, was terminated by the California divorce.
We find this logic unimpressive.  The uniform act defines "duty of support" to
include "any duty of support imposed or imposable by law, or by any court order,
decree or judgment, whether interlocutory or final, whether incidental to a
proceeding for divorce, judicial separation, separate maintenance or otherwise."
( Code Civ. Proc., § 1653, subd. (6); Uniform Reciprocal Enforcement of Support
Act, § 2, 9C U.L.A.) The term "support" is used in a general sense and includes
necessaries during marriage ( Civ. Code, §§ 155, 174- 176), separate maintenance
during legal separation   ( In re Lazar, 37 Cal.App.2d 327, 332 [99 P.2d 342]),
and alimony or child support after divorce ( Civ. Code, § 139; Mueller v.
Mueller, 44 Cal.2d 527, 532 [282 P.2d 869].) The prior order of support was
unaffected by the ex parte divorce. ( Hudson v. Hudson, 52 Cal.2d 735, 745 [344
P.2d 295].)

   The husband contends, however, that the ex parte divorce decree established
at a minimum that the wife deserted him, and under the doctrine of collateral
estoppel she may not now attack this finding.  Since a husband is not obliged to
support a wife who deserts him, the husband concludes that his duty of support
has been ended by the decree. ( Civ. Code, § 175.)   This argument again ignores
the basic concept of divisible divorce -- that while ex parte decrees may
dissolve the marital status of the parties, they have no effect on property
rights of a spouse not personally subject to the jurisdiction of the court which
rendered the decree. The court in the earlier reciprocal support litigation had
weighed the testimony of both parties in  an adversary proceeding and found an
answer to the question who had deserted whom.  A subsequent ex parte divorce
decree could not annul that determination.   While a support order is always
subject to modification on a showing of changed circumstances ( Worthley v.
Worthley, 44 Cal.2d 465, 468-474 [283 P.2d 19]; Code Civ. Proc., § 1682), there
was no attempt in the present case to make such a showing, for the record shows
the trial court proceeded solely on the basis of the husband's argument that the
divorce decree legally terminated his obligation of support.

   The judgment is reversed.  ( Ehrenreich v. Shelton, 213 Cal.App.2d 376,
378-379 [28 Cal.Rptr. 855].)


                              41 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          ANNA AGNES PEREIRA, Respondent, v. FRANK PEREIRA, Appellant.

                                 S. F. No. 4882

                          SUPREME COURT OF CALIFORNIA

                  156 Cal. 1; 103 P. 488; 1909 Cal. LEXIS 509


                             June 30, 1909, Decided

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     As Modified July 13, 1909.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from an interlocutory judgment of the Superior Court of
Alameda County in an action of divorce. William H. Waste, Judge.

COUNSEL: Arthur J. Dannenbaum, and Meyer Jacobs, for Appellant.

Snook & Church, Charles S. Wheeler, and J. F. Bowie, for Respondent.

JUDGES: SHAW, J., Angellotti, J., Sloss, J., Henshaw, J., Lorigan, J., and
Melvin, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: SHAW

OPINION

     SHAW, J.--The plaintiff obtained an interlocutory judgment of divorce on
the ground of extreme cruelty. This judgment also declared that the plaintiff
should have three fifths of the community property when the divorce became
final, that she should thereafter have custody of her minor child by the
marriage, and it provided for temporary alimony to her and for the custody of
the child during the time that would elapse  between the interlocutory judgment
and the final judgment. The defendant appealed from this interlocutory judgment
within sixty days after the rendition thereof. This appeal is presented upon the
judgment-roll and upon a bill of exceptions containing the evidence.

   It is conceded that the evidence was sufficient to justify the divorce and
the award of the custody of the child to plaintiff. The claim of the appellant
is that the court erred in the finding as to the amount of the community
property and in excluding evidence relating thereto.

   1. The first point to be noticed is the ruling of the court declaring void a
contract between the parties relating to their property and the division
thereof, and in refusing to enforce or consider it in that connection. We are of
the opinion that the court properly refused to consider this contract on the
ground that it was plainly against public policy. The present action was begun
on January 21, 1905. A previous action of divorce on the ground of extreme
cruelty, consisting in large part of the same acts assigned in the present
complaint was commenced by the plaintiff against the defendant on September 23,
1904. After that action was begun the parties became reconciled, resumed marital
relations, and on November 1, 1904, the plaintiff dismissed the action. On
November 4, 1904, in pursuance of negotiations begun before the dismissal but
after the reconciliation, the contract in question was executed. It was dated
November 1st and it recites that the previous action was then pending. Therein
the plaintiff expressly waived the cause for divorce alleged in said complaint
and agreed to dismiss the action. The contract further provided that none of the
relatives of either party should settle in, be invited to, or visit the home
without the consent of both parties; that if the husband should thereafter so
conduct himself as to give the wife a new cause of action for divorce, and she
should establish the same in a subsequent action against him for divorce or
maintenance, the husband should thereupon pay to the wife ten thousand dollars,
which should be a full satisfaction, settlement, and discharge of all claims of
the wife in such action "for alimony, costs, counsel fees, support, maintenance
of herself, homestead, homestead right, property and benefit of every, kind and
character." It also declared that "in the event of the institution of such
subsequent action  all claims and demands by her or on her part in or to any
moneys, property rights, or property, community or otherwise, now or hereafter
owned or acquired by" the defendant, other than said ten thousand dollars "are,
hereby forever settled, liquidated, relinquished, released, waived and
abandoned, and no claim, demand, or monetary or property benefit or relief shall
ever be claimed, asserted or sought in, by or by reason of said subsequent
action, should it be instituted, except only to the extent aforesaid."

   The Civil Code provides that the husband and wife may enter into any
engagement with the other respecting property which they might enter into if not
married, subject to the law as to fiduciary relations in general (sec. 158); and
that they may agree, in writing, to an immediate separation and may make
provision for the support of either of them and of their children during such
separation, but that they cannot by contract, otherwise alter their legal
relations, except as to property. (Sec. 159.) There was in this contract no
agreement for separation, and, hence, the agreement to pay ten thousand dollars
cannot be upheld as a provision for the support of the wife on a separation, as
provided in section 159. The real effect of the contract to pay the ten thousand
dollars, so far as the husband is concerned, would be to provide against
liability for a contemplated wrong to be subsequently inflicted by him upon his
wife, and to liquidate such liability in advance of the commission of the wrong.
The evidence and findings show that the defendant was then possessed of property
worth about seventy-seven thousand dollars, was engaged in a very lucrative
business, and was receiving an income of about eleven thousand dollars a year
which he had every reason to believe would continue. By this contract, if valid,
he was left free to inflict upon his wife the most grievous marital wrongs, such
as would compel her to obtain a divorce, secure in the protection of his
contract that ten thousand dollars would satisfy all her claims against him of a
pecuniary nature or in relation to the community property. If he should, after
its execution, be moved by evil impulse to commit anew the offenses against his
wife which first gave her cause for divorce, or other acts having the same legal
effect, the existence of a valid contract of this sort could not but encourage
him to yield to his baser inclinations, and inflict the injury. As it  was
obviously adapted to produce this result, it is to be presumed that this was one
of the inducements which made him desire its execution. The law does not
countenance such agreements. "Any contract between the parties having for its
object the dissolution of the marriage contract, or facilitating that result, .
. . is void as contra bonos mores." ( Loveren v. Loveren, 106 Cal. 512, 39 Pac.
802, quoting Phillips v. Thorp, 10 Or. 494; Beard v. Beard, 65 Cal. 354, 4 Pac.
229; Newman v. Freitas, 129 Cal. 289, 61 Pac. 907.) In Seeley's Appeal, 56 Conn.
206, 14 Atl. 291, the court says: "Inasmuch as the state rests upon the family
and is vitally interested in the permanency of a marriage relation once
established, it, for the promotion of public welfare, and of private morals as
well, makes itself a party to every marriage contract entered into within its
jurisdiction, in this sense, that it will not permit the dissolution thereof by
the other party thereto. Its consent in the form of a decree of its court passed
after hearing in due process of law, is a prerequisite for a divorce. . .
.Courts will not enforce any contract which is the price of consent by one party
to the marriage relation, to the procurement of a divorce by the other." And, in
reference to a similar agreement to that in the case at bar, the court in the
case just cited said: "Presumably each party saw in that agreement an individual
advantage; to him, in that he possibly paid her less thereby than the judgment
of the court upon hearing would compel; to her, in that he refrained therefor
from answering the allegations of her petition by proof, and thus possibly
permitted a divorce which he could have prevented.

   Before the contract was made, or its terms agreed to, the parties had made up
their former differences and had become reconciled. It shows by its terms that
it is not an agreement to settle property rights accruing by reason of a marital
offense already perpetrated and complete as a cause for divorce. There is
therefore no force in the claim, as applied to this case, that it is competent
evidence, or valid as a settlement of such rights, even if it were conceded that
such an agreement might under some circumstances be permitted to stand. The
court also found that this contract was procured by the husband through undue
influence and by fraud. Our conclusions upon the point that it was against
public policy  makes it unnecessary to consider the sufficiency of the evidence
to sustain these findings.

   2. The court found that the community property of the parties was of the
value of $ 57,664.77. It is claimed that this is not sustained by the evidence.

   There is practically no conflict on the subject, there being no witness to
that point except the defendant. The findings state that this property consisted
of the real estate on which the defendant carried on business, which was of the
value of forty-five thousand dollars, and certain money on hand, making up the
remainder. The evidence shows that the plaintiff and defendant intermarried on
April 19, 1900. At that time the defendant was, and he ever since has been,
carrying on a saloon and cigar business, then producing a net income of about
five thousand dollars annually. He owned the cigar and saloon stock and
fixtures, worth in all about fifteen thousand five hundred dollars, and had,
besides, some six thousand dollars in cash. Soon after the marriage he bought
the home wherein the parties afterwards lived, paying twenty-seven hundred
dollars therefor, and he afterwards expended thereon twenty-three hundred
dollars in improving it. This home is adjudged to be his separate property and
plaintiff is given no interest in it. A year and a half after his marriage he
bought the property in which he was carrying on business at the price of forty
thousand dollars. He paid in cash therefor five thousand dollars and afterwards,
out of his income, he paid the balance of the price and accumulated the cash on
hand at the time of trial, in addition, amounting to over twelve thousand
dollars. His net income at the time of trial was about eleven thousand dollars a
year. From the time of his marriage to the time of trial he allowed his wife
seventy-five dollars a month to run the house and she made her own clothes.
There is an unexplained discrepancy between the total amount of his income less
the household expenses, and his total gains. He must have received more than he
was willing to disclose, if his net income over household expenses amounted to
as much as the money which he admits he has received, not allowing anything for
his personal expenses.

   The court may have believed that he had other property which he had succeeded
in concealing. There was some justification for this inference, for he was
caught in the act of attempting  to conceal $ 7,761 of the cash on hand by means
of a New York draft which he had carried in his pocket for the four months
preceding the trial. It appears, however, that the decision of the court was
made upon the theory that all of his gains received after marriage, from
whatever sources, were to be classed as community property, and that no
allowance was made in favor of his separate estate. The fund remained in the
business after marriage and was used by him in carrying it on. The separate
property should have been credited with some amount as profit on this capital.
It was not a losing business but a very profitable one. It is true that is very
clearly shown that the principal part of the large income was due to the
personal character, energy, ability, and capacity of the husband. This share of
the earnings was, of course, community property. But without capital he could
not have carried on the business. In the absence of circumstances showing a
different result, it is to be presumed that some of the profits were justly due
to the capital invested. There is nothing to show that all of it was due to
defendant's efforts alone. The probable contribution of the capital to the
income should have been determined from all the circumstances of the case, and
as the business was profitable it would amount at least to the usual interest on
a long investment well secured. ( Boggess v. Richards', 39 W. Va. 576, 45 Am.
St. Rep. 938, 20 S.E. 599; Trapnell v. Conklyn, 37 W. Va. 252, 38 Am. St. Rep.
30, 16 S.E. 570; Penn v. Whitehead, 17 Gratt. 573, 94 Am. Dec. 478; Glidden v.
Taylor, 16 Ohio St. 509, 91 Am. Dec. 98.) We think the court erred in refusing
to increase the proportion of separate property and decrease the community
property to the extent of the reasonable gain to the separate estate from the
earnings properly allowable on account of the capital invested.

   It is true that the disposition of the community property by the superior
court, in all particulars, including matters committed to its discretion, is
subject to revision in this court on appeal. ( Civ. Code, sec. 148; Eslinger v.
Eslinger, 47 Cal. 64; Brown v. Brown, 60 Cal. 580; Strozynski v. Strozynski, 97
Cal. 192, 31 Pac. 1130.) In each of these cases the  supreme court increased the
wife's share of the community property from one half, as given by the trial
court, to three fourths. But the wife has not appealed and we cannot, upon the
husband's appeal, change the judgment by increasing the share of community
property given to the wife. The only error, in respect to community property,
which we can consider upon this appeal by the husband, is the error in classing
as community property that part of the gains which was derived from the "issues
and profits" of his separate property ( Civ. Code, sec. 163), the amount of
which we cannot determine. It will be necessary to remand the case for a retrial
of this issue. The court below will be free, upon such new trial, to apportion a
larger share of the community property to the plaintiff, or to divide it between
the parties in such shares as it shall deem just, under all the circumstances.
The present division seems fair in point of fact.

   3. The appellant further claims that, under the amendment of 1903 to sections
131 and 132 of the Civil Code, the court has no power, at or before the time of
rendering the interlocutory judgment of divorce, to make any inquiry, finding,
or decree with respect to the property rights of the parties, or with respect to
any other subject connected with the divorce, except the right of the
complainant to a divorce. Section 131 on this point is as follows: "In actions
for divorce the court must file its decision and conclusions of law as in other
cases and if it determines that no divorce shall be granted, final judgment must
thereupon be entered accordingly. If it determines that the divorce ought to be
granted an interlocutory judgment must be entered, declaring that the party in
whose favor the court decides is entitled to a divorce." Section 132 provides
that when "one year has expired after the entry of such interlocutory judgment,
the court on motion of either party, or upon its own motion, may enter the final
judgment granting the divorce, and such final judgment shall restore them to the
status of single persons, and permit either to marry after the entry thereof;
and such other and further relief as may be necessary to a complete disposition
of the action. . . . The death of either party after the entry of the
interlocutory judgment does not impair the power of the court to enter final
judgment as hereinbefore provided; but such entry shall not validate any
marriage contracted by either  party before the entry of such final judgment,
nor constitute any defense of any criminal prosecution made against either." As
these provisions were made after the other sections of the code had been in
force for many years, it was to be expected that the new provisions would not in
all respects be consistent in language with other sections on the same subject.
In section 146 the code speaks of a disposition of the community property "in
case of the dissolution of the marriage." In section 147 the code declares that
"the court in rendering a decree of divorce, must make such order for the
disposition of the community property and of the homestead as in this chapter
provided"; and in section 90 it declares that marriage is dissolved only by the
judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction declaring a divorce. From these
provisions it is argued by the appellant that the court's power to make a
disposition of the property rights of the parties exists only at the time when
the divorce judgment becomes final and that any act attempted to be accomplished
before that, in the way of a trial or interlocutory judgment declaring the
property rights or the rights to the custody of children, is coram non judice
and void.

   We do not think that the code provision requires such a narrow construction.
When  the history of legislation on the subject and the conditions existing at
the time of the adoption of the amendment of 1903 are considered, the purpose,
meaning, and effect of that amendment are not difficult to discover. While the
law deems it necessary to provide that a divorce may be granted when conditions
are such as to make the marriage relation intolerable, it is nevertheless true
that the policy of the law does not favor the dissolution of marriages. It has
been generally believed that many divorces were sought, not in good faith, but
because a roving fancy had found another affinity more attractive, and that a
dissolution was often desired solely for the purpose of forming a new marital
connection. With the design of providing conditions under which it would be
understood that ardent passions of this character must perforce have time to
cool before a new marriage relation could be actually formed, the legislature,
in 1897, enacted a law in effect providing that no marriage should be entered
into by any divorced person, until at least one year had elapsed after the
decree of divorce was rendered. (Stats.  1897, p. 34.) It had become customary
to avoid the provisions of this act by the expedient of going to an adjacent
state for the purpose of entering into a new marital relation. This court was
compelled to hold that marriages contracted in another state were valid in this
state, although they were entered into within less than a year after a divorce
had been granted in this state to one of the parties. ( Estate of Wood, 137 Cal.
129, 69 Pac. 900.) The purpose of the amendment of 1903 was to carry into effect
the object attempted to be attained by the statute of 1897. To do this the
expedient was adopted of delaying the final judgment in divorce cases for the
period of one year after it was judicially ascertained that a divorce should be
granted. By thus making the right to a divorce ineffective for the period of one
year, it became impossible for the parties to contract a valid new marriage
anywhere until at least a year after the trial of the action of divorce had
taken place. Except so far as was necessary to accomplish this object, it was
not the intent of the statute to change in any respect the practice and
procedure in actions for divorce. We do not doubt that the court has the same
power now that it has always had to try and determine the issues between the
parties in a divorce action with respect to property and custody of children,
and that this may, and generally should, be done at the same time as the issues
with respect to the cause for divorce are tried and determined. Unquestionably
the court would have power under the present law, as it always has had the power
under the previous laws, to postpone the trial and decision of the property
rights and custody of the children to any reasonable time after the rendition of
the judgment of divorce, whether interlocutory or final. The amendment has not
changed its power in this respect. It is proper in all actions for divorce to
try the entire action at the same time as the issues respecting divorce are
tried and to give an interlocutory judgment declaring the rights of the parties
with respect to property and children.

   We commend the action of the court below in this case in declaring, in its
interlocutory decree concerning the property, that the rights therein specified
should become final at the time of decree of divorce became final. We are not
called upon here to determine whether the adjudication of property rights would
or would not have been final at the  expiration of six months from the time of
the entry of the interlocutory decree, if no appeal had been taken, and the
parties had, before the expiration of one year and after the expiration of the
six months, by mutual consent, procured an order from the court annulling the
interlocutory decree of divorce; or whether such annulment would have had the
effect of setting aside the decree relating to property rights and children.
These questions are not involved in this case and it will be well to leave them
for future disposition in some case where they are directly presented. In the
present case the court determined all the issues in one trial and rendered an
interlocutory judgment declaring the rights of the parties upon all the issues,
and providing that the same should in all respects become final only at the time
when the decree of divorce became final, in the mean time allowing temporary
alimony. We see no objection to this practice and commend it as not only within
the power of the court but as a proper method of the exercise of that power.

   The judgment as to the amount and value of the community property and as to
the disposition thereof between the parties is reversed and the cause is
remanded for a new trial and judgment upon that issue alone. In all other
particulars the judgment is affirmed.

   Angellotti, J., Sloss, J., Henshaw, J., Lorigan, J., and Melvin, J.,
concurred.

   On the thirtieth day of July, 1909, the court in Bank filed the following
opinion and modification of the judgment:--

   THE COURT.--Since the filing of the opinion in this case, the plaintiff has
asked that, instead of remanding the case for a new trial of the issues as to
the property, the judgment be modified in regard thereto, and has filed a
written consent that the defendant be allowed, as part of his separate estate,
out of the cash on hand, interest at the rate of seven per cent on the $ 15,500
found to be the capital invested in his business. This removes the objection to
directing a modification of the judgment. The defendant introduced no evidence
to show that the capital invested was entitled to a greater return than legal
interest, and in the absence of such evidence, the burden of proof being upon
him, that would be the utmost he could claim. The wife would have been entitled
to an opportunity to prove, if she could, that it earned a smaller proportion of
the profits than legal interest, and, she being the respondent, it was for that
reason considered necessary to order a new trial for that purpose. Her consent
aforesaid avoids this necessity and leaves the case in such condition that a
modification of the judgment will end the litigation with justice to both
parties ( Fox v. Hale & Norcross S. Mfg. Co., 122 Cal. 221, 54 Pac. 731.)

   Interest at seven per cent on the $ 15,500 from April 19, 1900, the date of
the marriage, to November 3, 1905, the time of the trial amounts to $ 6012.70.
Deducting this from $ 12,129.03, found to be the cash on hand at the time of the
trial, leaves $ 6126.33, as the part of the cash belonging to the community. The
plaintiff's three fifths of this is $ 3675.86 and the defendant's two fifths is
$ 2450.47.

   It is ordered that the judgment be modified by changing the respective
statements of the shares of each in the cash on hand therein, so that the part
relating to the plaintiff's share shall read as follows:--

   "2nd. The sum of three thousand six hundred and seventy-five and 86-100
dollars ($ 3675.86), in cash, being three fifths of the sum of $ 6126.33 in cash
found by the supreme court to be community property of the plaintiff and
defendant; and that no interest in defendant's separate property be awarded to
plaintiff."

   And so that the part relating to the defendant's share shall read as
follows:--

   "2nd. The sum of two thousand four hundred and fifty and 47-100 dollars ($
2450.47), in cash, being two fifths of the sum found to be community property as
aforesaid"

   And that as so modified the judgment stand affirmed, the plaintiff to recover
all costs.


                              42 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          HELEN P. GROMEEKO, Appellant, v. ANDREW S. GROMEEKO et al.,
                                  Respondents

                                 Civ. No. 14854

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                  Division One

          110 Cal. App. 2d 117; 242 P.2d 41; 1952 Cal. App. LEXIS 1494


                                 March 28, 1952

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     The Opinion was Modified to Read as Above Printed on
April 1, 1952.  A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied April 26, 1952, and
Respondents' Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court was Denied May 26,
1952.  Schauer, J., was of the Opinion that the Petition Should be Granted.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from orders of the Superior Court of the City and
County of San Francisco terminating order for support, counsel fees and costs
pending divorce action; refusing to direct defendant to give and complete his
deposition; and denying motion for counsel fees and costs for taking of
defendant's deposition.  Theresa Meikle, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Temporary Alimony and Counsel Fees--Hearing--Proof of Marriage.
--On hearing of wife's application for support money and counsel fees pending
her divorce action, proof that she and defendant were married in San Francisco
in a certain year shifts to him the burden of showing what, if anything,
prevented that marriage ceremony from establishing the relationship of husband
and wife between them, or what, if anything, later occurred to terminate that
relationship.

(2) Id.--Foreign Divorces--Collateral Attack.  --If a wife personally appeared
and participated in her husband's Nevada divorce action, she cannot later
collaterally attack the decree rendered therein on issues litigated and decided
therein.

(3) Id.--Temporary Alimony and Counsel Fees--Hearing--Scope of Inquiry.  --If a
wife in her present divorce action proves that she did not authorize anyone to
appear for her in her husband's Nevada divorce action and that her seeming
appearance therein was the result of fraud practiced on her and the Nevada court
by defendant herein, she may, on hearing of her application for temporary
alimony and on hearing of defendant's motion to terminate the order for
temporary alimony, tender the issues that the signing of the dismissal of her
earlier divorce action was done under circumstances which negative that act as
an estoppel against the position she takes in this action, that defendant did
not acquire a Nevada residence, and that the Nevada decree was procured through
collusion and fraud.

(4) Id.--Temporary Alimony and Counsel Fees--Hearing--Proof of Marriage.  --The
evidence necessary to prove a marriage need not be as complete and satisfactory
on an application for temporary alimony and counsel fees as on a trial on the
merits.

(5) Id.--Temporary Alimony and Counsel Fees--Hearing--Proof of Marriage.  --When
a valid marriage is admitted and the issue is the validity of a foreign divorce
decree, the trial court has a larger measure of discretion to grant an
application for temporary alimony and counsel fees than when the fact of
marriage itself is in issue.

(6) Id.--Temporary Alimony and Counsel Fees--Hearing--Evidence.  --Evidence
received on hearing of an application for temporary alimony and counsel fees
must be competent unless its competency is waived by failure of the opposite
party to interpose an appropriate objection.

(7) Evidence--Hearsay.  --Witness' statement as to what her psychiatrist told
her concerning her physical and mental condition at the time she signed certain
documents may be incompetent as hearsay, but not irrelevant.

(8) Appeal--Orders Appealable.  --Order refusing to direct defendant to give his
deposition is not appealable, although reviewable in an appropriate mandamus
proceeding or on appeal from a final judgment.

COUNSEL: Hyman & Hyman for Appellant.

Abraham Glicksberg and W. L. A. Calder for Respondents.

JUDGES: Wood (Fred B.), J.  Peters, P. J., and Bray, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: WOOD

OPINION

     Plaintiff Helen Gromeeko has appealed from three orders made in this action
for divorce: (1) an order terminating an order which required defendant Andrew
S. Gromeeko to pay plaintiff for her support, counsel fees and court costs
pending the action; (2) an order which denied plaintiff's motion for an order
directing defendant to give and complete his deposition; and (3) an order which
denied her motion for counsel fees and costs for the taking of defendant's
deposition.

   The appeal from the order terminating the temporary support order presents
the question whether or not a certain Nevada decree of divorce between these
parties deprives the trial court, in this action, of jurisdiction to award
support money, counsel fees and costs, unless and until the Nevada decree shall
have been annulled by a court of competent jurisdiction; and, if not, the degree
of proof required, of the asserted  invalidity of the Nevada decree, upon the
hearing of a motion for support money, counsel fees and costs pending the
action, or of a motion to terminate an order for the payment of such moneys.

   April 3, 1950, plaintiff filed her complaint herein, asking for a divorce
from Andrew, and for an accounting by Andrew and the other defendants as to
certain properties.  Among the acts of cruelty upon which she grounded her
complaint for divorce, she alleged, concerning the Nevada decree: Since August
1, 1947, Andrew and defendant Elena S. Cronier had been living together
representing themselves to be husband and wife; in December, 1947, Andrew
falsely represented to the plaintiff that Elena was going to bear a child by
him, that he loved plaintiff but intended to obtain a decree of divorce in Reno
for the sole purpose of temporarily marrying Elena, thereafter to divorce Elena
and remarry plaintiff; Andrew, while a resident of San Francisco, obtained a
purported decree of divorce in Nevada, which decree was fraudulently obtained
and is void.

   Plaintiff applied for an order for support money, counsel fees and costs
pending the action.  At the inception of the hearing of that application,
counsel for  Andrew objected to any hearing thereof, on the asserted ground that
plaintiff was not the wife of Andrew, that they were divorced in February, 1948,
and that plaintiff was represented in court in the divorce action. Counsel for
plaintiff replied that they had alleged that there was a fraudulent decree of
divorce with no residence in Nevada of either party.  The objection was
overruled.  Plaintiff then asked Andrew certain questions in respect to his
residence in California.  He testified that he had been a licensed real estate
broker in California for 15 years, during which period he had never registered
to vote except in San Francisco, and did vote in San Francisco and nowhere else.
Thereupon Andrew's counsel said "in the interest of time I withdraw my objection
and the court may proceed on the order to show cause; I think we can save a
great deal of time." To which plaintiff's counsel responded, "I will address no
further questions as to the jurisdiction of the Court, in view of that
stipulation, your Honor." *

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*   That was
not a stipulation conferring jurisdiction, nor did the withdrawal of the
objection at that time prevent the defendant from later interposing it.  A party
cannot confer jurisdiction of the kind in issue.  Such an issue may be raised at
any time.  (See Colbert v. Colbert, 28 Cal.2d 276, 279 [169 P.2d 633].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Plaintiff was then called to the stand.  She testified that she and Andrew
were married in San Francisco in 1939 and that she resides in San Francisco.
She then gave evidence tending to show her financial need and Andrew's ability
to pay.  April 21, 1950, the court ordered Andrew to pay $ 150 monthly for
support, $ 300 on account of counsel fees, and $ 20 on account of costs.

   That evidence supported the order made.   Plaintiff proved the marriage. That
shifted to Andrew the burden of showing what, if anything, prevented that
marriage ceremony from establishing the relationship of husband and wife between
these parties, or what, if anything, later occurred to terminate that
relationship.  ( Bernheimer v. Bernheimer, 103 Cal.App.2d 643 [230 P.2d 17];
Thomas v. Thomas, 66 Cal.App.2d 818 [153 P.2d 389]; Bancroft v. Bancroft, 9
Cal.App.2d 464 [50 P.2d 465].) Andrew did not meet that burden.  Upon that
hearing there was presented to the court no evidence whatsoever concerning the
Nevada divorce decree or any of its incidents.

   Later, Andrew gave notice of motion to vacate the pendente lite order of
April 21, 1950, upon the ground that the court lacked jurisdiction to make that
order because these parties had not been husband and wife since February 2,
1948, when a Nevada court of competent jurisdiction divorced them by a decree in
an action in which the plaintiff personally appeared.

   August 30, 1950, upon motion of plaintiff, the hearing of defendant's motion
was continued until October 10, 1950.  As a condition of the continuation, the
court ordered that support payments stop pending the hearing of defendant's
motion.

   At the inception of that hearing, plaintiff filed an amended complaint in
which she sought annulment of the Nevada decree, a divorce from Andrew for
extreme cruelty, and an accounting.  As grounds for annulment of the decree she
alleged: the same asserted misrepresentations as in the original complaint
(summarized earlier in this opinion); Andrew never acquired a Nevada residence
and went there for the sole purpose of getting a divorce; plaintiff was mentally
incapacitated during that period; various documents, including a power of
attorney to Gordon Rice, were executed by her while incapacitated and under the
influence and control of Andrew; and Andrew caused perjured testimony to be
given the Nevada court concerning his place of residence.

   Defendant introduced in evidence a photostatic copy of a power of attorney
bearing plaintiff's signature. By it, she  purportedly appointed one Gordon Rice
her attorney at law and in fact to represent her in any suit for divorce that
might be brought against her in Nevada by her husband.  Plaintiff testified the
signature looked like hers but she could not say if it was hers.  She was sure
she never gave such a power of attorney.

   Defendant then put in evidence the judgment roll and the transcript of
testimony  in the Nevada action.  It appeared therefrom that Andrew brought the
action; that plaintiff herein personally appeared therein by her attorney,
Gordon Rice, filing an answer, and through him participated at the trial; that
the Nevada court found, upon supporting evidence, that Andrew was and for more
than six weeks prior to filing the complaint had been, a bona fide resident of
Nevada and of Washoe County, and was corporally present and domiciled therein
during all of that time; and that the decree had become final.

   Defendant next put in evidence the file of an action for divorce, in the
Superior Court, San Francisco, brought in 1947 by this plaintiff against this
defendant.  Included in the file was an instruction (dated April 14, 1948) to
the clerk to dismiss that action for the reason that a decree of divorce had
been theretofore obtained by the parties in Nevada.  A certified copy of the
Nevada findings and decree was attached thereto.  Plaintiff testified she did
not remember signing that instruction for dismissal but that it was her
signature.

   The trial court sustained objections to a number of questions which
plaintiff's attorney asked her concerning the power of attorney, questions such
as these: Did she know the Gordon Rice mentioned in the document?  Had she in
any manner contacted or spoken to or written to or received anything from anyone
by the name of Gordon Rice?  Had she ever appointed anyone as her attorney to
appear for her in the Reno divorce action? Her counsel said that by such
questions he sought and offered to prove that plaintiff had no attorney named
Gordon Rice and never knew what he was doing or what he had done.  The court
said, "I will stay by the ruling, objection sustained."

   The same rulings were made as to these questions: Did she ever know whether
she had appointed anyone to be her attorney in Nevada? Was she ever a resident
of Nevada?  As to papers presented to her by Andrew on or about January 29,
1948, the date of the power of attorney, did Andrew explain  to her the nature
of those papers?  (She said he did not ask her to read it; was positive she did
not read any document he gave her to sign at that time.) Did she know whether
Andrew ever lived in Nevada?  Did Andrew ever notify her he was living in
Nevada?

   Upon the sustaining of an objection to the question whether shortly after the
Reno divorce Andrew talked to plaintiff about Elena Cronier, plaintiff's counsel
said he sought to show that for a period of time, about that time, Andrew told a
story to plaintiff about Elena Cronier which terrified plaintiff concerning the
fact, represented by Andrew, that his child was to be born of that party and
that he represented that as a necessity for obtaining the decree of divorce in
Reno; he represented a picture to plaintiff, which she believed, of a complete
source of embarrassment, of "ostracization," of complete financial ruin to
himself and plaintiff, and that was the cause of her becoming hysterical and of
executing certain documents at his demand.  Further, her counsel desired to show
through this witness that Andrew represented that the Reno divorce was merely
for a temporary marriage, so that a name would be given the child which he
represented was to be born, and that he would thereafter come back to plaintiff,
and live with her and be remarried; that the decree was obtained through
collusion and fraud, at a time when his client was so mentally upset she did not
know what was happening; that the Nevada decree was void because neither of the
parties was a resident of Nevada; also, he sought to show the Nevada decree was
void because fraud was practiced upon plaintiff and because of her state of
mind.  Defendant objected, characterizing it as an attack upon the Nevada
decree, not a part of this proceeding even if permissible on the trial of the
action.  The court sustained the objection.

   Those rulings of the trial court were erroneous.  The order terminating the
order awarding support moneys, counsel fees, and costs should be reversed and
the proceeding remanded for rehearing.

     It is true that if plaintiff did appear and participate in the Nevada
action, she could not later collaterally attack the decree rendered therein upon
issues (such as Andrew's acquisition of residence in Nevada)  litigated and
decided therein.  ( Heuer v. Heuer, 33 Cal.2d 268 [201 P.2d 385]; Estate of
Schomaker, 93 Cal.App.2d 616 [209 P.2d 669]; Daut  v. Daut, 98 Cal.App.2d 375
[220 P.2d 63].) In each of those cases, as in Sherrer v. Sherrer, 334 U.S. 343
[68 S.Ct.  1087, 1097, 92 L.Ed. 1429, 1 A.L.R.2d 1355], and Coe v. Coe, 334 U.S.
378 [68 S.Ct. 1094, 1097, 92 L.Ed. 1451, 1 A.L.R.2d 1376], the party who later
unsuccessfully sought collaterally to attack a foreign divorce decree did in
fact personally appear in the foreign divorce action.   In contrast, in the
present action, the plaintiff seeks to show that she did not authorize anyone to
appear for her in the Nevada action, that her seeming appearance therein was the
result of fraud practiced upon her and the Nevada court by the defendant herein.
If she proves those allegations she will be in a position to tender proof (1)
that her signing of the dismissal of her earlier California divorce action was
done under circumstances which negative that act as an estoppel against the
position she takes in this action, (2) that Andrew did not acquire a Nevada
residence, and (3) that the Nevada decree was procured through collusion and
fraud.  (See Wolff v. Wolff, 134 N.J.Eq. 8 [34 A.2d 150].)

   That being so, upon the trial of this action,  may she not tender the same
issues upon the hearing of an application for temporary alimony and upon the
hearing of defendant's motion to terminate the order for temporary alimony? We
conclude that she may.

   The applicable statute declares that "When an action for divorce is pending,"
the court may, in its discretion, "require the husband . . . to pay as alimony
any money necessary to enable the wife . . . to support herself . . . , or to
prosecute or defend the action." ( Civ. Code, § 137.)

     There must, of course, be proof that they are husband and wife. The
required degree of proof is not as high as upon the trial upon the merits.  The
very provision for suit money indicates that.  In Sharon v. Sharon, 75 Cal. 1
[16 P. 345], the court said that upon such an application, when the defendant
denies the marriage, there must be "satisfactory evidence showing, at least
prima facie, a marriage, in fact," and "It has been said that it is not
necessary to prove a marriage as fully . . . on a preliminary application for a
temporary allowance, as will sustain a final decree." (P. 43.) In Hite v. Hite,
124 Cal. 389 [57 P. 227, 71 Am.St.Rep. 82, 45 L.R.A. 793], the court rejected
the prima facie rule and applied the preponderance of evidence requirement.  The
Hite case was distinguished in Bancroft v. Bancroft, 9 Cal.App.2d 464 [50 P.2d
465], upon the ground that the defendant in the Hite case denied the alleged
common law marriage, whereas in the Bancroft  case the plaintiff proved and
defendant admitted that a ceremonial marriage had taken place and the parties
had assumed the marital relation, which shifted to him the burden of proving the
marriage invalid.  The court indicated approval, in such a case, of a rule that
if the putative wife makes out a reasonably plain case of the existence of
marriage she should be furnished with temporary support and suit money, but
found that in the case before it the wife had established her marriage by a
preponderance of evidence.

   In Thomas v. Thomas, 66 Cal.App.2d 818 [153 P.2d 389], the husband admitted
the marriage and claimed it had been terminated by a foreign divorce but failed
to offer evidence of the divorce proceeding.  The evidence of the marriage and
the presumption of its continuance supported the order for temporary support,
counsel fees, and costs.

   In Knox  v. Knox, 88 Cal.App.2d 666 [199 P.2d 766], the court, in affirming
an order disallowing temporary support and suit money (the wife had appeared and
participated in the foreign divorce proceeding), expressed the rule in these
words: "It therefore became the duty of the court in the instant proceeding, to
determine, as a matter of fact, in the exercise of a sound judicial discretion,
whether there was reasonable probability of appellant herein successfully
attacking the validity of the Nevada divorce, and whether the instant proceeding
was instituted by appellant's wife in good faith." (P. 676.)

    In Kalmus v. Kalmus, 103 Cal.App.2d 405 [230 P.2d 57], a denial of temporary
alimony, counsel fees and costs was affirmed upon the ground, among others, that
the wife's evidence in support of her challenge of a foreign divorce decree
satisfied neither the preponderance of evidence rule nor the fair probability
rule, whichever might be applied.

   In Bernheimer v. Bernheimer, 103 Cal.App.2d 643 [230 P.2d 17], an order
refusing a wife temporary support (upon the ground that a foreign decree
divorcing the husband from his former wife was invalid) was reversed for the
reason that his conduct in participating in the foreign divorce proceeding and
procuring the decree therein precluded him from collaterally attacking that
decree. Accordingly, the wife's testimony that a marriage ceremony took place
between her and the defendant, was sufficient proof of marriage and shifted the
burden of proof to him, a burden he did not meet.

   In Carbone v. Superior Court, 18 Cal.2d 768 [117 P.2d 872, 136 A.L.R. 1260],
an order refusing to award temporary support  and suit money in a paternity suit
brought under section 196a of the Civil Code was reversed because the trial
court erroneously refused to permit the plaintiff to introduce any evidence of
paternity.  The Supreme Court held that proof of parentage is jurisdictional,
just as proof of marriage is jurisdictional in a similar proceeding in a divorce
action under section 137, and that in either case the party seeking the order
for support or costs must establish the jurisdictional fact by a preponderance
of evidence, but that "the proceeding need not be so complete nor the evidence
so extensive as upon the trial of the issues of the case and the order therefore
does not determine those issues nor affect the final judgment." (P. 772.)

   In Colbert v. Colbert, 28 Cal.2d 276 [169 P.2d 633], the requirement of proof
of the marriage (upon a motion to vacate a temporary alimony order, the same as
upon an original application for such alimony) is stated in these words: ". . .
the evidence necessary to prove a marriage need not be as complete and
satisfactory upon an application for temporary support as that required at the
time of trial to prove a marriage which is disputed by one of the parties." (P.
280.)

   In Baldwin v.  Baldwin, 28 Cal.2d 406 [170 P.2d 670], the wife appealed from
a judgment against her in her action for divorce and the husband appealed from
an order requiring him to pay her attorney's fees and costs on appeal.  The
judgment was based upon findings that a prior Nevada divorce decree, which she
questioned on jurisdictional grounds, was valid.  Both the judgment and the
order were affirmed.  In respect to the latter, the court said, at pages 416 and
417: "In support of his first contention [that, following a Nevada decree,
plaintiff was no longer his wife, and only a wife can be awarded suit money]
defendant relies upon statements contained in Hite v. Hite (1899), 124 Cal. 389
[57 P.2d 227, 71 Am.St.Rep. 82, 45 L.R.A. 793]; Carbone v. Superior Court
(1941), 18 Cal.2d 768, 771 [117 P.2d 872, 136 A.L.R. 1260]; and In re Cook
(1941), 42 Cal.App.2d 1, 3 [108 P.2d 46], to the effect that before alimony or
suit money can be awarded, the person seeking it must prove 'existence of the
marriage' with the other party to the proceeding.  In the Hite and the Cook
cases, however, it was the fact or the validity of the original marriage which
was in dispute, and in the Carbone case the holdings of the Hite and the Cook
cases were discussed by the court in considering the application of an
illegitimate child to enforce support pendente lite from her alleged father.  In
none of the three cases was an issue presented as to the validity of a divorce
decree secured by one party following an admitted marriage to the other.  Here
the marriage relationship admittedly existed at the time of, and continued for
several weeks following, the filing by plaintiff of her divorce complaint in
this state, and the chief defense offered by defendant to plaintiff's requests
for relief is that he thereafter secured in another state a decree of divorce
from her.  It is our view that under such circumstances, and upon a proper
showing otherwise, plaintiff should not be denied the payment from defendant  of
funds to enable her to properly prosecute an appeal from the judgment
determining the fact and effect of the Nevada decree. (Cf.  Fisher v. Superior
Court (1930), 110 Cal.App. 565, 567 [294 P. 445]; Stewart v. Stewart (1939), 32
Cal.App.2d 148, 150 [89 P.2d 404].) It is now the law of this state that it is
only after such an appeal has been finally determined (or the judgment of a
California trial court adjudicating such issue has become final) that the
validity or lack thereof of the Nevada decree and its effect -- and consequently
the marital status and reciprocal obligations of the parties in this state --
can be conclusively settled.  (Crouch v. Crouch (1946), ante, [28 Cal.2d] p. 243
[169 P.2d 897].)" (Pp. 416 and 417.)

   In Kopasz v. Kopasz, 34 Cal.2d 423 [210 P.2d 846], appeals in a separate
maintenance action were pending from a judgment in favor of the wife and from an
order directing the appellant to pay her costs and counsel fees on appeal.  She
moved to stay the appeal pending his compliance with that order.  He resisted on
the ground that he was relying on a foreign decree of divorce. In granting the
motion, the court said: "When a valid marriage has been admitted and the issue
before the court is the validity of a foreign divorce decree, the trial court
may in a proper case grant costs and attorney's fees on appeal until the effect
of the foreign decree has been finally determined by the courts of this state.
(Baldwin v.  Baldwin, 28 Cal.2d 406, 417 [170 P.2d 670].)" (P. 424.)

   In Fisher v. Superior Court, 110 Cal.App. 565 [294 P.2d 445], cited with
approval in the Baldwin case, the court denied an application of the husband for
a writ to prohibit the trial court from proceeding to enforce an order requiring
him to pay the wife temporary support and counsel fees, in  an action brought by
her for separate maintenance and to vacate an interlocutory decree of divorce he
had obtained in another action.  She alleged that he obtained the interlocutory
decree through extrinsic fraud practiced upon her and upon the court.  The writ
was refused upon the ground that the trial court had jurisdiction to proceed.
In that regard, the appellate court said: "It becomes a matter of fact for the
[trial] court to determine, in the exercise of a sound judicial discretion,
whether the petitioner was guilty of perpetrating the kind of fraud which
authorizes the judgment to be declared void and of no effect." (P. 567.)

   In this state of the decisions it is difficult to formulate a precise rule as
to the degree of proof of marriage required upon an application for temporary
support in an action for divorce or for separate maintenance. It is clear that
the evidence need not be as complete and satisfactory as at the time of trial.
When, as here, a valid marriage is admitted and the issue is the validity of a
foreign divorce decree, it appears that the trial court has a larger measure of
discretion to grant the application than when the fact of the marriage itself is
in issue.

     The evidence received upon such a hearing must, of course, be competent
unless its competency is waived by failure of the opposite party to interpose an
appropriate objection.   We mention this because upon the hearing below
plaintiff's counsel sought to elicit from her a statement of what her
psychiatrist told her concerning her physical and mental condition at the time
she signed certain documents.  An objection that such testimony would be
incompetent and irrelevant was sustained on both grounds.  As hearsay, it was
incompetent but not irrelevant.  If not hearsay (if the psychiatrist were the
witness, for example) it would be admissible.

   Our discussion of the appeal from the order terminating the order for
temporary support, counsel fees and costs applies with equal force to the appeal
from the order denying plaintiff's application for the cost of taking
defendant's deposition, which order should be reversed and the proceeding
remanded for rehearing.  Each of those orders appealed from is reversed.

     The order refusing to direct defendant to give his deposition is not
appealable, although reviewable in an appropriate mandamus proceeding or upon
appeal from  a final judgment. (See McClatchy Newspapers v. Superior Court,  26
Cal.2d 386 [159 P.2d 944].) The appeal from that order is dismissed.

   Appellant is to recover costs on all the appeals.


                              43 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           JOSEPH GLASTON, Respondent, v. ROSALIE GLASTON, Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 14706

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division One

           69 Cal. App. 2d 787; 160 P.2d 45; 1945 Cal. App. LEXIS 726


                                 June 28, 1945

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied July 16, 1945, and
Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court was Denied August 27,
1945.  Carter, J., Voted for a Hearing.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from part of a judgment of the Superior Court of Los
Angeles County.  Dudley S. Valentine, Judge.

   Action for divorce.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Judgments--Void Judgments--Personal Judgment on Constructive Service.  --A
personal judgment on constructive service of process upon a nonresident
defendant, who does not appear, is contrary to due process of law, and is not
valid in the state where rendered or elsewhere.

(2) Divorce--Foreign Divorces--Judgment for Alimony.  --A sister state judgment
of separation from bed and board rendered by default on substituted service is
not entitled to be enforced as a money judgment with respect to alimony granted
and unpaid.

(3) Id.--Extreme Cruelty--Evidence.  --A divorce for extreme cruelty is
supported by evidence of the defendant wife's admissions that she was supported
by a man other than her husband, and that she signed an agreement to resume
marital relations with her husband in return for a joint bank account and
one-half of his earnings.

(4) Id.--Foreign Divorces--Res Judicata.  --A judgment of separation from bed
and board is not a bar to a divorce action based on new grounds subsequently
arising.

(5) Judgments--Res Judicata--Waiver.  --Where the defendant in a divorce action
by cross-complaint alleges the same facts which formed the basis for a sister
state judgment of separation and thus presents for determination the issues
previously decided, and where the court finds against him as to each such issue,
his right to assert that the judgment constituted conclusive proof of the
defense of recrimination is foreclosed.

(6) Divorce--Recrimination.  --A cause of divorce which was provoked by a
defendant in a divorce action is not available by way of recrimination.

(7) Id.--Findings--Consistency.  --In a divorce action there is no inconsistency
between a finding of the rendition of a sister state judgment of separation and
a finding against the judgment as a bar to a divorce for subsequently arising
grounds.

COUNSEL: Samuel Schwartzberg and Henry P. Goodwin for Appellant.

Rosalind Goodrich Bates for Respondent.

JUDGES: York, P. J.  Doran, J., and White, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: YORK

OPINION

     Defendant wife appeals from a judgment granting to plaintiff husband an
interlocutory decree of divorce on the ground of cruelty. Defendant, a resident
of New York State, appeared and filed her cross-complaint in the instant action.

   The parties intermarried in New York State on September 7, 1940, and they
separated on October 9, 1940.  It is admitted by both that respondent attempted
a reconciliation and that on October 25, 1940, they signed a document whereby,
in return for the establishment of a joint bank account and one-half of
respondent's weekly earnings, appellant promised to resume marital relations
with respondent, starting November 25, 1940.  However, on October 31, 1940,
appellant instituted in New York State an action for separation from bed and
board on the grounds of cruelty, nonsupport and desertion. Respondent, who was
then and now is, a publicity agent for the well-known comedy team of Abbott and
Costello, was sent to California on November 2, 1940.  After handling publicity
for his employers at Chicago and Detroit en route to California, he shortly
thereafter arrived at Los Angeles, where he has ever since resided.

   Substituted service was made upon respondent in the New York action by the
publication of summons in two New York newspapers, and by mailing copies of the
complaint and summons to respondent at two different addresses in New York City.
Thereafter, judgment was taken against  him by default upon the three grounds
heretofore stated, appellant receiving a judgment for separate maintenance and
respondent  ordered to pay her $ 100 per week for her support, although he was
never at any time personally served with either the summons or complaint.

   To the amended complaint in the instant cause, appellant wife filed her first
amended answer and cross-complaint in which she denied the acts of cruelty
charged against her in said amended complaint, alleged a course of cruel and
inhuman conduct by respondent husband, and set up the judgment rendered in the
New York action as a bar to the within action for divorce, praying that said
foreign judgment be established and enforced in this state, and that she be
awarded a money judgment thereon for the unpaid sums accrued thereunder, to wit,
$ 8,600.  The allegations of appellant's cross-complaint filed herein with
respect to respondent's cruel and inhuman treatment of her are identical with
the allegations of her complaint filed in the Now York action.

   After a trial of the issues during which appellant introduced the New York
judgment and rested, the court made findings of fact in favor of respondent
husband, and denied any relief to appellant on her cross-complaint. Among other
things, the trial court found as follows: That "by and under a certain final
judgment of separation in favor of defendant herein, duly given and made by the
Supreme Court of the State of New York, County of New York, on or about October
6, 1941, in a certain action for separation from bed and board . . . brought by
this defendant,  as plaintiff therein, against the plaintiff herein, as
defendant therein, upon the grounds of cruelty and non-support and desertion by
the plaintiff herein, it was duly found and determined by said court that the
defendant herein was entitled to a judgment of separation upon all the grounds
therein mentioned," all as set forth in a duly exemplified copy of said judgment
attached to appellant's answer and cross-complaint herein as Exhibit A.

   "XI.  That [ILLEGIBLE WORD] is not true that the plaintiff herein is
therefore by said prior final judgment and adjudication estopped from alleging
or attempting to allege or prove any or all, of the matters and allegations
contained in said Paragraphs V and VI of the Amended Complaint as grounds for or
basis of his cause of action for divorce therein.  . . .  XXI.  That it it not
true that as a result of the judgment rendered in the above mentioned separation
suit plaintiff is barred from suing for a divorce."

   The judgment which followed granted an interlocutory  decree of divorce to
respondent husband, and ordered him to pay to appellant's attorneys $ 750 for
fees and $ 100 for costs, payable in monthly payments of $ 100 commencing March
10, 1944.  This appeal, as heretofore stated, has been perfected from that
portion of said judgment granting an interlocutory decree of divorce to
respondent.

   In support of her claim that this state must give full faith and credit to
the judgment rendered in the New York action for separation from bed and board
which, she urges, has been attacked herein on the sole ground that respondent
was not personally served in that action, appellant cites the case of Williams
v. North Carolina, 317 U.S. 287 [63 S.Ct. 207, 87 L.Ed. 279, 143 A.L.R. 1273].
The cited case held that the full faith and credit clause of the federal
Constitution requires the extraterritorial recognition of the validity of a
divorce decree obtained in accordance with the requirements of procedural due
process in a state by a spouse who under the law of such state had acquired a
bona fide domicil there, although the spouse who remained in the state of the
original matrimonial domicil did not appear in the divorce suit and was not
served with process in the state in which the divorce was granted.  In view of
certain dicta enunciated by the court therein to the effect that a divorce suit
"is not a mere in personam action" and that "the decrees in this case like other
divorce decrees are more than in personam judgments," appellant here contends
that the "jurisdictional holding of the United States Supreme Court" in the
cited case "is not limited to the matrimonial status of the parties but is also
applicable to the judgment for alimony contained in the New York judgment."

   Since the decision hereinbefore referred to (317 U.S. 287, 63 S.Ct. 207, 87
L.Ed. 279, 143 A.L.R. 1273), the Williams case has again been before the Supreme
Court of the United States.  In its last decision rendered May 21, 1945, the
court in referring to the first opinion says: "It was there held that a divorce
granted in Nevada, must be respected in North  Carolina, where Nevada's finding
of domicil is not questioned, though the other spouse had neither appeared nor
been served with process in Nevada and though recognition of such a divorce
offended the policy of North Carolina.  The record then before us did not
present the question whether North Carolina had the power 'to refuse full faith
and credit to Nevada divorce decrees because, contrary to the findings of the
Nevada court, North Carolina finds that no bona fide  domicil was acquired in
Nevada.' Williams v. North Carolina, supra, at 302. This is the precise issue
which has emerged after retrial of the cause following our reversal." This issue
was determined by the court in the following language: "We conclude that North
Carolina was not required to yield her State policy because a Nevada court found
that petitioners were domiciled in Nevada when it granted them decrees of
divorce. North Carolina was entitled to find, as she did, that they did not
acquire domicils in Nevada and that the Nevada court was therefore without power
to liberate the petitioners from amenability to the laws of North Carolina
governing domestic relation." ( Williams v. North Carolina, 325 U.S. 226 [65
S.Ct. 1092, 89 L.Ed.    ].)

   There is nothing in either of the Williams v. North Carolina decisions, supra
, which would indicate that the Nevada decrees of divorce there under
consideration did anything more than alter the marital status of the parties
thereto.  The question of alimony apparently was not in issue and the judgments
of divorce did not make a money award as against either of the spouses served by
publication, hence those decisions are not applicable to the facts presented by
the instant litigation.

     The law is well established "that a personal judgment upon constructive or
substituted service of process upon a nonresident defendant, who does not
appear, is contrary to due process of law and is valid neither in the state
where rendered nor in any other state in which its enforcement may be sought.
Pennoyer v. Neff, 95 U.S. 714, 24 L.Ed. 565." (126 A.L.R. 1475. See, also, 21
Cal.Jur. 500, and authorities there cited; De la Montanya v. De la Montanya, 112
Cal. 101 [44 P. 345, 53 Am.St.Rep. 165, 32 L.R.A. 82]; and Comfort v. Comfort,
17 Cal.2d 736, 741 [112 P.2d 259].)

   In the case of Geary v. Geary, 272 N.Y. 390 [6 N.E.2d 67, 108 A.L.R. 1293], a
decree, somewhat similar to the one here being considered, was entered which
provided that "the plaintiff is entitled to a judgment of separation from the
bed and board of defendant forever, because of the abandonment of the plaintiff
by the defendant, because of the cruel and inhuman treatment of plaintiff by the
defendant, and because of his failure, neglect and refusal to provide for the
plaintiff and the issue of the marriage of the plaintiff and defendant." Said
decree ordered defendant to pay $ 3,000 per month for the support of plaintiff
and the two minor children, an order  for the sequestration of property of
defendant located in New York having previously been made.  In the cited case it
was held by the New York Court of Appeals that "In matrimonial actions the 'res'
is the marital status of a resident of the state, and, to the extent that the
purpose of the action is to alter or affect the matrimonial status, the action
is a 'proceeding substantially in rem' where 'substituted service by publication
or in any other authorized form' is sufficient notice to answer the requirement
of 'due process', as formulated in Pennoyer v. Neff, supra. Thus even before
seizure of any property, the courts of New York might assume jurisdiction of the
action for separation, though the jurisdiction so assumed would not extend to
the inclusion of an award of alimony in the judgment of separation. Rigney v.
Rigney, 127 N.Y. 408, 28 N.E. 405, 24 Am.St.Rep. 462. . . .  In this case,
though the defendant was served personally in California under a valid order of
the court, and failed to appear or plead in the action, the judgment which could
be granted upon default could not include an effective award of alimony payable
out of sequestrated property of the defendant which had not previously been
seized." (Emphasis added.)

     The judgment in the New York action effected a separation of the parties
from bed and board without terminating the marriage, therefore, under the
foregoing rules of law, it is not entitled to be enforced in California against
respondent herein as a money judgment, with respect to the alimony therein
granted and now remaining unpaid.

    The opinion in the case of Comfort v. Comfort, 17 Cal.2d 736 [112 P.2d 259],
holds that a decree of separate maintenance and divorce from bed and board
granted to a wife and based upon desertion by the husband and upon his cruelty,
does not deprive a California court of the jurisdiction to entertain an action
for divorce brought subsequently by the husband.  There the wife's argument was
that the New York decree conclusively established that she was the innocent
party and that, under the cases, the marital domicil follows that of the
innocent party. This argument was rejected by our Supreme Court not only because
the cases do not support the rule as alleged by the wife, but also on the ground
that the New York decree simply established that at the time the decree was
entered, and prior thereto, the wife was the innocent party, but that it could
not, and did not, establish her continued innocence subsequent to that date.

    "A husband against whom a judgment for support and maintenance has been
rendered is not precluded thereby from asserting new grounds for divorce against
his wife which have arisen since the rendition of the judgment.  ( Condon v.
Condon (1917), 8 Ohio App. 189, 30 Ohio C.A. 295.)" (138 A.L.R. 362.)

     In the instant case, the testimony of the witnesses Green that appellant
made certain admissions subsequent to the rendition of the New York judgment, to
wit: In January of 1942, that some man other than her husband was providing for
her, together with the further admission that she signed the document of October
25, 1940, hereinbefore referred to, constituted sufficient evidence to support
the judgment granting respondent a divorce on the ground of extreme cruelty.  In
other words, what acts may have been committed by either party since the entry
of the New York judgment are open to investigation in the subsequent divorce
action, because the marital status of the parties still exists, and if either
party has done something which constitutes a ground for divorce the other party
is entitled to have the benefit of it.

     In answer to appellant's contention that the court erred "in failing to
find and hold that the judgment and findings of the New York court constituted
conclusive proof of the defense of recrimination of the wife to the husband's
divorce action," suffice to say that appellant, in addition to pleading the New
York judgment as a bar to the instant action, also filed a cross-complaint in
which she alleged the same facts which formed the basis for the New York
judgment.  By presenting for determination in the instant action the very issues
decided by the New York court, appellant has foreclosed her right to assert the
defense of recrimination, because the trial court herein has found against her
as to each and every issue that she so presented to it for determination.
Moreover, an examination of the entire record herein discloses a situation from
which the trial court would be justified in assuming that appellant was guilty
of provocatory conduct.  A cause of divorce which was provoked by a defendant in
a divorce action is not available by way of recrimination. ( Popescu v. Popescu,
46 Cal.App.2d 44 [115 P.2d 208].) He who comes into equity must come with clean
hands.  ( Comfort v. Comfort, 17 Cal.2d 736 [112 P.2d 259]; Mayo v. Mayo, 3
Cal.2d 51 [43 P.2d 535].)

     Appellant urges as a ground for reversal of the judgment herein certain
inconsistencies between certain findings of fact, to wit: Finding X is to the
effect that the New York judgment was a final judgment of separation in favor of
appellant and against respondent and was "duly given and made" by the Supreme
Court of New York State upon the grounds of cruelty, nonsupport and desertion by
respondent.  Finding XI is to the effect that respondent is not estopped by the
adjudication and final judgment in the New York action from alleging or
attempting to prove any or all matters alleged in his amended complaint as basis
for his cause of action for divorce herein, and Finding XXI reads: "That it is
not true that as a result of the judgment rendered in the above mentioned
separation suit plaintiff is barred from suing for a divorce."

   Since it is the conclusion of this court that the New York judgment is not
entitled to full faith and credit except insofar as it alters the marital status
of the parties and effects a legal separation, the findings adverted to are
consistent with this view, and together with other findings made, are amply
sufficient to support the conclusions of law and the judgment.

   For the reasons stated, the judgment appealed from is affirmed.


                              44 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           RUBY CLOMA RICHARDS McELHATTEN, Appellant, v. JAMES ALBERT
                             McELHATTEN, Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 22391

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Three

            159 Cal. App. 2d 136; 323 P.2d 500; 1958 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      1972


                                 April 3, 1958

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  Arnold Praeger, Judge.

   Action for annulment of a marriage.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Marriage--Annulment--Review of Evidence.  --It was reversible error to deny
an annulment, sought because the husband had another wife living by virtue of a
marriage that was in full force and effect, on the ground that the jurisdiction
of the Mexican court was not contested in a Mexican divorce proceeding by the
husband against his first wife where the only evidence as to such divorce
proceeding was the husband's testimony that he had never instituted a divorce
action in the United States and had never been served with process in a divorce
action brought by his first wife, that he "attempted" to get a divorce in Mexico
from his first wife on the day he married his second wife, that he was in Mexico
only two days, had no intention of living in Mexico or any place other than
California, and that he immediately returned to California.

COUNSEL: Lawrence R. Horton for Appellant.

No appearance for Respondent.

JUDGES: Shinn, P. J.  Vallee, J., concurred.  Wood (Parker), J., dissents.

OPINION BY: SHINN

OPINION

      Plaintiff appeals from an adverse judgment in her action for annulment of
her marriage to defendant, James Albert McElhatten.  She alleged in her
complaint that she participated in a ceremony of marriage with defendant on
December 4, 1951 in Tijuana, Mexico, a year later in another ceremony of
marriage in Glendale, California, and at the times of said purported marriages
and each of them defendant had another wife living by virtue of a marriage which
was then and continued to remain in full force and effect.  Defendant having
been duly served with  process and having defaulted, plaintiff submitted her
evidence, following which the court entered a judgment which recited "The Court
finds that the allegations of the complaint are not true, and that plaintiff is
not entitled to an annulment of marriage from defendant"; whereupon it was
decreed that an annulment of the marriage was denied.  Although the finding
negatives each and every allegation of the complaint, such could not have been
the intention of the court.  If given literal effect, the finding would be
contrary to the established facts as to the ceremonies of marriages in which
defendant participated.

   Defendant was called as a witness on behalf of plaintiff and testified that
he married Barbara June Gamble August 15, 1947.  He also testified that on or
about December 4, 1952, he participated in a marriage ceremony with plaintiff
Ruby Cloma Johnson McElhatten.  Certified copies of the certificates of each
marriage were received in evidence.  Defendant testified further that at all
times subsequent to August 15, 1947, he had lived and been continuously employed
in California; also that Barbara June Gamble McElhatten is living and a resident
of California.  He further testified that he had never instituted an action for
divorce in the United States and had never been served with process in an action
for divorce brought by Barbara; that he "attempted" to get a divorce in Mexico
"December 4, 1951"; he was in Mexico but two days; he had no intention of living
in Mexico or in any place other than California, and he immediately returned to
California.  This evidence was received November 15, 1956, and the cause was
submitted.

    There were further proceedings December 12, 1956.  Apparently, due to press
of other business, some of the facts developed had escaped the minds of the
court and counsel.  It was stated: "The Court is denying the decree of annulment
on the ground that the plaintiff in this action is not in a position to
collaterally attack the Mexican decree of divorce which it was testified the
defendant obtained in Tijuana on December 2, 1951; that the other party to the
marriage which resulted in the Mexican divorce is a party interested in the
matter and is not a party to this action.

   "If I remember correctly, the evidence showed that Barbara June Gamble had
remarried; is that correct?

   "Mr. Horton: I believe that was the testimony, your Honor.

   "The Court: There is no showing that the jurisdiction of  the Mexican Court
was not contested in the Mexican divorce proceeding. Therefore the decree of
annulment is denied." There was no evidence that defendant had procured a
divorce in Mexico December 2, 1951, or at any other time.  Neither was there any
evidence that Barbara June Gamble had remarried, although that question was
irrelevant to any issue in the case.

   The only tenable conclusion from the evidence was that defendant's marriage
to Barbara was in force at the time of his purported marriage to plaintiff.  The
clear inference from defendant's testimony was that he did not obtain even a
purported decree of divorce during the two days he was in Tijuana or at any
other time, and there was no evidence that he ever brought suit.  Moreover, a
resident of California cannot step across the international boundary into Mexico
as a casual visitor and bring back a signed paper which is entitled to any
consideration as a decree of divorce. The mere assertion that a marriage can be
dissolved in that manner deserves from a California court nothing but ridicule
and reproach.  The evidence which was elicited from defendant that he and his
former wife were residents of California, that he had never sued for divorce
there nor been sued, dispelled any presumption that their marriage had ever been
dissolved in any jurisdiction.  The record discloses no ground upon which a
decree of annulment could be properly refused.

   The judgment is reversed with directions to enter a decree in accordance with
the prayer of the complaint.

DISSENT BY: WOOD

DISSENT

   WOOD (Parker), J.  I dissent.  The burden of proving that defendant's
marriage to Barbara (his first wife) had not been dissolved by judicial decree
was upon plaintiff.  Whether plaintiff met that burden was a question of fact to
be decided by the trial judge.  The defendant was the only witness.  The
questions as to the weight and credibility of his testimony were exclusively for
the trial judge to decide.  The trial judge was not required to decide that, as
a matter of law, the marriage of plaintiff and defendant was invalid.  There is
a presumption that the marriage of plaintiff and defendant was valid.  The basis
for this presumption is that it is presumed that defendant is innocent of crime
and he did not commit bigamy when he married plaintiff.  That presumption is
evidence.  If, in the opinion of the trial judge, that presumption was not
rebutted or overcome by other evidence, the trial judge was required to deny a
decree of annulment.

   At the hearing upon the default herein,  plaintiff called defendant as a
witness under the provisions of section 2055 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Defendant testified that he married Barbara June Gamble on August 15, 1947, and
that thereafter he lived continuously in California (the certificate of that
marriage was received in evidence); he had not instituted an action for divorce
in the United States against Barbara, and he had never been served in a divorce
action commenced by her; on December 4, 1951, he attempted to get a divorce in
Mexico; he went to Mexico on  December 1 or 2, 1951, for the purpose of
attempting to get a divorce; he was in Mexico two days; at the time he went to
Mexico he did not have any intention of living in Mexico or any place other than
California; he returned to California and has lived in California since that
time; on December 4, 1952, he participated in a marriage ceremony with the
plaintiff herein, Ruby Cloma Johnson McElhatten (the certificate of that
marriage was received in evidence); after December 4, 1952, he has seen Barbara
June Gamble McElhatten alive, and she is a resident of California at this time.
(Time of the trial was November 15, 1956.)

   The testimony of defendant with respect to attempting to get a decree in
Mexico was as follows: "Q. [by attorney for plaintiff] Did you ever attempt to
get a divorce elsewhere?  A. Yes.  Q. Where was that?  A. Mexico.  Q. When was
that?  A. December the 4th.  The Court: Louder, please.  The Witness: December
4th, '51.  Q. By Mr. Horton [attorney for plaintiff]: When did you go to Mexico?
Did you go to Mexico for that purpose?  A. Yes."

   No copy or purported copy of a Mexico decree of divorce was offered or
received in evidence.  It thus appears that there was no evidence that there was
a Mexico decree of divorce. Also, there was no evidence that there was not a
Mexico decree of divorce.

   "It is well established that when a person has entered into two successive
marriages, a presumption arises in favor of the validity of the second marriage,
and the burden is upon the party attacking the validity of the second marriage
to prove that the first marriage had not been dissolved by the death of a spouse
or by divorce or had not been annulled at the time of the second marriage." (
Estate of Smith, 33 Cal.2d 279, 281 [201 P.2d 539].) In Hamrick v. Hamrick,  119
Cal.App.2d 839 [260 P.2d 188], it was said at page 848 (in quoting from another
case): "'. . . the burden is cast upon the party asserting guilt or immorality
to prove the negative -- that the first marriage had not ended before the second
marriage.'"

   In the present case there was testimony by defendant that his first wife was
living at the time of his second marriage. As above stated, whether plaintiff
met the burden of proving that the first marriage had not been dissolved by
judicial decree was a question of fact to be decided by the trial judge.  As
above stated, there was no evidence that there was not a Mexico decree of
divorce as to the first marriage. The only evidence with respect to the
nonexistence of a divorce decree in the United States (as to the first marriage)
was that defendant testified that he had not instituted an action for divorce in
the United States against his first wife (Barbara), and he had never been served
in a divorce action commenced by her.  His testimony that he had not been served
in a divorce action by his first wife was a legal conclusion.  The trial judge
was not required to infer or conclude from such testimony (regarding nonservice)
that defendant's first wife had not obtained a divorce. In Estate of Borneman,
35 Cal.App.2d 455 [96 P.2d 182], Mrs. Borneman, who sought to prove that her
marriage had not been dissolved by judicial decree, testified that she had not
commenced a divorce action and had never been served with papers in a divorce
action commenced by her husband.  She also introduced evidence that there was no
record of such action in San Francisco (where her husband had resided in 1912).
There was no evidence therein showing the husband's place of residence from 1912
to 1938, the date of his death.  The court said at page 460: "That proof was
insufficient to rebut the presumption of innocence.  [Citations.] The burden
rested on Mrs. Borneman to introduce such evidence as would convince the mind of
the trial court that the first  marriage had not been dissolved. [Citation.]
This apparently she did not do.  The most she did was to create a conflict in
the evidence but a mere conflict in the evidence will not warrant a reversal."
It thus appears that it has been held that testimony that a spouse had not been
served with process is not adequate proof that the other spouse had not obtained
a divorce. In Estate   of Smith, supra, 33 Cal.2d 279 [201 P.2d 539], it was
said at page 283: "In order to show that no divorce or annulment had been
obtained it is not necessary to prove that an examination was made of the public
records  of jurisdictions other than those in which the parties to the marriage
were domiciled." In the present case there was testimony by defendant that his
first wife was a resident of California "at this time." The reporter's
transcript shows as follows: "Q. Is she [Barbara, first wife] a resident of
California at this time?  A. Yes." There was no evidence as to the domicile of
the first wife from 1947, when she married defendant, to the time of trial (on
November 15, 1956).  Defendant testified that he had lived in California since
the marriage in 1947.  There was no evidence as to when he and his first wife
(Barbara) separated.  Even if it be assumed that her domicile was in Los Angeles
County, there was no evidence that an examination was made of the public records
of Los Angeles County to ascertain whether the first wife had obtained a decree
of divorce.

   In Maslow v. Maslow, 117 Cal.App.2d 237 [255 P.2d 65], which was an action
for annulment of marriage, the court said at page 243: "Where the evidence will
support different inferences, the choice of inferences is for the trial court;
and its finding, based on the inferences drawn, cannot be disturbed on appeal.
[Citation.] The trier of fact is the exclusive judge of the credibility of the
witnesses.  [Citations.] The trial court is free to disbelieve and reject the
testimony of witnesses even though they are uncontradicted and unimpeached.
[Citations.] These rules apply with particular emphasis to an action for
annulment since the state is a silent but active third party to every action to
dissolve a marriage. The state is interested in seeing to it that no marriage is
declared void as a result of fraud or collusion, and that the statutory grounds
on which the annulment is sought actually do exist.  [Citation.]"

   The court found that the allegations of the complaint are not true.  One of
those allegations was in substance that (at the times of the two marriage
ceremonies with plaintiff) the marriage of defendant to Barbara June Gamble (the
first wife) was and still is in force.  The effect of that finding is that
plaintiff did not overcome the presumption of validity of her marriage to
defendant, and did not meet the burden of proving that the marriage of defendant
to Barbara (the first wife) had not been dissolved by judicial decree.

   Under the evidence here the trial judge was not required to conclude that
appellant had met the burden of proving that the first marriage had not been
dissolved by judicial decree when the second marriage occurred.

    The trial judge stated, at the time of submitting the matter for decision,
that under the decision in Mumma v. Mumma, 86 Cal.App.2d 133 [194 P.2d 24], he
did not believe that the plaintiff could attack the Mexican decree collaterally,
and that plaintiff was not injuriously affected by that decree at the time of
its rendition.  The judge also stated, about a month later when he rendered his
oral decision in open court, that an annulment was denied on the ground that
plaintiff herein was not in a position to collaterally attack the Mexican decree
of divorce which it was testified the defendant obtained in Tijuana on December
2 (4), 1951, and that the other party to the marriage which resulted in the
Mexican divorce is a party interested in the matter and is not a party to this
action.  The judge said further: "If I remember correctly, the evidence showed
that Barbara June Gamble [McElhatten] had remarried; is that correct?  The
attorney for plaintiff herein replied: "I believe that was the  testimony, your
Honor." The judge said: "There is no showing that the jurisdiction of the
Mexican Court was not contested in the Mexican divorce proceeding. Therefore the
decree of annulment is denied." It is apparent that the judge was of the belief
that there was evidence that a decree of divorce had been rendered in Mexico.
According to the reporter's transcript, however, defendant did not testify that
he obtained a decree in Mexico.  His testimony was that he attempted to get a
divorce in Mexico.  The reporter's transcript does not show that there was
testimony with reference to the remarriage of the first wife.  The reference,
however, to such purported testimony indicates the importance of requiring
adequate proof herein of nonexistence of a judicial decree dissolving the first
marriage.

   In my opinion the judgment should be affirmed.


                              45 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             MARTHA OUTLAW HUNTINGTON, Respondent, v. HENRY EDWARDS
                            HUNTINGTON II, Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 19562

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

            120 Cal. App. 2d 705; 262 P.2d 104; 1953 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      2003


                                October 19, 1953

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied November 6, 1953,
and Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court was Denied December
17, 1953.  Carter, J., and Schauer, J., were of the Opinion that the Petition
Should be Granted.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  Thurmond Clarke, Judge.

   Action for divorce, for support, and for custody and support of children.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1a) (1b) Divorce--Foreign Divorces--Collateral Attack.  --The good faith of
spouse who migrates to sister state for purpose of obtaining a divorce is a
question of fact, and he who asserts invalidity of decree thus gained has burden
of proof.

(2) Id.--Foreign Divorces--Bona Fide Residence.  --A finding that divorced
husband did not establish a bona fide residence in Nevada where divorce was
granted is sustained by evidence that during his stay in Nevada he registered as
a voter but never exercised his right of franchise, that he opened a bank
account but never drew a check, and that while he told some witnesses that he
was to make Reno his permanent home, he established no business or place to
transact his affairs but received his mail at office of his Reno attorney.

(3) Id.--Foreign Divorces--Full Faith and Credit.  --From language of Civ. Code,
§§ 150, 150.1, 150.2, known as Uniform Divorce Recognition Law, it is evident
that Legislature conceived that when a divorce decree is certified from Nevada,
full faith and credit clause is not necessarily applicable until compliance with
requirements of due process has been shown.

(4) Id.--Foreign Divorces--Collateral Attack.  --A defendant in a Nevada divorce
action is at liberty to attack collaterally the decree so long as he did not
participate in case or make a personal appearance, but if he participated in
Nevada action or if he was personally served he is inhibited from making such a
collateral attack.

(5) Id.--Foreign Divorces--Collateral Attack.  --Where wife did not visit Nevada
during pendency of husband's divorce action and did not make a legal appearance
in case, she is not barred from attacking divorce decree obtained by him.

(6) Id. -- Foreign Divorces -- Bona Fide Residence.  -- A foreign divorce decree
is not entitled to full faith and credit where spouse has taken pro forma steps
to leave domicile of his lifetime, ascertains names of lawyers in new
jurisdiction who might best serve him, becomes infatuated with another woman, or
tells no one on his departure of his intention to establish a domicile beyond
borders of his domiciliary state.

(7) Id.--Counsel Fees--Time of Award.  --Order directing husband to pay counsel
for wife $ 6,000 "on account in connection with legal services heretofore
rendered and now contemplated to be rendered by said attorneys" was not intended
to be total counsel fee to be paid, but could only mean that the amount allowed
would be supplemented if services actually rendered should justify a further
award.

(8) Id.--Permanent Alimony--Amount of Award.  --An award of $ 1,000 per month as
alimony for wife and $ 600 per month for support of two boys cannot be said to
be grossly excessive where husband admitted that $ 1,250 per month would be a
fair allowance and where, although his income is around $ 50,000, aside from
divorce judgment he has no serious outlay to reduce it save that of federal
taxes and from testimony of his tax expert if no alimony were paid he would have
to pay government federal taxes of $ 23,318, whereas if he paid alimony of $
17,400 per year his federal income tax would be only $ 11,385.50.

(9) Id.--Enforcement of Awards--Lien on Property.  --Trial court may impose lien
on husband's separate estate to secure enforcement of award for payment of
alimony where such estate might otherwise be alienated by assignment or
attachment.

(10) Id.--Custody of Children--Visitation Rights.  --Divorced husband's right to
visit children is not unnecessarily interfered with where it cannot be said that
in view of circumstances of case the court abused its discretion in requiring
one day's notice in advance of his calling to see children.

COUNSEL: Newell & Chester and Robert M. Newell for Appellant.

Hightower & Martin and John L. Martin for Respondent.

JUDGES: Moore, P. J.  McComb, J., and Fox, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: MOORE

OPINION

     To an action by respondent, filed December 18, 1951, for divorce, for
support, and for custody and support of her two children, appellant answered
February 4, 1952, with a general denial, and on June 13th in a supplemental
answer he pleaded in bar that the District Court of the First Judicial District
of Nevada had on March 27, 1952, granted him a final decree of divorce. The
issues thus created were resolved by findings whereby the court below determined
that (1) by reason of appellant's cruelties, respondent is entitled to a decree
of divorce; (2) she is a fit and proper person to have the custody and care of
her children; (3) appellant is capable of supporting his wife and children on a
high standard of living to which he had habituated them; (4) appellant had an
annual income of $ 53,000 in 1951 from a trust held by the Security First
National Bank of Los Angeles, and for 1952 it will be about $ 48,000; (5) he is
a life beneficiary of such trust fund; (6) he is capable of paying for the
support and maintenance of respondent and her children and for reasonable
compensation to the attorneys of respondent and necessary costs of suit and
expenditures incurred in the protection of the interests of respondent and her
children; (7) respondent is without sufficient funds with which to maintain
herself and children or to pay reasonable compensation to her attorney and
others contributing to the prosecution of her cause and to pay the necessary
costs and money necessarily expended and debts incurred by respondent during the
pendency of this action and to June 15, 1952, in the sum of $ 1,450.96.  Other
findings will appear in the discussion.

   Because the findings declare and the judgment decrees that appellant took
steps in bad faith to make Nevada his permanent home, his first ground for a
reversal is that "Defendant's Nevada Divorce Decree Was Entitled to Full Faith
and Credit."

    In support of such proposition appellant cites Williams v. North Carolina,
325 U.S. 226 [65 S.Ct. 1092, 89 L.Ed. 1577, 157 A.L.R. 1366]; Hinderlider v.
LaPlata River & C. Creek Ditch Co., 304 U.S. 92 [58 S.Ct. 803, 82 L.Ed. 1202];
Baldwin v.  Baldwin, 28 Cal.2d 406 [170 P.2d 670]; DeYoung v. DeYoung, 27 Cal.2d
521 [165 P.2d 457]; Murphy v. Travelers Ins. Co., 92 Cal.App.2d 582 [207 P.2d
595]; Lowe Corp. v.  Rasmusson, 53 Cal.App.2d 490 [127 P.2d 1002]; 2 Nelson,
Divorce and Annulment (2d ed.) 499; Keenan, On Residence and Domicil, 457.  Such
authorities in general terms uphold certain statements of appellant made in his
attempt to overcome the findings of fact and to discredit the adjudication of
his bad faith.  But under a cold analysis, it is clear that they are
inapplicable to the findings or to the evidence in the record.

     The good faith of a spouse who migrates to a sister state for the purpose
of obtaining a divorce is a question of fact and he who asserts the invalidity
of a decree thus gained has the burden of proof.  Respondent accepted the burden
and produced a generous quantity of evidence in support of her contention.
Appellant was born in Los Angeles County.  He was reared and educated there, and
there resided, voted, married, established a home, and became the father of two
children.  His only bank account prior to his sudden flight to Nevada was
maintained in Pasadena and his only income was from a trust administered in the
city of Los Angeles.  He told neither his wife, nor his mother nor his children
of an intention to live in Nevada.  In fact, he told no one but a crony in cups
of his plan.  He departed with a few personal effects, leaving his utility
accounts and his safety deposit box in his own name.  On his arrival in Reno he
telephoned his wife he disliked the cold and would remain but a short time, and
caused his attorney in that city to notify respondent that he was in the divorce
capital because of marital difficulties.

   But appellant was not alone or lonely in the new place.  He was there
attended by one "Lucille" who was bent upon a kindred mission.  She resided with
appellant in the same apartment, used the same attorney to get a divorce that
represented her consort in his far-flung venture, and he supplied her with
clothes and otherwise maintained her.   But evidently aiming to make a record of
events that would establish his good faith residence, before leaving he resigned
from the Pasadena golf club where he never played; at increased expense he
changed his membership in the California Club of Los Angeles to "non-resident"
status.  In Reno he procured a chauffeur's license; registered his automobile,
paid a personal property tax in the amount of $ 8.90 and a poll tax in the sum
of $ 3.00.  He registered as a voter but never exercised his right of franchise,
leased an apartment at $ 85 per month and opened a bank account with $ 200 but
never drew a check.  He did tell some of his witnesses in Reno he was  to make
Reno his permanent home. He established no business or place to transact his
affairs but received his mail at the office of his Reno attorney.  Such facts
and others to be mentioned are sufficient to warrant the finding that
appellant's claim of having "established a new residence for himself in the
State of Nevada after December 15,  1951, is sham and fictitious . . . said
Nevada residence . . . being merely colorable and designed to invoke the
jurisdiction of the Nevada courts . . . was simulated or pretended and for the
purpose of obtaining a divorce, and . . . with the intention to leave Nevada
when he accomplished such purpose.  No bona fide domicile was established in
Nevada by either of the spouses."

   Under the findings, then, appellant was still a domiciliary of California at
the time he commenced his action for divorce in Nevada.  His activities
ostensibly designed to establish the good faith of his residence were not
conducted with a sincere intent; also, the circumstances under which they were
performed are such as to warrant the finding that they were dishonestly designed
to identify appellant with Nevada and, therefore, are not sufficient to effect a
change of domicile. ( Civ. Code, §§ 150, 150.1, 150.2.) *

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*   Civil
Code:

    Section 150.  This article may be cited as the Uniform Divorce Recognition
Act.

   Section 150.1.  A divorce obtained in another jurisdiction shall be of no
force or effect in this State, if both parties to the marriage were domiciled in
this State at the time the proceeding for the divorce was commenced.

   Section 150.2.  Proof that a person hereafter obtaining a divorce from the
bonds of matrimony in another jurisdiction was (a) domiciled in this State
within twelve months prior to the commencement of the proceeding therefor, and
resumed residence in this State within eighteen months after the date of his
departure therefrom, or (b) at all times after his departure from this State and
until his return maintained a place of residence within this State, shall be
prima facie evidence that the person was domiciled in this State when the
divorce proceeding was commenced.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    It is equally established by the record that respondent was domiciled in
California at the time the Nevada action was commenced and continues to be so
and did not participate therein or file a personal appearance.

     From the language of the cited code sections it is evident that the
Legislature conceived that when a divorce decree is certified from Nevada, the
full faith and credit clause is not necessarily applicable until a compliance
with the requirement of due process has been shown.  However, inasmuch as
appellant bases his claim to a reversal primarily upon the ground that full
faith and credit was not extended to his Nevada  decree, exploration of that
topic is indispensable to a complete disposition of this appeal.

     A defendant in a Nevada divorce action is at liberty to attack collaterally
the decree so long as he did not participate in the case or make a personal
appearance. ( Estin v. Estin, 334 U.S. 541, 549 [68 S.Ct. 1213, 92 L.Ed. 1561,
1568, 1 A.L.R.2d 1412].) But if he did participate in the Nevada action or if he
was personally served, the defendant is inhibited from making a collateral
attack upon the decree. ( Coe v. Coe, 334 U.S. 378,  384 [68 S.Ct. 1094, 1097,
92 L.Ed. 1451, 1459, 1 A.L.R.2d 1376]; Sherrer v. Sherrer, 334 U.S. 343, 351 [68
S.Ct. 1087, 1097, 92 L.Ed. 1429, 1436, 1 A.L.R.2d 1355]; Johnson v. Muelberger,
340 U.S. 581 [71 S.Ct. 474, 95 L.Ed. 552, 556].) The case of Sherrer suffered a
unique fate.  Even though both parties participated in the Florida action, the
Massachusetts court held it was not entitled to full faith and credit because
neither party had established a Florida domicile. But it is not pertinent to a
consideration of the attack upon the judgment obtained by appellant in Nevada.
Not only did respondent not visit Nevada during the pendency of the action
there, but she did not make a legal appearance in the case.  She is therefore
not barred from attacking appellant's decree. Appellant has industriously
attempted to support the validity of his Nevada judgment by citing certain
decisions that rejected attacks upon foreign divorce decrees. The leading
authority invoked in his support is Baldwin v.  Baldwin, 28 Cal.2d 406 [170 P.2d
670]. That decision did, in truth, reject the attack upon the Nevada decree for
the reason that the trial court determined as a fact that Mr. Baldwin did
sincerely intend to remain in Nevada.  That finding was the very backbone of the
judgment and protected it from a collateral attack. He had waited three and a
half months to file action after his arrival in that state.  This appellant's
hesitation after his six weeks had expired did nothing to increase the glamour
of his good faith in the matter of establishing his long residence.   The law is
established that the bona fides of the galloping litigant in search of a forum
wherein to seek a divorce is a question of fact. ( Marshall v. Marshall, 69
Cal.App.2d 20, 23 [157 P.2d 854].) That fact herein was found adversely to
appellant.  Also, appellant cites Gildersleeve v. Gildersleeve, 88 Conn. 689 [92
A. 684, 686, Ann.Cas. 1916B 920]; Colburn v. Colburn, 70 Mich. 647 [38 N.W. 607,
608]. Both decisions held nothing more than that the good faith of an actual
change of residence to another state, with  the intention of remaining there was
not affected by the migrant's motive to procure a divorce. Moreover, appellant
quotes at length from 2 Nelson, Divorce and Annulment, supra, and Keenan's On
Residence and Domicile .  The substance quoted merely declares  fundamental
principles inapplicable where the mala fides has been determined by the trial
court.

     On the contrary, the holdings are legion that the foreign decree is not
entitled to full faith and credit where a spouse has taken pro forma steps to
leave the domicile of his lifetime, ascertains the names of lawyers in the new
jurisdiction that might best serve him ( Hall v. Hall, 199 Miss. 478 [24 So.2d
347, 349]); or becomes infatuated with another woman, resigns from lodge
affiliations and applies in the new state for a position as teacher ( Cox v. Cox
, 137 N.J.Eq. 241 [44 A.2d 92, 96]); or where a husband's conduct indicated that
he had gone to Florida for the sole purpose of obtaining a divorce ( White v.
White, 150 F.2d 157, 158; Evans v. Evans, 149 F.2d 831]; or where the defendant
had gone to the new state and secured a divorce in violation of a temporary
injunction issued in the home state, like appellant herein, told no one on his
departure of his intention to establish a domicile beyond the borders of his
domiciliary state ( Streitwolf v. Streitwolf, 181 U.S. 179, 183 [21 S.Ct.  553,
45 L.Ed. 807, 810]); or where the defendant leaves his home in New Jersey where
his wife's action for divorce is pending and in Florida alleges only acts that
had occurred in the state of his matrimonial domicile ( Mascola v. Mascola, 134
N.J.Eq. 48 [33 A.2d 864, 866]).

   In Roberts v. Roberts, 81 Cal.App.2d 871 [185 P.2d 381], although the wife
had, while under the dominance and direction of her husband, gone to Reno where
she employed the attorney specified by him and was duly granted a collusive
decree of divorce, it was held (1) to be the duty of California courts to forbid
interference with the status of its own citizens and to prevent the dissolution
of a marriage by the decree of a court of a sister state that had no
jurisdiction; (2) "this state is a party to every marriage contract of its own
residents as well as the guardian of their morals"; and (3) a divorce granted by
a Nevada court "without first having pursuant to its own laws acquired
jurisdiction over one of the parties is a void decree." That decision is a
variant from Heuer v. Heuer, 33 Cal.2d 268 [201 P.2d 385], in which the Nevada
decree was given full faith and credit because the wife had freely and of her
own accord actively participated in the Nevada proceedings.   In Marshall v.
Marshall, supra, the husband had gone to Nevada while a divorce action was
pending in California.  His conduct before and after arriving in Nevada proved
to be contrary to that of a bona fide resident.  Because his residence was
attempted in bad faith, his Nevada decree was nullified.  Such are the morals
and the law that the courts of this state will continue to reject a foreign
divorce decree "in any case where it is apparent that the tourist plaintiff
cocked one eye askance at the examining justice while solemnly swearing
intention to remain permanently in the divorce forum state and with the other
eye anxiously watched the courtroom clock in nervous concern about catching the
afternoon train 'back home.'" (Justice Sicher in Standish v. Standish, 179 Misc.
564 [40 N.Y.S.2d 538, 546].)

   In addition to the vices of the Nevada decree discussed above, appellant must
be reminded that not only did he know that he was restrained from proceeding
with his action in the district court of Nevada, but also, in the course of the
proceedings before that court an affidavit was read into the record to the
effect that Mr. Huntington had been restrained from proceeding with the action.

   Attorneys' Fees

     At the hearing on the order to show cause, the court ordered appellant to
pay counsel for respondent $ 6,000 "on account in connection with legal services
heretofore rendered and now contemplated to be rendered by said attorneys, and
the sum of Fifteen Hundred Dollars ($ 1,500.00) for court costs, the employment
of Nevada counsel, investigators, and the like, and in connection with all costs
incurred to date by virtue of operations in this case connected with the State
of Nevada." The order then proceeds to provide for the installment payment of
such sums which was subsequently modified by reducing the monthly payments from
$ 500 to $ 350.

    Appellant now contends that the court intended by its order to provide that
$ 6,000 should be the total attorney's fee to be paid for work to be done in the
future ("now contemplated") as well as for "services heretofore rendered." He
argues that not only was no proof made of the extent of such legal services, but
no request was even made at the trial by respondent's lawyers for additional
fees.  Such contention is directly contrary to the holding in Hellman v. Hellman
, 108 Cal.App.2d 588 [239 P.2d 458]. The order made a year prior to judgment and
before the defendant had answered directed the latter to "pay the plaintiff's
attorney forthwith the sum of  $ 200 on account of counsel fees." It was held
that by such order the court granted the plaintiff's application in part and
"reserved for later determination the question whether a larger sum should be
awarded." Pursuant to the reservation, the court after trial awarded payment of
$ 200 in addition to any sum theretofore paid.  Such holding was in accord with
DeVall v. DeVall, 102 Cal.App.2d 53, 58 [226 P.2d 605], where the court at the
hearing of the order to show cause directed Mr. DeVall to pay his wife $ 200 on
account of attorney's fees . . . balance, if any, pursuant to determination at
the time of trial." In Nelson v. Nelson, 100 Cal.App.2d 348 [223 P.2d 636], the
trial court reserved ruling on plaintiff's motion for "additional attorney's
fees." When the trial was finished the court found as a fact that the sum of $
100 was a reasonable sum to be awarded for additional attorney's fees.  From the
cited decisions and others and from the general practice of courts in actions
where counsel fees of one party are to be paid by the other, it is customary
with trial courts frequently to defer the act of determining the full amount to
be paid, but to reserve such decision for the court to make after observing the
amount of service performed before appraising its value.  After the court has by
implication allowed partial payment on account and thereby reserved jurisdiction
to determine the entire amount at the conclusion of the trial, the court does
not thereby lose jurisdiction to make such determination (See Civ. Code, § 137.)
The phrase "on account" could have no other reasonable meaning than that the
allowance of $ 6,000 would be supplemented if the services actually rendered
should justify a further award.

   Alimony

     The court fixed $ 1,000 per month as alimony for respondent and $ 600 per
month for support of the two boys, an annual total of $ 19,200 out of his gross
income of about $ 50,000.  Inasmuch as the trial court is vested with wide
discretion in making such orders, in view of the evidence appertaining thereto,
it cannot be said that the award is grossly excessive.  Appellant admitted that
$ 1,250 per month would be a fair allowance. While his annual income is around $
50,000, aside from the instant judgment he has no serious outlay to reduce it
save that of federal taxes and from the testimony of his tax expert "if no
alimony were paid he would have to pay to the government federal income tax of $
23,318.  If he paid alimony of $ 17,400 per year, his federal income tax would
be only $ 11,385.50, in other words, almost half."  Based on an income of $
50,000 and no deductions, appellant would have to pay about $ 25,000 for federal
income taxes.  But in the situation presented, after $ 12,000 is deducted for
alimony payments, the federal income tax payable on $ 38,000 would be about $
17,000, leaving him about $ 21,000.  After a payment of $ 7,200 for the support
of his sons, he has $ 13,800 for his personal living expenses under the present
judgment.

   Out of her $ 12,000 paid under the judgment, respondent will have to pay
about $ 3,000 federal income tax. It appears that the family group now has a
total of $ 30,000 for its support compared with $ 25,000 prior to the divorce,
and that appellant now has for himself alone more than half of his old income
which supported the entire family.

   Miscellaneous Assignments of Error

     Appellant complains that the court had no jurisdiction to split his
separate income or to divide his property; or to impose a lien on his income.
He says because his trust is administered in Los Angeles County where "all
manner of writs of enforcement  are available to plaintiff, the administration
of the trust is unnecessarily interfered with by the alleged lien." The answer
to such complaints is that only by the imposition of a lien upon his separate
estate to secure the enforcement of the judgment can there be economic security
for the wife and children.  Were appellant's estate not under the lien imposed
by the court, it might be alienated by assignment or attachment.

     The right of appellant to visit his children is not "unnecessarily
interfered with." After hearing all the evidence of appellant's misconduct, and
having had opportunity fairly to appraise respondent's character, it cannot be
said that the court abused its discretion in requiring one day's notice in
advance of his calling to see the children.

   Complaint is made of "numerous errors in the admission of evidence." Such
errors are not set out in a brief but only references to the reporter's
transcript are provided.  From his manner of suggesting some 28 errors, it must
be assumed that none of them is prejudicial.

   Judgment affirmed.


                              46 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             RITCHIE CALHOUN, Appellant, v. SAMUEL WILSON CALHOUN,
                                   Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 3376

            Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District

          70 Cal. App. 2d 233; 160 P.2d 923; 1945 Cal. App. LEXIS 1063


                                 July 19, 1945

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied August 11, 1945,
and Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court was Denied September
13, 1945.  Carter, J., and Traynor, J., Voted for a Hearing.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of San Diego
County.  Robert B. Burch, Judge.

   Action for separate maintenance.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Foreign Divorces--Bona Fides of Residence.  --In an action for
separate maintenance, a Nevada decree awarding the husband a divorce could not
be successfully attacked for fraud of the husband in leaving the State of
California for the sole purpose of obtaining a divorce, where a finding that he
had established a bona fide residence in Nevada and had become a resident and
citizen of that state was sustained by evidence that he established a residence
in that state, became a registered voter thereof, remarried there and has since
had no other home.

(2) Id.--Foreign Divorces--Collateral Attack.  --In an action for separate
maintenance, a Nevada decree awarding the husband a divorce may not be
successfully attacked for fraud on the part of the husband in failing to
disclose to the Nevada court that a prior California decree had denied him a
divorce on the ground that the separation of the parties was caused by the sole
fault of the husband, where under the Nevada statute the fact of the husband's
marital misconduct causing the separation was not a bar to the decree but merely
a circumstance for the divorce court to consider in its discretion.

(3) Id.--Separate Maintenance--Defenses--Nonexistence of Marital Relation.
--Where a Nevada decree awarding the husband a divorce is entitled to full faith
and credit, a California court has no power to award the wife support money,
since the power to award support grows out of the marital relation, and where
that relation has been dissolved by a divorce decree the wife cannot enforce
against her former husband an obligation not imposed by the court at the time of
the judgment.

COUNSEL: Clarence Harden and Henry F. Walker for Appellant.

Monroe & McInnis for Respondent.

JUDGES: Marks, J.  Barnard, P. J., concurred.

OPINION BY: MARKS

OPINION

     This is an appeal from a judgment which divided the community property of
the parties, but failed to require defendant to contribute anything to the
support of plaintiff.  Plaintiff raises no question as to the division of the
community property but argues that the trial court erred in refusing to require
defendant to contribute to her support.

   The parties were married in Oakland, California, on May 24, 1923, and lived
together as husband and wife until November, 1939, when they separated.  On
January 3, 1941, Mr. Calhoun brought an action for divorce in the Superior Court
of San Diego County alleging wilful desertion by Mrs. Calhoun.  She appeared and
successfully contested that action.  The trial court found that Calhoun had
deserted and abandoned Mrs. Calhoun without cause or excuse and against her will
and without her consent.  The decree denying the divorce was entered on November
13, 1941.

   In February, 1943, probably about the 6th, Calhoun left California and went
to Nevada.  He filed an action for divorce there about March 21, 1943.  Mrs.
Calhoun was served with the summons and complaint in California.  She did not
appear in the action and Calhoun was granted a decree of divorce on April 27,
1943.

   The divorce was granted under the provisions of section  9467.06, Nevada
Statutes, which provides in effect that where a husband and wife had lived
separate and apart for three consecutive years without cohabitation the court
may grant an absolute decree of divorce in the suit of either party.  This was
an amendment of a prior statute which required five consecutive years of
separation without cohabitation. (Nevada Stats. 1931, p. 180, ch. 111, § 1.)

    The complaint in the instant action attacked the validity of the Nevada
divorce on the ground of fraud on the part of Calhoun in (1) leaving the State
of California and going to Nevada for the sole purpose of obtaining a divorce,
and, (2) in failing to disclose to the Nevada court that the California decree
had denied him a divorce on the ground that the separation of the parties was
caused by the sole fault of the husband.  In this connection it is argued in
effect that the three years of separation without cohabitation required by the
Nevada statute started to run on March 21, 1940; that the California decree
denying Calhoun a divorce was rendered November 13, 1941, so that three years
following that date had not elapsed between that date and the filing of the
Nevada action about March 21, 1943, which should defeat Calhoun's action in
Nevada.

     The first contention is fully answered by the evidence introduced in the
instant case and the findings of the trial court.  Calhoun moved to Nevada about
February 6, 1943, established a residence there and has continued to reside
there ever since.  He became a registered voter of Nevada, remarried there and
has had no other home.  He came to California temporarily to attend to business
affairs in the city of Coronado and was served with summons and complaint in the
instant action while on that trip.  The trial court found that he had
established a bona fide residence in Nevada and had become a resident and
citizen of that state.  Upon the evidence no other conclusion could have been
reached.

     The second argument is answered in the case of Herrick v. Herrick, 55 Nev.
59 [25 P.2d 378], where three decrees or orders of California courts were
pleaded by the wife as a bar to the husband's action for divorce filed in
Nevada.  The Supreme Court of Nevada said:

   "The statute is very plain.  It does not in terms require that a party should
be without fault, and we do not think that such limitation may be inferred from
it. . . .

    "The idea of a divorce on the ground stated is an idea of recent origin.
The legislative concept embodied in the statute is that when the conduct of
parties in living apart over a long lapse of time without cohabitation has made
it probable that they cannot live together in happiness, the best interest of
the parties and of the state will be promoted by a divorce. . . .

   "We are satisfied that the fault of one or both of the parties which may have
caused the separation is merely a circumstance for the trial court to consider
in the exercise of its discretion.  It is unnecessary for us to determine if in
any of the California decrees the husband is adjudged to have been to blame in
causing the separation, and therefore estopped to maintain the suit for divorce
as contended by appellant.  This contention is disposed of by our ruling that it
is not an essential element of the statute that a party be without fault to
maintain an action for divorce on the ground of separation for five years
without cohabitation.

   "Appellant's contention that the decree of divorce in this case impairs the
obligation of contract evidenced by the California decree of separate
maintenance is devoid of merit.  The dissolution of the marriage relation
extinguishes the subject matter which forms the basis of an action or proceeding
for separate maintenance. Bushnell v. Cooper, 289 Ill. 260, 124 N.E. 521, 6
A.L.R. 1517; 30 C.J. 1075." (See, also, Jeffers v. Jeffers, 55 Nev. 201 [29 P.2d
351]; George v. George, 56 Nev. 12 [41 P.2d 1059, 97 A.L.R. 983].)

   It is admitted that we must give full faith and credit to the divorce decree
of a sister state obtained in accordance with the laws and practice of that
state and obtained without fraud if the prevailing party was a bona fide citizen
of the sister state and the resident of this state had been served with process
or had appeared in the action in the other state.  ( Williams v. North Carolina,
317 U.S. 287 [63 S.Ct. 207, 87 L.Ed. 279, 143 A.L.R. 1273].)  It is argued that
giving full faith and credit to the Nevada divorce decree does not prohibit the
California courts from awarding Mrs. Calhoun support money as the Nevada court
only granted a divorce and did not attempt to pass on the question of the
support of the wife; that the California courts may give a wife support
independent of statute, under their powers in equity, citing Galland v. Galland,
38 Cal. 265; Murray v. Murray, 115 Cal. 266, 270 [47 P. 37, 56 Am.St.Rep. 97, 37
L.R.A. 626];  Livingston v. Superior Court, 117 Cal. 633 [49 P. 836, 38 L.R.A.
175].

    The answer to this argument lies in the fact that the power to award support
grows out of the marital relation. As said in Howell v. Howell, 104 Cal. 45 [37
P. 770, 43 Am.St.Rep. 70]: "After the judgment granting the divorce the
plaintiff was no longer the wife of the defendant; and he owed her no longer any
marital duty.  From that time she could enforce against him no obligation not
imposed by the court at the time of the judgment." (See Hite v. Hite, 124 Cal.
389 [67 P. 227, 71 Am.St.Rep. 82, 45 L.R.A. 793]; Bancroft v. Bancroft, 9
Cal.App.2d 464 [50 P.2d 465].) As Mrs. Calhoun was not the wife of defendant at
the time she instituted this action against him we can find no error in the
trial court's refusal to require him to support her.

   We believe the case of Cardinale v. Cardinale, 8 Cal.2d 762 [68 P.2d 351], is
decisive of the questions presented here.  Sabina Cardinale and Mario Cardinale
were married in San Francisco in 1910 and lived together until July, 1921,
having one child.  The plaintiff wife commenced an action for separate
maintenance in the Superior Court of San Diego County.  The defendant husband
cross-complained asking a divorce on the grounds of desertion and extreme
cruelty. After a trial the court denied the husband a divorce, gave the custody
of the child to the mother and ordered the husband to pay $ 40 per month for the
support of the child and a like amount for the support of the wife.  The child
died in December, 1924, and the husband discontinued the payments for its
support but continued to pay support to the wife until some time in 1931.

   The husband went to Nevada in the fall of 1931 and on December 9, 1931,
procured a decree of divorce on the grounds of extreme cruelty and separation
for more than five consecutive years without cohabitation. As stated by the
Supreme Court:

   "On June 18, 1932, in San Diego County, in the separate maintenance action,
the wife, without notice to the husband, procured a judgment against him for $
998, the alleged amount of arrears in monthly payments due her under the
separate maintenance decree. In October, 1932, the husband moved the court to
set aside this judgment for arrears and to modify the decree of separate
maintenance and to decree that payments  for the child terminated as of her
death, and payments for the wife's support terminated as of the date of the
Nevada divorce, December 9, 1931. . . .

   "The trial court, having found no invalidity in the Nevada divorce decree,
properly terminated the allowance to appellant of separate maintenance as of the
date that decree was rendered.  (1 Cal.Jur., p.  1038, sec. 88; 30 C.J. 1095.)"

   The judgment is affirmed.


                              47 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              RETA FAE KNOX, Appellant, v. ALBERT H. KNOX et al.,
                                  Respondents

                                 Civ. No. 16040

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division One

          88 Cal. App. 2d 666; 199 P.2d 766; 1948 Cal. App. LEXIS 1518


                               November 19, 1948

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  Geo. A. Dockweiler, Judge.

   Action for separate maintenance wherein transferees of property in which
plaintiff claimed a community interest were joined as parties defendant.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1a) (1b) Appearance -- By Attorney -- Authority of Attorney to Appear.  --A
Nevada attorney had authority to enter an appearance in a divorce action in that
state against his client residing in Florida, where such an appearance was
provided for in a property settlement agreement prepared by the client's
attorneys in Florida and executed by the parties, and where she forwarded the
filing fee for the making of such appearance.

(2) Divorce--Temporary Alimony, Counsel Fees and Costs--Jurisdiction.  --In an
action for divorce or separate maintenance, the power of the court to award
support, attorney's fees and suit money pendente lite grows out of the marital
relation, and such power does not exist if a previous divorce obtained in
another state is valid.

(3) Id.--Foreign Divorces--Collateral Attack.  --A wife who was sued for divorce
in another state while residing in a third state, and retained an attorney who
entered a general appearance in such divorce proceedings, represented her in
court, and filed an answer contesting the jurisdiction of the court on the
ground of plaintiff's nonresidence, may not, in an action for separate
maintenance brought by her in the courts of this state, collaterally attack, on
the same ground of plaintiff's nonresidence, a final divorce decree rendered in
such foreign proceedings which is not subject to such collateral attack where
rendered, since such attack would violate the full faith and credit requirement.

COUNSEL: Cook & Johnson and Siley J. Shannon for Appellant.

Sherman & Sherman, Glenn M. Still and Chas. R. Thompson for Respondents.

JUDGES: White, J.  York, P. J., and Doran, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: WHITE

OPINION

     This is an appeal from a judgment dismissing an order to show cause
directed to defendant Albert H. Knox.

   The foregoing order to show cause commanded said defendant to appear before
the court to show cause why he should not be required to pay plaintiff
reasonable sums for attorney's fees, court costs and for the support and
maintenance of said plaintiff and the minor children of the parties during the
pendency of an action for separate maintenance instituted by plaintiff against
the aforesaid defendant.  The defendants,  Mary Leggett, Frank Payne, and Elton
Cherry were joined as parties defendant in the action upon the ground that
certain properties of plaintiff and defendant Albert H. Knox, in which the
former claims a community interest, were transferred to such other defendants.

    By her action for separate maintenance, plaintiff sought to declare null and
void a decree of divorce granted her husband, defendant Albert H. Knox, by the
Second Judicial District Court of the State of Nevada, in and for the county of
Washoe, on May 3, 1944, on the ground that neither of said parties to said
action were bona fide residents of the State of Nevada  at any time prior to the
granting of said decree, and to rescind a property settlement agreement entered
into during the pendency of the Nevada action, and approved by the Nevada court
in said action.  The rescission was grounded on the claim of fraud in the
alleged concealment of assets by defendant husband.

   The factual situation revealed by the record shows that plaintiff herein and
her husband, defendant Albert H. Knox, were married in Pennsylvania on July 2,
1923.  They separated in 1935, since which date they have not lived together as
husband and wife.  They have two daughters, one now over 21 years of age, and
the other approximately 17 years of age.

   In 1938, while Mrs. Knox was living in Florida and Mr. Knox in California,
they attempted, without success, to work out a property settlement agreement. In
those negotiations plaintiff Mrs. Knox was represented by Attorney Maguire of
the firm of Maguire and Voorhis of Orlando, Florida, and the husband was
represented by the law firm of Sherman and Sherman of Los Angeles, California.
By agreement between the parties at that time, defendant husband paid the fees
of the Florida attorneys for Mrs. Knox, but it appears that it was definitely
understood between the parties that the attorneys represented Mrs. Knox and that
their obligation was strictly to her.  When the foregoing negotiations for a
property settlement agreement proved futile they were abandoned.

   On March 7, 1944, defendant herein, Mr. Knox, filed suit in the aforesaid
Nevada court against Mrs. Knox for divorce. Summons was issued on the complaint
and Mrs. Knox was personally served with the complaint and summons at Orlando,
Florida, on March 14, 1944.

   By his complaint for divorce in the Nevada court,  Mr. Knox alleged that he
was, and for more than six weeks preceding the filing of said complaint had been
a bona fide resident of and domiciled in the county of Washoe, State of Nevada,
during all of which time he had been actually present and domiciled in the city
of Reno, Nevada.  After alleging the date and place of his marriage and the
issue thereof, the  existence of certain real and personal property, some of
which was allegedly his separate property and some of which was community
property, and his willingness to pay a reasonable sum for the support and
maintenance of Mrs. Knox and the minor children, the complaint alleged that the
parties "have lived separate and apart, without cohabitation, for three
consecutive years immediately preceding the commencement of this action."

   Upon being served with process, Mrs. Knox engaged the law firm of Maguire,
Voorhis and Wells, and Attorney Maguire of that firm, who had previously
represented Mrs. Knox, undertook to again represent her.

   At the hearing on the order to show cause, now engaging our attention, the
attorney representing Mrs. Knox stated, "that through said attorneys (Maguire,
Voorhis and Wells) she secured an attorney by name of L. D. Summerfield, a
resident of Reno, Washoe County, Nevada, to act for her in connection with said
proceedings and to effect a property settlement."

   Defendant Knox herein, was represented in the Nevada action by the law firm
of Thatcher and Woodburn of Reno, Nevada, and plaintiff herein, Mrs. Knox, was
represented by Attorney L. D. Summerfield of the same place.

   Following commencement of the Nevada divorce proceeding by Mr. Knox,
considerable negotiations ensued concerning the execution of a property
settlement agreement between the respective parties.  Certain demands were made
by Mrs. Knox through her Florida and Nevada attorneys.  When these demands were
finally acceded to a property settlement agreement was arrived at and signed.
The agreement was drafted and prepared by the Florida attorneys for Mrs. Knox.
It provided for the distribution of certain property and for the payment by Mr.
Knox to Mrs. Knox of the sum of $ 5,000 in cash and the further sum of $ 150 per
month.  That Mr. Knox would pay for the education of the two minor daughters,
and in addition, would give to each the monthly sum of $ 25 for spending money.
It was also provided that Mrs. Knox be made the irrevocable beneficiary under a
policy of insurance in  a fraternal society, and that the two daughters be named
as the irrevocable beneficiaries in a policy of insurance issued by the New York
Life Insurance Company in the sum of $ 5,000.  The agreement also provided that
Mr. Knox would be obligated to pay the premiums on such policies.

    The existence of the Nevada divorce action then pending against Mrs. Knox
was recognized in the property settlement agreement, in connection with which
the agreement provided:

   "This agreement is made for the purpose of settling the respective property
rights of the parties hereto and of removing the subject matter thereof from the
field of litigation.

   "The Wife shall forthwith cause an appearance to be entered in the aforesaid
pending action in Nevada through Nevada counsel of her own selection.  The
Husband shall pay attorneys' fees for the Wife in the maximum sum of $ 750.00,
which sum shall include any and all legal expenses which the Wife may have
incurred in Nevada, Florida, or elsewhere in connection with the preparation of
this agreement and all negotiations prior thereto and for the trial of the
pending Nevada divorce action.

   "This agreement shall not be construed by anyone as a consent of either of
the parties hereto to their separation nor as a condonation by either of any
conduct of the other nor as waiver by either of any right or cause of action or
defense arising by reason of the conduct of the other.  It is nevertheless
understood that divorce proceedings have been instituted by the Husband against
the Wife in the Second Judicial District Court of Nevada, in and for the County
of Washoe, and that this agreement is executed for the purpose of effecting a
settlement of the respective property rights of the parties hereto in the event
a divorce should be decreed.  It is of the essence of this agreement that the
settlement herein provided for shall not become operative in any manner nor
shall any of the Recitals herein become binding upon either party unless a
decree of divorce between the parties shall be entered in the pending Nevada
action.  The settlement herein provided shall become immediately effective and
operative in the event of and upon the entry of a decree of divorce between said
parties in said pending Nevada action." (Emphasis added.)

   The record reflects the fact that after the filing of the Nevada divorce
action by Mr. Knox and prior to the time the same was at issue, there was
considerable correspondence between the Florida and Nevada attorneys for Mrs.
Knox relative to the legal status of the latter and what would be her position
if she appeared in the action and denied her husband's allegation of domicile
contained in his complaint, or what would be her legal status should she permit
her default to be taken in the Nevada divorce action. The Florida attorneys for
Mrs. Knox had advised her Nevada attorney that  she denied that her husband was
a bona fide resident or domiciled in Washoe County, Nevada, as alleged in
paragraph 1 of his divorce complaint.  Her Florida attorneys sent to her Nevada
attorney the sum of $ 10, "with the thought in mind that, if necessary, and if
it seems appropriate in the light of all the facts outlined at the time, an
answer can be filed in Mrs. Knox's behalf."

   The extent of the discussion by correspondence is reflected in the affidavit
of Glenn M. Still, one of the attorneys for Mr. Knox, from which it appears that
on March 15, 1944, Attorney Maguire, one of Mrs. Knox's attorneys, wrote to her
Nevada attorney advising that "Mrs. Knox denies the bona fide residence of Mr.
Knox in Washoe County, Nevada, as alleged in paragraph 1" of his divorce
complaint.

   On March 24, 1944, the Florida attorney for Mrs. Knox wrote her Nevada
attorney as follows:

   "For the time being we do not wish to weigh the question of a possible
contest of the jurisdiction of the Nevada Court.  We will, in the next few days,
write you further with respect to that.  Should research justify the conclusion
it may be that Mrs. Knox will want to contest jurisdiction, present all the
facts, and if necessary appeal the case to the Supreme Court of the United
States.  That is a matter to be determined and one about which we will endeavor
to write you not later than March 31st, earlier if possible."

    On March 25, 1944, Mrs. Knox herself wrote a letter to her Nevada attorney
referring to the letter of her Florida attorney just quoted, and giving to her
Nevada attorney various facts and data pertaining to the marital status and
background of the parties hereto.

   On March 27, 1944, the Nevada attorney for Mrs. Knox wrote a letter to her
Florida attorneys reading in part as follows:

   "Before entering any appearance on behalf of Mrs. Knox and submitting her to
the jurisdiction of the Nevada court there are several items to be considered:

   "1. You appreciate that if Mrs. Knox submits to the jurisdiction of the
Nevada court and litigates jurisdiction and other items, she will be bound by
any decree rendered and that decree will be entitled to recognition under the
full faith and credit clause of the United States Constitution (see Davis v.
Davis, 305 U.S. 32; 59 S.Ct. 3; [83 L.Ed. 26]; 118 A.L.R. 1518).

    "2. Mrs. Knox has the option of allowing the matter to go to a default
decree and later making a collateral attack on the decree. (See Williams v.
North Carolina, 317 U.S. 287 [63 S.Ct. 207, 87 L.Ed. 279, 143 A.L.R. 1273].)"

   Then follows a lengthy discussion of the Williams case above mentioned, and
as to the rights of a nonresident defendant who does not submit to the
jurisdiction of the Nevada court, and permits the divorce decree to be obtained
by default, to collaterally attack such decree in the domicile of such
nonresident defendant.

   Mrs. Knox's Florida attorney replied to this letter under date of March 31,
1944, discussing the contents thereof.  It was with this letter that the check
for $ 10 was forwarded to cover fee for filing an answer "if it seems
appropriate . . . ." Also attached to the letter was a lengthy memorandum
containing the views of the Florida attorney for Mrs. Knox on the question of
jurisdiction and as to what, in the opinion of the writer, would be the position
of Mrs. Knox if she did file an answer and if she did not do so.  A copy of this
letter was mailed to Mrs. Knox.

   On May 31, 1944, Attorney Summerfield of Reno, Nevada, wrote to the Florida
attorneys for Mrs. Knox concerning the property settlement agreement, in part as
follows:

   "I am pleased to report that Mr. Knox and his counsel finally acceded to
everything you asked for.  The agreement was executed as you drew it, and Mr.
Knox also signed the deed which you have marked 'A' and which you so much
desired to secure." (Emphasis added.)

   Following the signing of the property settlement agreement by Mr. and Mrs.
Knox, the attorney for the latter, pursuant to the terms of the aforesaid
property settlement agreement that "the wife shall forthwith cause an appearance
to be entered in the aforesaid pending action in Nevada through Nevada counsel
of her own selection," filed her answer in the Nevada divorce action.

   By her answer Mrs. Knox admitted all of the allegations hereinbefore set
forth in the complaint filed by her husband, save and except the allegation
therein contained that he was a bona fide resident of and domiciled in the
county of Washoe, State of Nevada, which averment she denied.

   Service of the answer was admitted and verification thereof was waived on May
3, 1944, by the attorneys for Mr. Knox.

     We pause here to give consideration to appellant's contention that her
Nevada attorney was without authority  to enter an appearance for her in the
Nevada divorce action. This claim is without merit.  Such an appearance was
provided for in the property settlement agreement prepared by her own attorneys
in Florida and hereinabove quoted.  Added to that is the fact that appellant,
wife herein, received the $ 5,000 in cash, the property settlement, and all
payments provided for in the agreement.  Trial of the divorce action in Nevada
was had on the same day the answer of Mrs. Knox was filed.  There is evidence in
the record that her Nevada attorney was personally present in court throughout
the trial, participated therein, and questioned Mr. Knox thereat.  This,
however, is denied by appellant in the  complaint filed by her in the separate
maintenance action now before us.

   Following the trial findings of fact and conclusions of law were made by the
court, wherein it was determined "that plaintiff (Mr. Knox, responded herein) is
now, and for more than six weeks preceding the filing of the complaint in this
action has been a bona fide resident of and domiciled in the County of Washoe,
State of Nevada; that plaintiff, during all of said time has been actually
present and domiciled in the City of Reno, County and State aforesaid."

   Judgment was rendered upon the findings of fact and conclusions of law,
wherein it was decreed that Mr. Knox, plaintiff in said action, be granted "a
decree of absolute divorce herein, forever dissolving the bond of matrimony
existing between plaintiff and defendant," and the foregoing property settlement
agreement received in evidence was approved, adopted, confirmed, and "the
plaintiff and defendant respectively, are hereby ordered to abide thereby and to
perform the obligations thereof."

   No appeal was taken from the Nevada divorce decree and it has become final.

   Mr. Knox thereafter remarried, and according to his affidavit made upon
information and belief, Mrs. Knox has also remarried.

   From May 3, 1944, when the Nevada decree of divorce was granted, Mr. Knox
complied with all the provisions of the property settlement agreement, and Mrs.
Knox received and accepted the fruits thereof until the later part of 1946, when
she came to Los Angeles and instituted the present action against Mr. Knox for
separate maintenance, alleging that the Nevada decree was invalid, and citing
him into court  on an order to show cause why he should not be ordered to pay
her alimony, attorney's fees and costs of suit.

   When said order to show cause came on for hearing, appellant herein (Mrs.
Knox) was called as a witness, whereupon respondent, Mr. Knox, introduced into
evidence exemplified copies of the divorce proceedings in Nevada, consisting of
the complaint, the answer, the findings of fact and conclusions of law and the
judgment and decree of divorce in the case of Albert H. Knox, Plaintiff, v. Reta
Fae Knox, Defendant, together with an exemplified copy of the summons in said
cause and affidavit of service on defendant therein, Reta Fae Knox, showing that
she was served in Orlando, County of Orange, State of Florida, all of which were
received in evidence by the court, and objected to the introduction of any
evidence on said order to show cause and also moved the court to dissolve the
order to show cause upon the main ground, "First, that the judgment of divorce
in the State of Nevada, which is in the record now, is entitled to full faith
and credit under the United States Constitution, Article IV, Sec. 1, I believe,
-- and also under the Act of May 26th, 1790, 1 Stat. at Large, 122, Chapter 11,
as amended revised statutes, and Section 905, 28 U.S.C.A., Section 687, which is
the Federal Congressional Act promulgated under the full faith and credit clause
of the Constitution and that this court must give full faith and credit to the
judgment of divorce in the State of Nevada and the defendant Knox has the
constitutional right to have that judgment of Nevada be given in this court full
faith and credit, which, of course, would mean that it cannot be attacked in
this proceeding."

   At said hearing appellant herein offered to prove, among other things, that
at the time of the filing of the Nevada divorce action and for several years
prior to that date, she was and had been living at Orlando, Florida, with her
two minor daughters, the issue of the marriage, that she resided there at the
request of her husband.  "That she always attempted to maintain the relationship
of husband and wife and to preserve the home, that on numerous occasions she
offered to come to California with him but that he always dissuaded her." Then
followed admission of service upon her of the summons and complaint in the
Nevada divorce action, of her employment of aforesaid attorneys in Florida who
"had previously been employed by Albert H. Knox, as her attorneys  in connection
with an effort to effect a property settlement. And that the property settlement
was never effected." That  through her said attorneys she secured the services
of Attorney Summerfield at Reno, Nevada, "to act for her in connection with said
proceedings and to effect a property settlement. That she was without funds
which fact was known to the attorneys above mentioned and that they were paid
their fees and costs by her husband." Appellant then offered to prove that the
property settlement was finally negotiated and contained the provision that she
should "forthwith cause an appearance to be entered in the aforesaid pending
action in Nevada through Nevada counsel of her own selection." That her husband
should pay her attorney's fees in the maximum sum of $ 750.

   She further offered to prove that she had no independent means of support and
no means whatever to go to the State of Nevada to contest the action.  That
through her attorneys she requested her husband to furnish money for the purpose
of going to Nevada, but that said request was never complied with.  And that
"she was advised by her counsel in Nevada, Mr. Summerfield, by telegram that due
to the fact the pending negotiations had been completed there was no necessity
for her to appear, and that he (her husband) was not going to send any money."
That she never instructed Attorney Summerfield to enter any appearance in the
Nevada action other than as set forth in the aforesaid property settlement
agreement. That she never saw or verified any answer in such cause or instructed
Attorney Summerfield to file any answer, and that she had no knowledge whatever
as to what, if any, issues were raised by any such answer.  That prior to the
institution of the Nevada divorce action her husband had resided and had been
engaged in business in the city of Los Angeles, California, for a number of
years.  That the service of the complaint upon her was the first intimation she
had that he claimed to be a resident of Nevada.  That within a few days after
obtaining the Nevada decree, her husband returned to the city of Los Angeles
where he continued to live and engage in business.  Then follows an offer to
prove by testimony of respondent husband, under section 2055 of the Code of
Civil Procedure, certain facts with reference to his residence and domicile in
California, that he was in business in Los Angeles, that he never disposed of
his business, never registered to vote in Nevada and that within two or three
days after the decree of divorce had been granted in Nevada he returned to Los
Angeles where he has  continued to live up to the time of the institution of
this action.

   When the matter was submitted, the court sustained respondent's objection to
the introduction of any evidence upon the order to show cause, granted
respondent's motion to dismiss the order to show cause and rendered judgment
accordingly.

   By her amended complaint which contained two causes of action, upon which the
challenged order to show cause was issued, appellant herein alleged
substantially the allegations which, as hereinbefore set forth, she offered to
prove at the hearing on the order to show cause.

   Appellant first contends that temporary alimony, suit money and attorneys'
fees may be awarded on an order to show cause in an action by the wife
collaterally attacking a divorce decree obtained in another jurisdiction.

     We entertain no doubt but what under some circumstances, and upon a proper
showing, a wife should not be denied alimony and attorneys' fees to enable her
to prosecute an action to determine the validity and effect of a decree of
divorce obtained in another state.  Nevertheless, it is firmly established in
our law that the power to award support, attorneys' fees and suit money grows
out of the marital relation.  Hence, if the Nevada divorce was valid, appellant
was no longer the wife of respondent Knox and he no longer owed her any marital
duty.  ( Colbert v. Colbert, 28 Cal.2d 276, 279 [169 P.2d 633].) It therefore
became the duty of the court in the instant proceeding, to determine, as a
matter of fact, in the exercise of a sound judicial discretion, whether there
was reasonable probability of appellant herein successfully attacking  the
validity of the Nevada divorce, and whether the instant proceeding was
instituted by appellant wife in good faith.  The question presented to us is
therefore, whether the court, in the light of the circumstances here present,
abused its discretion in refusing to award appellant counsel fees, suit money
and alimony pending a final determination of the controversy.  If the court was
justified in holding that the courts of this state must give full faith and
credit to the Nevada decree, in that it was obtained in accordance with the laws
and practice of that state, was obtained without fraud, and that respondent
husband was a bona fide resident of and domiciled in Nevada, and that appellant
wife was a resident of the State of Florida, had been served with process and
appeared in the  action in Nevada, then the court was justified in holding that
the dissolution of the marriage between the two parties herein extinguished the
subject matter which forms the jurisdictional prerequisite for a court to order
support, costs and counsel fees pendente lite in an action for separate
maintenance.

     We are satisfied that upon the facts and circumstances before the court in
the case at bar no other conclusion could have been arrived at other than the
one reached by the trial court.  It seems clear to us that the trial court was
justified in finding that the Nevada court had jurisdiction of the subject
matter in the sense that it had power to grant or withhold a decree of divorce.
It had jurisdiction over the person of the plaintiff in that action (respondent
Knox herein) in consequence of the complaint which he had filed.  It had
jurisdiction over the defendant in that action (appellant herein) by her
voluntary submission to its jurisdiction by an attorney who, under the facts
present in the instant proceeding, was clearly authorized to appear for her.

   We are persuaded that the cases of Sherrer v. Sherrer, 334 U.S. 343 [68 S.Ct.
1087, 92 L.Ed. 1429], and Coe v. Coe (334 U.S. 378 [68 S.Ct. 1094, 92 L.Ed.
1451]) decided by the U. S. Supreme Court on June 7, 1948, are decisive of the
question with which we are here confronted, which is, whether under the
circumstances presented by this case, the decision rendered in the Nevada
divorce proceeding may, consistent with the requirement of full faith and
credit, be subjected to collateral attack in the courts of this state in an
action for separate maintenance brought by the defendant in the original Nevada
divorce proceedings.  In the Sherrer case, supra, at page     [92 L.Ed.], it was
said:

   ". . . Insofar as cases originating in the federal courts are concerned, the
rule has evolved that the doctrine of res judicata applies to adjudications
relating either to jurisdiction of the person or of the subject matter where
such adjudications have been made in proceedings in which those questions were
in issue and in which the parties were given full opportunity to litigate.  The
reasons for this doctrine have frequently been stated.  Thus in Stoll v.
Gottlieb, 305 U.S. 165, 172, 83 L.Ed. 104, 109, 59 S.Ct. 134, 38 Am.Bankr.N.S.
76 (1938), it was said: 'Courts to determine the rights of parties are an
integral part of our system of government.  It is just as important that there
should be a place to end as that there should be a place to begin  litigation.
After a party has his day in court, with opportunity to present his evidence and
his view of the law, a collateral attack upon the decision, as to jurisdiction
there rendered merely retries the issue previously determined.  There is no
reason to expect that the second decision will be more satisfactory than the
first.'

   "This Court has also held that the doctrine of res judicata must be applied
to questions of jurisdiction in cases arising in state courts involving the
application of the full faith and credit clause where, under the law of the
state in which the original judgment was rendered, such adjudications are not
susceptible to collateral attack." (Emphasis added.)

   In the case now engaging our attention, appellant was afforded full
opportunity to contest the jurisdictional issue and in fact did contest that
issue by filing an answer in which she denied that respondent herein was a bona
fide resident  of the State of Nevada.  By entering a general appearance in the
Nevada proceeding, filing a pleading tendering an issue, the very matter she now
seeks to contest in the courts of this state, retaining an attorney who
represented her and participated in the Nevada proceeding, appellant herein
cannot be heard to subsequently attack in the California courts, a decree
rendered under such circumstances and valid in the state where it was rendered.
As in the Sherrer case, supra, the finding of the requisite jurisdictional facts
in the Nevada divorce case was made in proceedings in which appellant herein
appeared and through her counsel participated.

   We find nothing in the cases cited by appellant which militates against the
proposition, ". . . that the requirements of full faith and credit bar a
defendant from collaterally attacking a divorce decree on jurisdictional grounds
in the courts of a sister State where there has been participation by the
defendant in the divorce proceedings, where the defendant has been accorded full
opportunity to contest the jurisdictional issues, and where the decree is not
susceptible to such collateral attack in the courts of the State which rendered
the decree." (Sherrer v. Sherrer, supra, at page     [92 L.Ed.].)

     Appellant's contention that she never authorized her Nevada attorney to
enter an appearance other than as set forth in the property settlement agreement
is answered by the statement that in such agreement, prepared by her own Florida
attorneys she, as heretofore pointed out, agreed to enter such an appearance and
forwarded the filing fee for the making of such appearance. Her claim that her
mere  general appearance through the filing of an answer did not result in an
adversary proceeding in which all parties are heard, is answered by the
following language of the United States Supreme Court in the case of Sherrer v.
Sherrer, supra, at page     [92 L.Ed.]: "If respondent failed to take advantage
of the opportunities afforded him, the responsibility is his own.  We do not
believe that the dereliction of a defendant under such circumstances should be
permitted to provide a basis for subsequent attack in the courts of a sister
State on a decree valid in the State in which it was rendered."

   Concerning appellant's contention that it was at all times her intention to
go personally to the State of Nevada and defend against the divorce action, but,
that she was without financial means to do so; that she requested her Nevada
attorney to procure from her husband funds with which to make said trip, and was
advised that her husband refused to supply her with any funds for that purpose,
it may simply be said that upon the entry of the divorce decree in Nevada on May
3, 1944, appellant shortly thereafter admittedly received the sum of $ 5,000,
and in addition thereto has been receiving the sum of $ 150 per month.  Yet,
possessed of these funds, she nevertheless made no attempt to challenge the
validity of the Nevada decree by appeal in the courts of that state, but
continued to accept the benefits of the foregoing property settlement agreement
until October 24, 1946, when she filed the separate maintenance action upon
which the order to show cause now engaging our attention was issued.

   Under the factual situation surrounding this case it cannot be successfully
urged that the proceedings before the Nevada court were in any degree violative
of the procedural due process or that appellant herein was denied a full
opportunity to contest the issue of respondent's Nevada domicile.

   Were the courts of California, under the facts here present, to permit an
attack upon the Nevada decree, which would again put in issue respondent's
Nevada domicile, and the consequent jurisdiction of the courts of that state, we
would be asserting a power which could not be reconciled with the requirements
of full faith and credit.

   For the foregoing reasons it follows that the judgment should be affirmed.
It is so ordered.


                              48 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           SADIE ZANONE, as Administratrix of Estate of CATHARINE A.
              POWERS, Deceased, Appellant, v. JOHN R. SPRAGUE, as
           Administrator of Estate of JANE M. SPRAGUE, Deceased, and
                   JOHN R. SPRAGUE, Her Husband, Respondents

                                  Civ. No. 839

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, THIRD APPELLATE DISTRICT

             16 Cal. App. 333; 116 P. 989; 1911 Cal. App. LEXIS 131


                             June 3, 1911, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:      APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of the City and
County of San Francisco. J. M. Seawell, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

   Homestead--Selection from Separate Estate of Husband--Divorce by
Husband--Nonassignment to Wife--Termination of Rights. Where a homestead was
declared by a husband upon his separate property for the benefit of himself and
wife, and he subsequently obtained a divorce from the wife, in which proceeding
no order was made assigning the homestead to the wife for a "limited period," as
provided in subdivision 4 of section 146 of the Civil Code, her rights in the
homestead were absolutely terminated upon the entry of the final decree of
divorce in favor of the husband. If the wife's rights are not reserved in the
decree, they are destroyed forever.

   Id.--Power of Court to Set Apart Homestead to "Innocent Party" for "Limited
Period" not Arbitrary.--The power of the court to set apart the homestead to the
"innocent party" for a "limited period" in a divorce action, may not be
exercised arbitrarily; but must be exercised by the court reasonably, and
according as the facts of the case demand that it shall be applied; yet it must
be put into operation in behalf of the wife, if she would retain any interest
whatever in the homestead selected from the separate estate of the husband.

   Id.--Right of Wife must be Established by Decree or Contract.--When a wife,
after the divorce, seeks to assert any claim to any part of the husband's
property, homestead or otherwise, she must establish that right by the decree,
or by a valid contract between herself and husband.

   Id.--Silence of Decree--Presumption.--Where the decree is silent as to the
homestead, it is to be presumed that at the time of granting the divorce it made
no order with reference to the homestead, neither assigning it to the "former
owner" of the property, nor to the wife "for a limited period."

   Id.--Default of Wife in Divorce Suit.--Where the wife made no appearance in
the divorce suit brought against her by her husband, and allowed the judgment to
be entered upon her default, it may be assumed that the evidence must have
disclosed that she was not entitled to consideration as one to whom the
homestead should be assigned "for a limited period."

   Id.--Decree not Necessary to Revest Title in Husband.--The homestead having
been selected from the husband's separate property, when the wife's interest
therein terminated by the decree of divorce, no order of court was necessary to
revest the whole interest in the divorced husband when the wife's interest
therein had ceased, but the whole homestead ceased as to that family, and the
property remained in the former owner, freed and unencumbered by any claim of
the former wife.

   Id.--Devolution of Homestead by Death of Spouse--Construction of Code.--The
devolution of a homestead by the death of a spouse, under section 1474 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, can only apply when the relation of spouse exists at
the date of the death, and cannot apply when the relation of spouses has been
severed by divorce, and the death of a divorced husband can confer no right of
devolution upon the divorced wife under that section of the code.

   Id.--Meaning of Word "Survivor" in Code.--The word "survivor," as used in
section 1174 of the Civil Code, refers only to the surviving spouse, and not
merely the surviving individual whose character as a spouse has been destroyed
by a decree of divorce, during the life of the former husband now deceased.

   Id.--"Husband and Wife."--The words "husband and wife," as applied to
domestic relations, each has but one meaning, viz., "a man who has a wife" and a
"woman who has a husband," and cannot mean an unmarried man and an unmarried
woman, or a divorced man and a divorced woman.

   Id.--Constitutional Law--Act to Amend Sections of Civil Code--Re-enactment of
Entire Code not Required.--Where an act to amend sections of the Civil Code
properly re-enacts the entire sections as amended, that is a sufficient
compliance with the provision of the constitution, which does not require that
the whole Civil Code should be re-enacted in such case.

   Id.--Action to Quiet Title of Divorced Wife of Deceased--Evidence--Proper
Exclusion of Declaration of Homestead--Nonsuit.--In an action by the
administrator of the divorced wife of deceased, to quiet her title to the
homestead as surviving spouse, the court properly excluded the declaration of
homestead in her favor, and granted a nonsuit as to defendants.

   Id.--Remarriage of Husband--Homestead not Inuring to Second Wife.--Where the
husband remarried, and the record shows no second homestead in favor of the
second wife, the former homestead, as such, could not inure to her benefit.

   Id.--Inheritance of Child of Former Marriage.--A child of the former marriage
would be entitled to her proper share according to the law of succession, as to
the estate of which her father died seised.

COUNSEL: Robert P. Troy, and Andrew Thorne, for Appellant.

W. H. Morrissy, for Respondents.

JUDGES: HART, J. Chipman, P. J., and Burnett, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: HART

OPINION

     HART, J. This is a suit to quiet title to certain real property situated in
the city of San Francisco.

   The court granted defendant's motion for a nonsuit and rendered and caused to
be entered judgment accordingly. The appeal here is by the plaintiff from said
judgment.

   There is no dispute as to the important facts, which are: Alfred Coad and
plaintiff's intestate, Catherine A. Powers, intermarried in the month of July,
1869.

   The real estate in dispute was the separate property of said Alfred Coad, it
having been devised to him by his father, Samuel Coad, prior to his said
marriage to plaintiff's intestate.

   On the sixth day of January, 1870, Alfred Coad filed with the county recorder
of the city and county of San Francisco a declaration of homestead on said
property.  In the declaration so filed it was stated that the family of the
declarant consisted of himself and wife (plaintiff's intestate), and that, at
the time of the filing of said declaration, they were residing on the premises
upon which the declaration of homestead was so filed.

   On the fourteenth day of April, 1881, Alfred Coad was, by the superior court
in and for the city and county of San Francisco, granted a decree of divorce
from plaintiff's intestate.  On the twelfth day of October, 1890, Alfred Coad
and Jane Mary Sprague, defendant's intestate, intermarried and remained husband
and wife up to the time of said Coad's death, which occurred on the thirteenth
day of April, 1906.

   Coad and defendant's intestate, as husband and wife, resided on the premises
in dispute at the time of his death.

   Subsequently to the death of Coad, his widow married John R. Sprague, the
marriage ceremony having been performed on the twenty-ninth day of September,
1907.

   After the trial of this action, both Catherine A. Powers and Jane M. Sprague
died intestate, and the plaintiff and the defendant were duly appointed
administratrix and administrator, respectively, of the estates of the deceased
women, and were thereupon substituted as parties plaintiff and defendant,
respectively, to this action.

   The claim of the plaintiff is that her intestate, Catherine A. Powers (mother
of plaintiff by Alfred Coad), is the owner in fee of the premises in controversy
by reason of the declaration of homestead filed thereon by Alfred Coad during
their coverture (Code Civ. Proc., sec. 1474), said homestead never having been
abandoned during the life of said Coad by the mode prescribed by law. (Civ.
Code, sec. 1243.)

   The contention of the defendant is: 1. That no valid homestead was ever
declared and filed on the premises; 2. That, assuming that there was a homestead
declared and filed on the premises according to the requirements of the law (
Civ. Code, secs. 1263, 1264), the interest of Catherine Powers therein
terminated with the decree dissolving the marriage relation between her and
Coad.

   The decree of divorce is absolutely silent as to the homestead or other
property, and, manifestly, in such case, if either or both of the propositions
contended for by the defendant are maintainable, Catherine Powers had no
interest of whatsoever kind or nature in the property in dispute at the time of
the commencement of this action.

   We are of opinion that the second proposition urged by defendant, viz., that
whatever interest in or rights under the purported homestead acquired by
plaintiff's intestate were lost upon the entry of the decree granting Coad a
divorce from her, is sound and must be sustained. It will, therefore, not be
necessary to examine and decide the question  whether the attempt to impress the
disputed property with the character of a homestead was successful or futile.

   "The policy of homestead laws," says Waples, in his work on "Homestead and
Exemption," page 29, "is the conservation of homes for the good of the state;
the mischief to be prevented by those laws is the breaking up of families and
homes to the general injury of society and of the state; the remedy provided is
the exemption of occupied family homes from the hammer of the executioner," and,
therefore, as to "homestead statutes, liberal construction is the rule so far as
concerns exemptions." (Id.) In other words, homestead statutes are not designed
to screen debtors or to protect them against the performance of their just
obligations, but to provide for the conservation of homes in the interest of the
general welfare and to that end to protect homes against the business
misfortunes or the improvidence of heads of families. While homestead rights are
purely creatures of the legislature, they are, nevertheless, as stated, to be
given a liberal construction in order to fully effectuate their beneficent
purposes. With this rule in view, we shall consider the respective contentions
of the parties to this controversy.

   As the property involved here is of the separate estate of Coad, it is
manifest, as will be seen, that the only way by which plaintiff's intestate
could have retained any interest in the homestead in question, after the divorce
was granted, was by an assignment of said homestead to her by the court for a
"limited period" at the time the decree granting the divorce was rendered and
entered. (Civ. Code, sec. 146, subd. 4.) Said subdivision of said section
provides that, upon the dissolution of the marriage by the decree of a court of
competent jurisdiction, in case the homestead has been selected from  the
separate property of either,  the same "shall be assigned to the former owner of
such property, subject to the power of the court to assign it for a limited
period to the innocent party."

   As we have seen, the decree of divorce is silent as to the homestead, and it
is, therefore, to be presumed that the court, at the time of granting the
divorce, made no order with reference to said homestead, having assigned it
neither to the "former owner" of the property (Coad) nor to the wife "for a
limited period." ( Brady v. Kreuger, 8 S. D. 464,  [59 Am. St. Rep. 771, 775, 66
N. W. 1083].) Indeed, from the fact that Coad was the plaintiff in said action,
and from the further fact that plaintiff's intestate made no appearance therein,
but allowed the proofs to be heard and the judgment to be entered upon her
default, it may be assumed that the evidence must have disclosed that she did
not come within the description of the party, as set forth in that section, to
whom a trial court is authorized, in such case, to assign a homestead carved out
of the separate property of the other spouse "for a limited period." At any
rate, it is very evident that the circumstances developed at the hearing of the
suit for divorce were not, in the judgment of the court hearing said action,
such as to justify an order awarding the homestead, "for a limited period," to
plaintiff's intestate.

   If, as we conceive to be the correct rule, the only interest which
plaintiff's intestate could have in said homestead, after the divorce was
granted, is limited to that interest which she might have acquired had the court
found (and made an order accordingly) that the exigencies of the action for
divorce warranted it in assigning said homestead to her for a "limited period,"
then, the court not having so found or made such assignment of the homestead, it
seems to us that it of necessity follows that whatever rights she might have
claimed under said homestead terminated, ipso facto, with the entry of the
decree of divorce. Nor, since the homestead was selected from his separate
property, was it necessary, in order to vest in Coad the whole of the homestead
interest, that the court should have expressly and by its decree or otherwise
assigned to him said homestead. The "family" for whose benefit the homestead was
selected from the separate property of the husband having been destroyed by the
decree of the court divorcing the parties, the homestead necessarily ceased to
exist as to that family, and, the homestead not having been assigned to the wife
at the time of the making and entry of the divorce decree, the property so
impressed remained in its former owner freed from and unencumbered by any claim
which the former wife might have had to it by reason of said homestead. (Waples
on Homestead and Exemption, p. 67 et seq.; Brady v. Kreuger, 8 S. D. 464, [59
Am. St. Rep. 771, 66 N. W. 1083]; Bahn v. Starcke, 89 Tex. 203, [59 Am. St. Rep.
40, 34 S. W. 103].)

    Of course, no one will gainsay the right or power of the legislature to
authorize the assignment of the homestead, upon the granting of a divorce, to
either spouse absolutely, whether such homestead is carved out of the separate
property of either spouse or selected from the community. But, in this
particular instance, the legislature of this state has not so provided. The
right of the "innocent party" to an action for divorce to the enjoyment of the
homestead, selected from the separate property of the other spouse, after a
divorce has been granted, is limited by the express language of the statute,
and, while the phrase, "for a limited period," may entitle the "innocent party"
to the enjoyment or possession or occupancy of such homestead for a long period
of years, even perhaps during the life of such party, according to the
circumstances of the particular case ( Hutchinson v. McNally, 85 Cal. 619, [24
Pac. 1071]; Neary v. Godfrey, 102 Cal. 338, [36 Pac. 655]), it does not mean
that the court has the power of vesting the homestead absolutely in such party,
unless such party happens to be the "former owner" of the property from which
said homestead has been selected.

   The rule that the homestead, where selected from the separate property of one
of the spouses, terminates, upon the granting of a divorce, in so far as are
concerned the rights therein of the spouse from whose separate estate it has not
been taken, unless such rights are preserved, as far as they may be, by the
decree, is recognized and applied in many other jurisdictions, whose homestead
laws vary only in immaterial particulars from ours.

   In South Dakota the statute (Civ. Code, sec. 93; Comp. Laws, sec. 2585)
provides,  among other things, that "the court in rendering a decree of divorce,
may assign the homestead to the innocent party, either absolutely or for a
limited period, according to the facts in the case," etc.

   It will be noted that the code section in that state goes farther than
subdivision 4 of section 146 of our code, for it is there provided, generally
and without any qualification as to whether the property from which the
homestead is selected is of the separate estate of one of the spouses or of the
community, that the court may, upon granting the divorce, assign such homestead
to "the innocent party," absolutely, if "the  facts in the case" warrant it.
Here, as seen, the court has no such power.

   In Brady v. Kreuger, 8 S. D. 464, [59 Am. St. Rep. 771, 66 N. W. 1083], the
decree of divorce made no disposition of the homestead--in fact, it was
absolutely silent upon that subject--but it was, nevertheless, contended by the
appellants in that case that "after a divorce the wife retains her interest in
the homestead, and that, under the facts proven in this case, she was entitled
to retain possession of the premises occupied by herself and husband at the time
the divorce was granted." The supreme court of South Dakota  disposes of this
proposition adversely to the contention of the appellants as follows:
"Appellants contend that this court will presume, in the absence of evidence to
the contrary, that the decree gave her the right to retain possession of the
homestead. But this we cannot do. Courts will sometimes indulge presumptions to
support a judgment of a court, but never to reverse it. In the absence,
therefore, of any proof as to the contents of the decree of divorce, we cannot
presume it contained anything favorable to the defendants. The relation of
husband and wife having terminated, the wife ceased to have any claim upon or
right in the husband's property, whether homestead or otherwise, unless such
rights were preserved by the decree of the court. If the decree of the court
preserved her rights to the homestead, or conferred upon her any other
privileges in, or interests in or to, the property of the husband, the burden
was upon her to establish such rights by the decree, as she clearly would have
no right to the possession of the homestead after a decree of divorce had been
granted, unless saved by the decree. There being in this state no right of
dower, or other absolute claim of the wife upon the property of the husband,
except under the law of succession, as his widow, or under a homestead claim
which exists in favor of a wife or widow, and which depends solely upon the fact
that she is such wife or widow, she can only avail herself of these claims by
showing that she occupies either one or the other of these relations named to
the husband. As the wife, upon a dissolution of the marriage, ceases to be the
wife, and can never be the widow, of her divorced husband, her claims upon his
property, necessarily, also cease and terminate upon the divorce. ( Rosholt v.
Mehus, 3 N. D. 513, [57 N. W. 783, 23 L. R. A. 239].) It was undoubtedly for
these reasons that the legislature of this state has conferred upon the courts
in which a decree of divorce may be obtained such comprehensive powers for
regulating and settling the rights of the wife in the property of the husband.
(Comp. Laws, secs. 2581-2585.) The rights of the wife, therefore, in her
husband's estate after a divorce is granted, are regulated and determined
exclusively by the provisions of the decree of divorce, unless there is some
valid contract between the husband and wife. When a wife, after the divorce,
seeks to assert any claim to any part of the husband's property--homestead or
otherwise--she must establish that right by the decree, or by a valid contract
between herself and husband."

   As in South Dakota and in many other states, so in California, the law has
provided the courts with ample power, in cases where the marriage relation has
been dissolved by a decree of divorce, to justly and equitably adjust homestead
and other property rights as between the parties for whose benefit homesteads
may be declared or created. But such power cannot be applied without regard to
the facts of the case. The power of the court, for instance, under subdivision 4
of section 146 of the Civil Code, to assign the homestead, which has been
selected from the separate property of one of the spouses, to the "innocent
party" to the divorce action, may not be exercised arbitrarily. It is only where
the circumstances of the case justly demand such assignment that the power
should be invoked and applied. For illustration, it may be suggested, as some of
the reasons which may interpose against the exercise of that power, that the
"innocent party" may be found to have ample separate means for his or her own
purposes, while the "former owner" of the property may have no other means than
those represented by the homestead; or it may be that the community interest of
such party may, under all the circumstances, be sufficient and just. Again, it
may have transpired that the parties themselves have reached an amicable and
satisfactory agreement by which they have apportioned their property rights
without the necessity of disturbing or interfering with the "former owner's"
absolute right to the possession and occupancy of his separate property from
which the homestead  has been selected. But, while this power must be exercised
by the court reasonably and according as the facts of each case demand that it
shall be applied, it must, as suggested, be put into operation in a case like
this if the wife would retain, after the divorce, any interest whatsoever in the
homestead selected from the separate estate of the husband. The court, in other
words, would have to take some affirmative action to that end, or, as is
declared in Brady v. Kreuger, 8 S. D. 464, [59 Am. St. Rep. 771, 66 N. W. 1083],
her rights under the homestead declaration would have to be preserved by the
decree, otherwise they are destroyed forever. The court not having done so in
this case, the homestead, as before asserted, so far as plaintiff's intestate is
concerned, ceased to exist with the granting of the decree of divorce and the
same, therefore, remained in the former owner free from any homestead claim,
right or privilege of the former wife.

   Whether, under such circumstances, such property would still retain the
essential characteristics of a homestead, so far as the "former owner" is
concerned, need not be decided here, although such has been declared to be the
rule in this state. ( City Store v. Cofer, 111 Cal. 482, [44 Pac. 168].)

   But counsel for appellant insist that the provisions of section 1474 of the
Code of Civil Procedure are absolutely controlling in the matter of the
devolution of homesteads, after the death of one of the spouses, regardless of
whether or not the family, as it originally stood when the homestead was filed,
had, prior to such death, been destroyed by a decree of divorce. That section
reads: "If the homestead selected by the husband and wife, or either of them,
during their coverture, and recorded while both were living,  was selected from
the community, or from the separate property of the person selecting or joining
in the selection of the same, it vests, on the death of the husband or wife,
absolutely in the survivor."

   The argument in support of this proposition is that the word, "survivor," as
used in said section, means the one of the two spouses that outlives the other
without regard to whether, at the time of the death of the one or the other, the
marriage relation between them had been duly dissolved by the decree of a court.
Of course, it must be manifest, from the views we have ventured as to the effect
of the decree  of divorce on the rights of the plaintiff's intestate under the
declaration of homestead, that we do not agree to such construction of section
1474 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

   Indeed, applying, in the ascertainment of the true import of section 1474 of
the Code of Civil Procedure, the very rule of construction, as promulgated by
section 16 of said code, invoked by counsel for the appellant to establish their
conception of the meaning and intention of said section 1474, the result must
be, it seems clear to us, that said section does not, nor was it intended to,
bear the interpretation which counsel ascribe to it.

   Section 16, supra, declares that "words and phrases" must be "construed
according to the context and the approved usage of the language; but technical
words and phrases, and such other words as have acquired a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in law, or are defined in the succeeding section, are to be
construed according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning or definition."

   The words "husband" and "wife," as applied to domestic relations, each has
but one meaning. The technical meaning of those words is identical with their
common or colloquial meaning, and the law can use them in no other sense. It is,
therefore, not necessary to refer to and examine law or other dictionaries to
ascertain their legal or only signification. They are generic terms that
describe human beings of a certain class, and the mere mentioning or use of the
words will as readily suggest or convey to the mind the kinds of the human
family they describe as the mentioning of the word "horse" will portray to the
mind the kind of quadruped that term describes. They obviously mean,
respectively, as they are most tritely defined by Bouvier, "a man who has a
wife" and "a woman who has a husband." As used in section 1474 of the Code of
Civil Procedure, these words mean and can only mean, as descriptive of the
domestic relation, just what they naturally imply, and, of course, do not mean
an unmarried man and an unmarried woman As all the other words in said section
refer to the words, "husband" and "wife," as so employed, we have only to look
to the context of said section for the precise signification of all the vital
words therein used for the purpose of defining or prescribing any rights which
the legislature by said section  intended to confer upon either the husband or
wife or both, and, so examining the section, it becomes very clear that the
word, "survivor," as therein employed, refers to the "husband" and "wife" as
such--that is, it applies to those individuals with reference to the legal
status they bear toward each other and not, as counsel's construction of the
section would have it, as mere individuals or strangers sustaining toward each
other no legal relation. In other words, the true meaning of the language of the
section is that the homestead selected as therein prescribed shall, upon the
death of the husband as a husband or the wife as a wife, vest absolutely in the
survivor of such marriage relation. Obviously, if the marriage relation was
dissolved at the time of the death of either the one or the other, the deceased
would have passed away not as a husband or as a wife, as the case might be, but,
in contemplation of law, as a perfect stranger to the one who, in point of time,
was the survivor. The irresistible result of this construction is that, in order
that the homestead contemplated by said section may, upon the death of the one
or the other of the spouses by whom and for whose benefit such homestead was
selected, vest absolutely in the "survivor," such death must have occurred when
the parties were still spouses, or, in other words, the "survivor" must be the
surviving spouse and not merely the surviving individual whose character as a
spouse had previously to the death of the other been destroyed by a decree of
divorce.

   Counsel for the appellant make the further point that section 146 of the
Civil Code is unconstitutional in that the act within which said section was
embraced was, as passed by the legislature of 1873-74, in violation of section
25 of article IV of the constitution of 1849. Said section of our first
constitution reads: "Every law enacted by the legislature shall embrace but one
object, and that shall be expressed in the title; and no law shall be revised or
amended by reference to its title; but in such case the act revised or section
amended shall be re-enacted and published at length."

   The legislature of 1873-74 attempted to amend, if it did not succeed in
amending, a large number of the sections of each of the four codes. (See Stats.
1873-74, p. 192.) The title of the act amending certain sections of the Civil
Code is as follows: "An act to amend the Civil Code."

    The objections urged against the constitutional validity of said act are
that its title expresses no subject whatever, and that it fails to re-enact and
publish at large the law which it purports to amend. In other words, as to the
latter objection, it is the contention that, to make the act conform to the
provision of the constitution referred to,  in the place of publishing in the
body of the act only such sections as were amended, the entire Civil Code, which
constitutes one act, should have been embodied in and re-enacted by the
amendatory act.

   Section 146 of the Civil Code, as well as the other sections of said code as
amended by the act of 1873-74, have been the accepted law of this state on the
subjects to which they respectively relate for nearly forty years, and there can
be no doubt that, under many of said sections, there have grown up and been
established rights of the most substantial kind which might be seriously
jeopardized, if not completely destroyed, by a ruling at this late date holding
said sections to be void for the reasons suggested or for any reason. Even if
there be merit in the points urged against said sections, it is not for a moment
supposable that any court would, under the circumstances, give its sanction to a
proposition whose inevitable result would be to produce at least endless
confusion and perhaps the destruction of vested property rights.

   But, if our views as to the meaning and intent of section 146 of the Civil
Code and of section 1474 of the Code of Civil Procedure are correct, it is
immaterial whether the first-mentioned section is valid or invalid. It is very
clear, as we have declared, that the only right which plaintiff's intestate
could have acquired to the homestead involved here was that with which the court
might have invested her for a limited period under the power conferred upon it
by said section 146, and, manifestly, if said section is void for the reason
urged here against its validity, she could not, at the time the divorce was
granted, even have acquired or been entitled, as the "innocent party," if such
she had been found to be, to the enjoyment of said homestead for "a limited
period."

   We have found no expression in any of the cases cited by counsel for
appellant in conflict with the conclusion reached here. The cases cited were
where, either after the death of one or the divorce of the parties for whose
benefit the homesteads  were created, an ineffectual attempt was made to enforce
the payment of the claims of certain creditors by a seizure of the premises upon
which the homesteads were filed, the contention of such creditors being that the
peculiar facts from which the right to such homesteads arose were such as to
relieve the premises of their homestead character either upon the death of one
of the parties to the homestead or the divorce of such parties. (See City Store
v. Cofer, 111 Cal. 482, [44 Pac. 168]; Roth v. Insley, 86 Cal. 134, [24 Pac.
853].)

   The result of the conclusion at which we have arrived is, manifestly, that
plaintiff's intestate has no title of any kind to the homestead in dispute, and
that, as a necessary consequence, the judgment of the court below that she is
not entitled to the relief sought by the complaint cannot be disturbed.

   The defendant asked for and was, therefore, awarded no affirmative relief.

   While the proposition is not involved here, there can be no impropriety in
suggesting, if, indeed, suggestion of the proposition is necessary, that, Coad
having died intestate and, there having been, so far as we are advised by the
record, no new declaration of homestead filed on the property in controversy
after his marriage to defendant's intestate, the plaintiff, being the only child
of said Coad, so far as the record shows, would be entitled to her share,
according to our law of succession, in whatever estate, including the property
here involved, of which her father died seised. Of course, it will not be
contended that the homestead in question here could inure to the benefit of the
second wife. ( Estate of Clavo, 6 Cal. App. 774, [93 Pac. 295].)

   Necessarily, the views ventured herein dispose of the points urged against
the rulings of the court in excluding as evidence the declaration of homestead
and in granting the motion for a nonsuit.

   For the reasons stated herein the judgment is affirmed.

   Chipman, P. J., and Burnett, J., concurred.


                              49 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              JESSIE SANBORN, Respondent, v. MAX MERRILL SANBORN,
                                   Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 8983

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SECOND APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION TWO

           3 Cal. App. 2d 437; 39 P.2d 830; 1934 Cal. App. LEXIS 1210


                           December 31, 1934, Decided

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition by Appellant to have the Cause Heard in the
Supreme Court, after Judgment in the District Court of Appeal, was Denied by the
Supreme Court on February 28, 1935.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County. Myron Westover, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Contracts--Property Settlement Agreement--Liens--Mortgages--Pleading.  --In
this action to recover alleged arrearages under a property settlement agreement,
which provided that the husband's obligation to make payments "is secured by a
lien upon the income" of certain real property, where the agreement was
incorporated in the complaint by reference, but as pleaded the agreement did not
show upon its face in direct terms all the facts essential to constitute the
same a mortgage, nor was any such construction put upon it by the other
averments in the complaint, in the absence of a special demurrer on the ground
that it was doubtful whether the debt sued upon was secured by mortgage, the
complaint was sufficient to support a judgment for debt.

(2) Id.--Husband and Wife--Liens--Mortgages--Construction.  --Every lien is not
a mortgage; and in said action, the lien described in said agreement was not a
mortgage, and plaintiff was entitled to enforce payment of the debt arising
under the agreement without any foreclosure of the lien, where a resort to the
terms thereof showed that the language describing the lien did not contain the
essentials to constitute a mortgage lien and that there were no words of
conveyance or transfer of an interest in the property as security.

(3) Id.--Evidence--Credibility--Findings.  --Mere contradictions of the
testimony of a witness will not suffice to constitute inherent improbability or
to destroy its weight, but the weight and sufficiency thereof are peculiarly
within the province of the trial court for decision; and in said action, the
finding that no promise to obtain a divorce had been made by plaintiff as
consideration for the agreement could not be disturbed on appeal where there was
a substantial conflict in the evidence, and there was nothing in the agreement
which on its face showed that it was contra bonos mores.

(4) Id.--Husband and Wife--Property Settlement Agreement--Divorce.  --When a
contract, which is executed under authority of sections 158 and 159 of the Civil
Code, and which provides for support for the wife, is involved in an action
other than divorce, the contract is to be judged by the same rules as any other
ordinary contract between individuals occupying fiduciary relations, and if
found to be valid is binding on the parties and will be recognized and enforced
by the courts; but because of the unlimited power vested in the divorce court to
make disposition of community property and to award support, such contracts,
when pleaded and relied upon, are not binding or conclusive upon the divorce
court until subjected to examination by that court and approved in the divorce
action.

(5) Id.--Property Settlement Agreement--Validity of--Approval by Court.
--Contracts between husband and wife under the provisions of sections 158 and
159 of the Civil Code, being authorized by law, are valid if untainted by fraud,
collusion or undue influence, or if not contra bonos mores, or the like, and the
approval or sanction thereof by a divorce court is not necessarily a
prerequisite to validity of such an agreement when sued upon in an independent
action to enforce its terms.

(6) Id.--Husband and Wife--Divorce Judgment--Issues--Jurisdiction--Res Judicata.
--In said action, the record in a prior divorce action showed that the issue of
the validity of said property settlement agreement was not before the court
where judgment was entered upon default of the husband, and the complaint, on
the ground of desertion, alleged that there was no community property and no
children, but did not allege any facts relating to support, or apply for
support, although it alleged that the parties had made a property settlement and
incorporated the agreement by reference, which reference to said agreement was
irrelevant, redundant and surplusage, and conferred no jurisdiction upon the
court to entertain and pass upon the same.

(7) Id.--Jurisdiction--Issues--Property Settlement Agreement--Res Judicata.
--Jurisdiction to consider and approve such property settlement agreements in a
divorce court depends on the power to dispose of community property or to award
support, and in a default divorce case where it is admitted by the pleadings
that there is no community property and no application for support is made by
the complaining party, the divorce court has no power to consider those matters
or to consider and determine the validity of any previous property settlement of
the parties; and when the divorce court, under such circumstances, ignores the
agreement, it cannot be held to have approved or disapproved the agreement, and
the doctrine of res judicata does not apply in a subsequent action on said
agreement.

COUNSEL: Willebrandt, Horowitz & McCloskey and Fred Horowitz for Appellant.

J. H. De La Monte and Ralph D. Brown for Respondent.

JUDGES: WILLIS, J., pro tem. Stephens, P. J., and Crail, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: WILLIS

OPINION

     The facts are stated in the opinion of the court.

   WILLIS, J., pro tem. -- The parties herein, formerly husband and wife,
executed an agreement authorized by sections 158 and 159 of the Civil Code
wherein provision was made for monthly payments by appellant to respondent in a
specified sum for support, and wherein it was agreed that the obligation to make
such payments "is secured by a lien upon the income" of certain real property
owned by appellant, and that "the rents, issues and profits therefrom are
charged and impressed with the payment of the amounts hereinbefore provided to
be paid". Upon this contract respondent brought suit to recover alleged
arrearages.  A general demurrer was interposed and overruled. Appellant in his
answer pleaded lack of consideration, illegality of the agreement by reason of a
contemporaneous oral promise of respondent to obtain a divorce as consideration
for execution thereof by appellant, and res judicata by reason of subsequent
divorce proceedings. Judgment was entered for respondent from which this appeal
is taken.

     The general demurrer was properly overruled. The agreement was incorporated
in the complaint by reference, and appellant contends that the complaint
therefore revealed that the agreement sued upon constituted a mortgage  and that
respondent's sole remedy was to foreclose under the provisions of section 726 of
the Code of Civil Procedure. The provisions relating to the lien in the
agreement are pleaded by reference only, and as pleaded the instrument does not
show upon its face in direct terms all the facts essential to constitute the
same a mortgage; nor was any construction put upon it by other averments in the
complaint to establish the lien therein described as a mortgage. ( Silvers v.
Grossman, 183 Cal. 696 [192 P. 534].) In the absence of a special demurrer on
the ground that it was doubtful or uncertain therefrom whether the debt sued
upon was secured by mortgage, the complaint was sufficient to support a judgment
for debt. ( Hibernia Sav. & Loan Soc. v. Thornton, 117 Cal. 481 [49 P. 573].)

     Resort to the terms of the instrument reveals that the language describing
the lien therein provided did not contain the essentials to constitute a
mortgage lien. No words of conveyance or transfer of an interest in property as
security appear therein. Every lien is not a mortgage, and the lien described in
the instrument herein is clearly not a mortgage and respondent was free to
enforce payment of the debt arising under this agreement without any foreclosure
of the lien. ( People's Home Sav. Bank v. Sadler, 1 Cal. App. 189 [81 P. 1029].)
There is nothing in the decision in Higgins v. Higgins, 121 Cal. 487 [53 P.
1081, 66 Am. St. Rep. 57]), relied upon by appellant, in conflict with the views
above expressed. In that action the wife sued to foreclose a similar lien, and
the sole question on appeal was whether the property subjected to the lien was
sufficiently described. The court therein did not decide whether the lien in
that case was a mortgage lien or not, nor was section 726 of the Code of Civil
Procedure mentioned therein.

     The trial court, upon a substantial conflict of evidence, found that no
promise to obtain a divorce was made by respondent as consideration for the
agreement. This finding appellant attacks upon the ground that the testimony of
respondent and her witness was so inherently improbable as to be unworthy of
belief or to possess weight, and that appellant's contrary testimony should
prevail. Mere contradictions of the testimony of a witness will not suffice to
constitute inherent improbability or to destroy  its weight. The weight and
sufficiency thereof were peculiarly within the province of the trial court for
decision ( People v. Raich, 26 Cal. App. 286 [146 P. 907]; People v. Becker, 140
Cal. App. 162 [35 P.2d 196]), and under the well-known rule this court will not
disturb a finding of the trial court on a fact concerning which there is a
substantial conflict in the evidence. The evidence herein is quite sufficient to
support the questioned finding, and as there is nothing in the agreement which
on its face shows that it is contra bonos mores , it follows that the court's
conclusion that it was legal and valid is supported.

   Appellant contends that inasmuch as the court in its decree in the divorce
action between the parties did not expressly approve the agreement in question,
it is for that reason invalid, and cites a number of cases decided by our
appellate courts wherein it is said that "such pretended agreements, if they are
to have any force, must be subjected to the examination of the divorce court,
and  derive their sanction from the decree made by the court, with a knowledge
of the facts". The foregoing quoted expression first appeared in the case of
Loveren v. Loveren, 106 Cal. 509 [39 P. 801], and was a quotation from a
Missouri decision ( Speck v. Dausman, 7 Mo. App. 165). It has been quoted and
used several times since in other decisions of our appellate courts but always
in a divorce case.  There is a marked distinction between the rule which governs
in an action, other than divorce, on a contract executed under authority of
sections 158 and 159 of the Civil Code and the rule which governs such contracts
when presented to a divorce court. In the former instance they are judged by the
same rules as any other ordinary contracts between individuals occupying
fiduciary relations, and if found to be valid are binding on the parties and are
recognized and enforced by courts; while in the latter instance, because of the
unlimited power vested in the divorce court to make disposition of community
property and to award support, such contracts, when pleaded and relied upon, are
not binding or conclusive on the divorce court until subjected to examination of
the court in the divorce action and approved. ( Moog v. Moog, 203 Cal. 406 [264
P. 490].)   Contracts between husband and wife under the provisions of sections
158 and 159 of the Civil Code, being authorized by  law, are valid if untainted
by fraud, collusion, undue influence or not contra bonos mores, or the like. (
Hogarty v. Hogarty, 188 Cal. 625 [206 P. 79]; Murray v. Murray, 28 Cal. App. 533
[153 P. 248].) It has never been held that to acquire and possess validity such
contracts must necessarily first be approved by a divorce court. The effect of
the decisions relied on by appellant is simply that, as against the power of the
divorce court in the matter of disposition of community property and awarding
support, such contracts have no effect or control in the divorce case until
sanctioned and adopted by the court either in whole or in part. Such sanction,
however, is not necessarily a prerequisite to validity of such an agreement when
sued upon in an independent action to enforce its terms.

     Appellant further contends that the validity of the agreement was an issue
in the divorce case, and that the divorce court, having failed to expressly
approve the same in its decree, in effect decided that such agreement was void
and that the doctrine of res judicata bars relief herein. Respondent claims that
on the same divorce case record it appears that the agreement was approved by
the court. We do not agree with either of these contentions. The divorce
complaint stated a cause of action for divorce on the ground of desertion,
alleged there was no community property, no children, and did not allege any
facts relating to support. There was an allegation that respondent had made a
property settlement with appellant, and the complaint incorporated the agreement
here in question by reference. The prayer was for divorce and general relief,
couched in the conventional form. Default of the appellant was entered for
failure to answer. After a trial the court found that all the allegations of the
complaint were true and that respondent was entitled to a divorce. The usual
interlocutory and final decrees were entered. It is clear from this record that
the issue of validity of the agreement was not before the court. The reference
in the complaint to the agreement was irrelevant, redundant and surplusage, and
conferred no jurisdiction upon the court to entertain and pass upon the same.
Jurisdiction to consider and approve such agreements in a divorce court depends
on the power to dispose of community property or to award support. Where in a
default divorce case it is admitted by the  pleadings that there is no community
property and no application for support is made by the complaining party, the
court has no power in such case to consider those matters; and this necessarily
results in excluding power to consider and determine the validity of any
previous property settlement of the parties. The trial court herein adopted and
followed this conception of its powers and ignored the agreement. It was neither
approved nor disapproved and is, therefore,  not subject in this action to any
of the limitations of the doctrine of res judicata.

   Finding no error in the action of the trial court the judgment must be
affirmed, and it is so ordered.

   Stephens, P. J., and Crail, J., concurred.


                              50 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            JANET V. McLAUGHLIN, Appellant, v. MORRIS R. McLAUGHLIN,
                                   Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 22551

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

            159 Cal. App. 2d 287; 323 P.2d 820; 1958 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      1993


                                 April 9, 1958

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court
was Denied June 4, 1958.  Traynor, J., was of the Opinion that the Petition
Should be Granted.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  Aubrey N. Irwin, Judge.

   Action by former wife against her former husband for damages for breach of a
property settlement agreement and for other relief.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Husband and Wife--Property Settlement Agreements--Requisites.  --Civ. Code,
§ 159, controls property settlement agreements after separation; such agreements
must be in writing and signed by both parties.

(2) Divorce--Judgment--Interlocutory Decree.  --An interlocutory divorce decree
does not constitute a contract between the parties.

(3) Husband and Wife--Property Settlement Agreements--Effect--Enforcement.  --A
valid contract settling property rights between married persons does not require
approval of a divorce court to render it effective; it is binding on the parties
and enforceable by either against the other, though the court fail or refuse to
adopt or approve the agreement by its decree, and may be sued on in an
independent action.

(4) Divorce--Judgment--Res Judicata.  --Where the issues with respect to support
provisions of a property settlement agreement were not litigated at the divorce
trial nor on the wife's motion for a nunc pro tunc order amending the divorce
decree, and where all that was decided at the latter hearing was that the court
did not intend at the divorce trial to approve any property settlement
agreement, and there was no valid award for the wife's support, the prior
proceedings were not a bar to her enforcement of any rights to future support
that she may have under a property settlement contract alleged in her complaint
in a separate action.

(5) Pleading--Motion for Judgment on Pleadings.  --Defendant's motion for
judgment on the pleadings is the equivalent of a general demurrer, and the only
question is whether the pleading states facts sufficient to constitute a cause
of action.

(6) Frauds, Statute of--Pleading.  --In cases dealing with contracts within the
statute of frauds, the complaint may state a cause of action though it does not
allege that the contract is in writing; the law will presume the contract to be
valid and thus to be evidenced by a writing.

(7) Husband and Wife--Property Settlement Agreements--Pleading and Proof.  --In
an action on a property settlement agreement, plaintiff need not allege that the
contract was in writing, but in order to recover thereon she must prove that it
was in writing and was signed by both parties.

(8) Divorce--Judgment--Collateral Attack.  --A former wife may not maintain an
action at law for damages based on defendant's alleged fraud in procuring a
divorce decree by making promises to her that he would pay for her support in
her later years if he should be granted a divorce, that he made such promises
with no intention of keeping them and for the intention of deceiving her, and
that she, in relying on such promises, relinquished her interest in most of the
community property and refrained from introducing evidence in support of
allegation in her cross-complaint, thereby preventing her from obtaining a
divorce and hence alimony, since a collateral attack on the decree, after it has
become final, is not permitted.

(9) Id.--Permanent Alimony--When Grantable.  --Where a divorce was granted the
husband for the wife's fault, the court was without jurisdiction to award her
alimony.

(10) Id.--Judgment--Collateral Attack.  --Where the court granting a husband a
divorce for the wife's fault had jurisdiction to divide the community property
but not to award alimony to her, only that portion of the decree purporting to
award alimony was null and void; the remainder remained in force and was not
subject to collateral attack.

COUNSEL: W. H. Wadsworth, E. L. Fraser and Charles E. McClung for Appellant.

Morris R. McLaughlin, in pro. per., Warner & Sutton, Barbara Warner and Caryl
Warner for Respondent.

JUDGES: Fox, P. J.  Ashburn, J., and Kincaid, J. pro tem., * concurred.

*   Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: FOX

OPINION

     Plaintiff has appealed from a judgment on the pleadings in favor of
defendant.

   Plaintiff and defendant were married in 1921.  They separated in 1935 and
have lived separate and apart since that time.  In 1948 the husband filed suit
for divorce on the ground of extreme cruelty.  The wife answered and filed a
cross-complaint seeking divorce. In 1949 an interlocutory decree was entered
granting the husband a divorce. The decree also provided for division of the
community property and awarded the wife custody of the minor child, who was then
19 years old.  The decree ordered the husband to pay the wife $ 200 per month
for the "support, care and maintenance" of herself and the minor child until
further order of the court.  A final decree was entered in June, 1950.  The
minor child attained his majority in October, 1950.  The decree has never been
modified or set aside.  In 1953 the husband ceased making any payments to the
wife.  In April, 1954, she procured an order to show cause re contempt by reason
of his failure to make payments.  This court issued a writ of prohibition.  In
that proceeding we held that the interlocutory decree failed to disclose any
fact indicating that the provision for the wife's support was based on a
contract settling the property rights of the parties, that on its face the
provision for the wife's support was simply an alimony order, and that since on
the  record the divorce was granted to the husband for the wife's fault, the
trial court was without jurisdiction to award her alimony and that such order
was void. ( McLaughlin v. Superior Court, 128 Cal.App.2d 62 [274 P.2d 745].)

   Thereafter, the wife made a motion in the trial court for an order nunc pro
tunc amending the interlocutory decree to show that the support order was based
upon a property settlement agreement relating to the disposition of the
community property and the support and maintenance of the wife and minor child.
The motion sought to have the terms of the property settlement agreement
incorporated in the decree. This motion was denied.  She then made a motion for
a writ of execution on the ground that the decree ordered payments by the
husband to her of $ 200 per month until further order of the court.  This motion
was also denied.  Both of these rulings were affirmed on appeal.  ( McLaughlin
v. McLaughlin, 141 Cal.App.2d 494 [296 P.2d 878].)

   In 1955 the wife instituted the present action against her former husband.
The complaint contains four counts.  Her first count is based on the theory that
the interlocutory decree "constituted a written contractual agreement" for the
division of the community property and the support of herself and the minor
child and that defendant herein has breached such agreement.  In her second
count plaintiff alleges a property settlement agreement in substantially the
same terms as alleged in her first count, but she makes no reference to the
divorce decree. It is then alleged that defendant has breached the agreement.
In the third count plaintiff alleges that defendant made promises to her that he
would pay for her support in her later years if he should be  granted a divorce;
that defendant knew these promises were untrue and had no intention of keeping
them; that defendant made such promises with the intention of deceiving
plaintiff; that plaintiff believed defendant's promises and that, in reliance
thereon, plaintiff relinquished her interest in most of the community property
and refrained from introducing evidence in support of the allegations in her
cross-complaint, thereby preventing her from obtaining a divorce and hence
alimony. The fourth count need not be considered since plaintiff now concedes
that it fails to state a cause of action.

   In her first count plaintiff does not purport to base her cause of action on
the interlocutory decree per se.  Rather, her position is that the decree is
itself a written property settlement agreement. This count does not state facts
sufficient to  constitute a cause of action.  " Civil Code, section 159,
controls property settlement agreements after separation and such agreements
must be in writing and signed by both parties.  . . ." ( McLaughlin v.
McLaughlin, supra, p. 497; see also Fitch v. Tyler, 105 Cal.App. 306, 311 [288
P. 74].) On its face the document upon which plaintiff relies (viz., the
interlocutory decree, a copy of which is attached to the complaint) does not
meet the requirements of section 159 since it is not signed by either of the
parties.  It therefore follows that plaintiff may not assert any rights based on
an agreement embodied in that document.

     Plaintiff relies upon Gould v. Superior Court, 47 Cal.App. 197, 200 [191 P.
56], for the proposition that an interlocutory decree constitutes a contract
between the parties.  That proposition is not here applicable because the
contract which plaintiff asserts must comply with the provisions of Civil Code,
section 159, which requires the signatures of both parties.  An interlocutory
decree is not such a contract.

   Plaintiff's second cause of action is based upon an alleged property
settlement agreement separate and apart from the divorce decree. We need only
consider that portion of the alleged agreement which pertains to plaintiff's
future support because the other terms of the agreement are identical with the
provisions of the divorce decree which was an adjudication of those matters.  It
is clear that this alleged property settlement agreement was neither adopted nor
approved in the divorce decree. ( McLaughlin v. McLaughlin, supra, p. 497.)   "A
valid contract settling property rights between married persons does not require
the approval of a divorce court to render it effective.  It is binding on the
parties and enforceable by either of them against the other even though the
court fails or refuses to adopt or approve the agreement by its decree in a
divorce proceeding." ( Green v. Green, 66 Cal.App.2d 50, 56 [151 P.2d 679].)
Such agreement may be "sued upon in an independent action to enforce its terms."
( Sanborn v. Sanborn, 3 Cal.App.2d 437, 442 [39 P.2d 830]; Anthony v. Anthony,
94 Cal.App.2d 507, 512 [211 P.2d 331].) Under these principles plaintiff is
entitled to maintain an action against defendant for the breach of a valid
property settlement agreement.

     It is clear that the issues with respect to the support provisions of the
property settlement agreement alleged in the second cause of action have not
been litigated.  No property  settlement agreement was before the court at the
divorce trial nor at the hearing on plaintiff's motion for a nunc pro tunc order
amending the divorce decree. ( McLaughlin v. McLaughlin, supra, p. 497.) All
that was decided at the latter hearing was that the court did not intend at the
trial of the divorce suit to approve any property settlement agreement. (
McLaughlin v. McLaughlin, supra, p. 497.) Moreover, there was no valid award for
plaintiff's support.  (McLaughlin v. Superior Court.) Therefore, the prior
proceedings are not a bar to her enforcement of any rights to future support
that she may have  under the contract alleged in the second count of her
complaint.

   Defendant asserts that the contract alleged in count two is oral.  This may
be true; the complaint does not allege whether the agreement is in writing (or
signed by the parties) as required by section 159 of the Civil Code.
Defendant's motion for judgment on the pleadings is the equivalent of a general
demurrer, and the only question is whether the count in question states facts
sufficient to constitute a cause of action. We have concluded that this issue is
analogous to that involved in cases dealing with contracts which come within the
statute of frauds.   In those cases it is held that the complaint states a cause
of action even though it does not allege the contract is in writing.  "The law
will presume the contract to be valid and not invalid and thus, where required
by the statute of frauds will presume it to be evidenced by writing." ( Alaska
Salmon Co. v. Standard Box Co., 158 Cal. 567, 569 [112 P. 454]; see also
Bradford Inv. Co. v. Joost, 117 Cal. 204 [48 P. 1083]; Nunez v. Morgan, 77 Cal.
427 [19 P. 753]; Reagan v. Justice's Court, 75 Cal. 253 [17 P. 195].)
Therefore, plaintiff's second count states a cause of action; but in order to
recover thereon she will be required to prove that the property settlement
agreement is in writing and signed by both parties.

     Plaintiff's third cause of action is based upon defendant's alleged fraud
in the procurement of the judgment in the divorce action. She alleges that he
made promises which he had no intention of keeping, thereby inducing her to
refrain from introducing evidence on her cross-complaint in the divorce action
which would have entitled her to a decree of divorce and hence alimony. She also
alleges that his promises induced her to transfer her rights in most of the
community property to defendant.  Since the divorce action adjudicated the
rights of the parties respecting division of the  community property it is clear
that plaintiff may not maintain this action while the final decree in the
divorce action is still in effect.  Plaintiff's present action "constitutes a
collateral attack on the [decree], which the law does not permit.  [Citation.]
For this reason, an action at law for damages against an adversary party for
allegedly procuring a judgment by fraud or perjury cannot be maintained while
such judgment remains in force." ( Gerini v. Pacific Employers Ins. Co., 27
Cal.App.2d 52, 55 [80 P.2d 499].)   The divorce was granted to the husband for
the wife's fault, and the court was without jurisdiction to award her alimony. (
McLaughlin v. Superior   Court, supra, p. 65.) We have already noted that the
divorce decree, which also provided for division of the community property, has
never been vacated or modified. It is therefore clear that plaintiff's third
count does not state facts sufficient to constitute a cause of action.

     Plaintiff apparently accepts the rule announced in the Gerini case, but she
contends that it is not applicable in the case at bar.  She asserts that "the
judgment in the previous litigation relating to [her support] . . . has been
held to be void and, accordingly, is not in force and effect.  . . ." Plaintiff
is mistaken.  Only that portion of the divorce decree which purports to award
her alimony has been declared to be null and void. ( McLaughlin v. Superior
Court, supra.) The remainder of the decree is still in force.  (See Harwell v.
Harwell, 26 Cal.App.2d 143, 144-145 [78 P.2d 1167].) Since the portion of the
decree granting defendant herein a divorce and dividing the community property
is still in force, and since plaintiff herself was not granted a divorce by that
decree, plaintiff's third cause of action must fall as a collateral attack upon
a judgment which is on its face valid.

    The judgment is reversed as to count two of the complaint; as to counts one
and three, the judgment is affirmed.


                              51 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           SUZETTE THOMAS, Petitioner, v. THE SUPERIOR COURT OF BUTTE
                           COUNTY et al., Respondents

                                 Civ. No. 5491

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, THIRD APPELLATE DISTRICT

           9 Cal. App. 2d 383; 49 P.2d 898; 1935 Cal. App. LEXIS 1331


                            October 8, 1935, Decided

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition by Respondents to have the Cause Heard in the
Supreme Court, after Judgment in the District Court of Appeal, was Denied by the
Supreme Court on December 5, 1935.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    PROCEEDING in Mandamus to compel the Superior Court of Butte
County, and Harry Deirup, Judge thereof, to issue an order for the defendant in
a divorce case to show cause why he should not be adjudged in contempt for
failure to pay alimony.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Husband and Wife--Divorce--Alimony--Property Settlement Agreement--Pleading
--Construction.  --Where a complaint for divorce alleged the execution of a
written settlement of property rights which provided for certain monthly
payments by the husband which should be included in a decree of divorce when
granted, and then requested that said payments be incorporated in the decree and
be made payable to plaintiff, the complaint sufficiently alleged the execution
of said agreement and there was a sufficient request for the court to approve
and adopt the same as part of the judgment, and the husband, who failed to
appear or answer, could not complain of such construction of the pleading
although the language might have been more certain and specific.

(2) Id.--Judgments--Minute Orders--Construction.  --While a minute order entered
in the trial of a divorce case, and which purports to determine the issues of
the proceeding, may be deemed to be the judgment which will be controlling in
subsequent proceedings, where the order merely recites "Interlocutory decree
ordered", and at the time the order is made the court signs and files a formal
interlocutory decree specifically allowing alimony and directing the defendant
to pay the same, and it is evident that the court did not intend to have the
issues determined by the mere entry of the minute order, such minute order is
not controlling and the formal decree is the judgment of the court.

(3) Id.--Issues--Law of Case.  --Where on a previous appeal it was held that
such a minute order was not intended as a final judgment of the court, but that
the formal interlocutory decree was intended as the judgment settling the rights
of the respective parties, that decision became the law of the case and was
controlling in a subsequent proceeding in mandamus to compel the issuance of an
order for the former husband of petitioner to show cause why he should not be
adjudged in contempt for failure to pay alimony as required by said formal
decree.

(4) Id.--Mandamus--Contempt--Pleading.  --In this proceeding in mandamus to
compel the issuance of an order for the former husband of petitioner to show
cause why he should not be adjudged in contempt for failure to pay alimony, the
petition contained sufficient allegations that said former husband was in
default of the payment of alimony which he was duly ordered to pay by the terms
of the final judgment of the trial court, and that he was financially able to
pay, where the amount ordered was $ 50 per month, and the petition alleged he
was earning $ 225 a month and that he had wilfully failed to pay the alimony
with the purpose of harassing and annoying the petitioner.

COUNSEL: William Ellis Lady for Petitioner.

Horowitz & McCloskey for Respondents.

OPINION

     The facts are stated in the opinion of the court.

    THE COURT. -- This is a petition for a writ of mandamus to require the
Superior Court of the County of Butte to issue an order for the defendant in a
divorce case to show cause why he should not be adjudged guilty of contempt for
failure to pay alimony required by the provisions of a judgment which was
rendered against him.

   The petitioner and Clyde Thomas were husband and wife. Dissensions arose
between them and they executed a written settlement of property rights in which
it was provided that in the event of a divorce "Clyde Thomas is to pay, and does
by these presents agree to pay unto the said wife, Suzette Thomas, the sum of
fifty ($ 50.00) Dollars per month, to be paid to his said wife until she may
remarry." A complaint for divorce was subsequently filed by this petitioner
against her husband in which it was alleged that the agreement in settlement of
property rights had been previously executed and "that in said agreement
heretofore made certain payments were agreed to be made to the plaintiff herein
by the defendant which payments defendant will be bound to pay and plaintiff
bound to receive, and if a decree of divorce is entered in this matter said
payments shall be included in said decree of divorce and be payable to the
plaintiff according to the terms of said agreement". The prayer of the complaint
then asked for a decree of divorce and "that the payments agreed to be made by
the defendant to plaintiff be incorporated in a decree of divorce and be made
payable to plaintiff; and for such other and general relief as the court shall
deem meet and proper". This complaint was duly served upon the defendant who
failed to appear or answer the same within the time allowed by law or at all and
his default was duly entered. October 2, 1928, the cause was tried in the
absence of the defendant. Witnesses were sworn and examined and a minute order
was entered in the following language: "Interlocutory decree ordered." On the
same date a written interlocutory decree of divorce was duly signed and filed
containing the following provision with respect to alimony: "It is further
ordered, adjudged and decreed that the defendant herein pay to the plaintiff
herein the sum of Fifty ($ 50.00) Dollars per month as alimony for the support
and maintenance of said plaintiff until such time as the said plaintiff may
remarry." After a lapse of one year and on October 8, 1929, a final decree of
divorce was duly entered containing the following language with respect to the
settlement of property rights and alimony: "It is further ordered, adjudged and
decreed that the defendant herein pay to the plaintiff herein the sum of Fifty
($ 50.00) Dollars per month as alimony for the support and maintenance of said
plaintiff until such time as the said plaintiff may remarry, in accordance with
property settlement entered into between plaintiff and defendant under date of
September 12, 1928." For a period of time the defendant paid these instalments
of alimony, but subsequently defaulted with respect to such payments.

   It is alleged in the petition for a writ of mandamus that the defendant in
the divorce proceeding failed and neglected to pay the petitioner any
instalments of alimony from or after February, 1934, and that he is in default
of such payments in the aggregate sum of $ 850; that at all times mentioned he
has been and now is employed as an assistant United States district attorney,
receiving a salary therefor in the sum of $ 225 a month and that he has failed
and neglected to make said payments of alimony with the wilful purpose of
harassing and annoying the petitioner; that after the defendant's default as
above stated the petitioner duly made an application to respondent in said
divorce proceeding, based upon said alleged facts and asked that court to issue
a citation therein for the defendant to show cause why he should not be adjudged
guilty of contempt for failure to pay the alimony above mentioned; that the
court denied petitioner's application and refused to issue a citation therein.
Thereupon this petition for a writ of mandamus was filed in this court, praying
for an order directing the respondent to show cause why he should not be
adjudged guilty of contempt of court for failure to pay alimony as directed by
the decree of divorce and praying that the court be required to proceed to hear
and determine the question of the defendant's alleged contempt.

   Upon this hearing it is contended by the respondent that the petition is
insufficient to warrant the issuing of a writ of mandamus for the reasons that
the complaint in divorce fails to affirmatively demand judgment for alimony and
that  the minute order which was entered at the trial of the divorce proceeding
fails to specifically  award alimony to the plaintiff and fails to approve or
adopt the alleged written settlement of property rights between the parties. It
is asserted the court was therefore without authority to render either the
interlocutory decree or the final decree of divorce awarding alimony to this
petitioner. It is asserted that the minute order which was entered upon the
trial of the cause amounts to a judgment which is binding upon this petitioner
in that regard and that it contains no affirmative order of the court for the
defendant in that proceeding to pay to the plaintiff any sum of money as alimony
or otherwise.

     We are of the opinion that the complaint in the divorce proceeding
sufficiently alleges the execution of the written settlement of property rights
and a sufficient request for the court to approve and adopt the same as a part
of its judgment and to allow the plaintiff in that action the sum of $ 50 a
month as alimony. The defendant failed and neglected to appear or answer the
complaint. Even though the language might have been more certain and specific,
the defendant in the divorce proceeding may not complain of what appears to us
to be a fair construction of the pleading. The complaint first alleges that the
written agreement of property rights was executed between the parties and then
specifically requests "that the payments agreed to be made by the defendant to
the plaintiff be incorporated in the decree of divorce and be made payable to
plaintiff".

     It is true that reputable authorities have held that where a minute order
of the trial of a divorce case has been entered which purports to determine the
issues of the proceeding it may be deemed to be the judgment which will be
controlling in subsequent proceedings. These authorities, however, are readily
distinguishable from the present case. It is apparent from the meager language
employed in the minute order of the divorce proceeding in this case that it was
not intended by the court as a determination of the issues of the divorce
proceeding, for it merely recites "Interlocutory decree ordered." At the time
this minute order was made the court signed and filed a formal interlocutory
decree of divorce in which the court specifically allowed plaintiff $ 50 a month
"as alimony for the support and maintenance  of said plaintiff" and directed the
defendant to pay the same. In the final decree of divorce this same language was
employed. It is evident that the court did not intend to have the issues of the
divorce proceeding determined by the mere entry of the minute order, but upon
the contrary a formal decree determining all of the issues of the proceeding was
then signed and filed as its judgment therein. The case of Baxter v. Baxter, 3
Cal. App. 2d 676 [40 P.2d 536], relied upon by the respondent, holds that a
minute order granting a divorce, approving a property settlement and awarding
the custody of children did purport to determine the issues of that case and
that it was therefore controlling as a judgment. In that case, however, the
minute order was very complete and specific for it contained the following
language: "Interlocutory decree of divorce granted plaintiff. Property
settlement approved; decree is made in accordance therewith. Minor children
granted to the plaintiff until the further order of the court." In the present
case the minute order does not purport to settle property rights or make an
award of alimony or even determine the right to a divorce. It merely says,
"Interlocutory decree ordered." The very language of this minute order
contemplates the making and entry of a formal judgment to determine the issues
involved in the case. This is vitally different and readily distinguishable from
the Baxter case.

     On a previous appeal to this court in the case of Thomas v. Superior Court
of Butte County, 129 Cal. App. 282 [18 P.2d 755], it was held that this very
minute order was not intended as a final judgment of the court and upon the
contrary it was determined that the formal interlocutory decree was intended as
the judgment settling the rights of the respective parties. That decision
becomes the law of this case. In that case the Appellate Court said:

   "While it is true that a minute order might be sufficient to carry out the
directions of the court, nevertheless the order here made shows upon its face
that it was not intended as a final judgment of the court."

     We are of the opinion that the petition in this case contains sufficient
allegations that the defendant in the divorce proceeding is in default of the
payment of alimony which he was duly ordered by the terms of the final judgment
of the trial court to pay, and that he is financially able to pay the same, for
the petition alleges  that he is earning $ 225 a month and that he has wilfully
failed to pay the alimony with the purpose of harassing and annoying the
petitioner.

   We are therefore of the opinion that the writ of mandamus should issue as
prayed for. It is so ordered.


                              52 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             FRANKLIN LIFE INSURANCE CO., Plaintiff, v. LORAYNE M.
          KITCHENS, Defendant, Cross-defendant and Respondent; MAUREEN
                L. KITCHENS, a Minor, etc., et al., Defendants,
                       Cross-complainants and Appellants

                                 Civ. No. 30233

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

            249 Cal. App. 2d 623; 57 Cal. Rptr. 652; 1967 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2269


                                 March 21, 1967

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  Carlos M. Teran, Judge.

   Interpleader by insurance company to resolve conflicting claims of life
insurance proceeds.

COUNSEL: Wilton W. Webster for Defendants, Cross-complainants and Appellants.

John M. Coleman for Defendant, Cross-defendant and Respondent.

JUDGES: Fleming, J.  Roth, P. J., and Herndon, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: FLEMING

OPINION

     Interpleader by Franklin Life to resolve contesting claims to life
insurance proceeds.  On one side, the insured's divorced wife, Lorayne M.
Kitchens, the named beneficiary under the policy; on the other, the guardian of
the insured's three minor children, Maureen, Thomas, and Susan Kitchens.

   The children claim on the basis of their parents' divorce decree, which in
disposing of community property awarded life insurance to the husband as his
separate property, "provided he shall at all times, until the youngest child of
the parties shall attain majority, maintain the said children, jointly, as the
beneficiaries of all such policies in effect." The husband failed to designate
the children as beneficiaries of the Franklin Life policy, and at the time of
his death his divorced wife remained the named beneficiary under the policy.

   The trial court ruled in favor of Mrs. Kitchens, reasoning that since the
parties to the contested divorce had not voluntarily agreed to change
beneficiaries, the court in the divorce action had been without jurisdiction to
order it.  Her demurrer  to the pleadings of the children was sustained, and
their claim to the proceeds dismissed.

   This relatively simple case contains the strands of several knotty and
complex problems.

   1. No Property Agreement Is Involved

     To support their claim to the insurance proceeds the children rely
principally on a theory of contract, contending that the husband and wife had in
substance made a voluntary agreement to designate the children as beneficiaries
of their insurance, an agreement enforceable by its third-party beneficiaries
under usual contract rules.  This agreement was reached, they argue, when the
attorney for the husband in the contested divorce submitted proposed findings of
fact designating the children as insurance beneficiaries, proposals which were
similar to those previously submitted by the attorney for the wife.  They argue
that the submission of parallel findings on the disposition of particular
community property, findings later adopted by the court, was equivalent to an
agreement between spouses on that subject.  To support their contention they
cite Chilwell v. Chilwell, 40 Cal.App.2d 550 [105 P.2d 122]; Mutual Life Ins.
Co. v. Franck, 9 Cal.App.2d 528 [50 P.2d 480]; Mutual Life Ins. Co. v. Henes, 8
Cal.App.2d 306 [47 P.2d 513]; and Gould v. Superior Court, 47 Cal.App. 197 [191
P. 56].

   We do not find these cases determinative of the present problem.  In each of
them it was clear that a settlement disposing of all community property had been
arrived at by the parties, either by formal written agreement or by agreed
stipulation in open court.  Such was not the case here, where the divorce decree
was the end-product of a contested action.  Submission by the parties of
proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law suggesting the disposition of
the community property, either at the specific direction of the court or on the
parties' own initiative in the hope their proposals will be adopted, does not
turn a contested case resolved by decision of the court into an agreed case
settled by consent of the parties.  Even when proposed findings on a particular
subject parallel those submitted by the adverse party, in the absence of some
showing of a belated compact between the parties settling all terms and
conditions of their affairs the essential element of a free accord remains
lacking.  In Farley v. Farley, 227 Cal.App.2d 1, 9 [38 Cal.Rptr. 357], the court
rejected a contention similar to that made here, saying of the party  sought to
be bound, "True, he did request the Utah court to substitute the north half of
the property for the south half originally awarded.  That act does not signify
voluntary submission to the property disposition.  It signifies only that
defendant  may have been constrained by necessity to make the best of a bad
situation without acceding to the situation itself." Here, the division of
property at the conclusion of the divorce trial, even though it followed the
proffered suggestions of the parties in some respects, was an involuntary
division of property by court order and not the result of a voluntary settlement
made by the parties themselves.  ( McLaughlin v. McLaughlin, 159 Cal.App.2d 287,
291 [323 P.2d 820].)

2. A Divorce Court May Order the Designation of Minor Children as Beneficiaries
of Community Life Insurance

   The court below concluded that a judgment ordering a spouse to designate
minor children as beneficiaries of community life insurance exceeded the
jurisdiction of the divorce court and was therefore void.  The argument that in
the absence of a property settlement such a judgment is necessarily
unenforceable appears based on two somewhat unrelated propositions concerning
the court's authority in a divorce action: (1) the court's power to dispose of
community property is limited to a simple division of property between spouses,
and (2) its authority to compel child support is restricted to the designation
of periodic monetary allowances. (Civ. Code, § 139.)

   We discuss each of these propositions.

   The first, that the court in a divorce action is limited to a simple division
of community property between spouses, derives from Simpson v. Simpson, 80 Cal.
237 [22 P. 167], a case in which an award of the homestead to the wife in trust
for her support and the support of seven minor children was adjudged an outright
award of community property to the wife against the husband's later claim to a
reversionary interest in the homestead. There had been no clear intent in the
judgment of divorce to create a trust, said the court, and the paragraph in the
judgment which mentioned support was only an expression of the motive for giving
the homestead to the wife and not a limitation on its absolute assignment under
an earlier paragraph of the decree. Although the court thereby found the trust
invalid for uncertainty of intent, it went on to discuss what it called another
consideration tending  to support its construction -- that the law did not
authorize the divorce court to assign the homestead to the wife in trust for any
purpose and the divorce court must have intended to act within its authority.
Furthermore, said the reviewing court, in the absence of statute courts have no
common law authority to create any kind of trusts, certainly not express trusts.
And finally, the court pointed out, no trustee had been designated under the
decree, for it would have been a legal impossibility for the wife to have acted
as trustee for herself.  But having made these broad pronouncements, the court
then returned to its original ground of decision, its construction of the decree
as an absolute award of the property in fee to the wife, and concluded its
opinion by declaring it unnecessary to decide what would have been the effect of
a final decree which had clearly assigned the homestead to the wife in trust.
On reading Simpson today, we deduce that the court was strongly inclined against
taking part of the homestead from the children to give it to a husband who had
been divorced for two years' habitual drunkenness and that as a precaution
against an undesirable result the court had set forth every reason it could
think of, both practical and theoretical, why the former husband was not
entitled to an interest in the homestead.

   But as often happens the dictum used in Simpson to fortify a disposition of
property to serve family purposes was later applied mechanically by another
court to defeat an award for family support, and in McKannay v. McKannay, 68
Cal.App. 701, 705 [230 P. 214], we find the flat declaration that a divorce
court cannot award community property to a spouse in trust for the benefit of
the children.  In that case the court found that a decree awarding the use of
the family home and furniture to the wife in trust for the benefit of the two
minor children, one of whom was a permanent  invalid, created a trust which was
beyond the power of the court to create, and, accordingly, the court reversed a
judgment which allowed the invalid daughter, the son, and the wife to continue
to occupy the family home.  The clear implication of the McKannay ruling is that
the divorce court can only divide the community property between the parties and
cannot set up terms and conditions governing its use.

   Yet Civil Code, section 146, the basic statute which authorizes the division
of community property in a divorce action, provides no direct support for the
holding in McKannay, but on the contrary, at least with respect to the
homestead, specifically  authorizes its assignment to the prevailing party for
an absolute or a limited period of time.  The statute contains no specific
prohibition against the assignment to a party of a community property estate for
years, an estate for the life of the assignee, an estate for the life of a third
party, or an estate for the minority of a third party.  In view of the absence
of any statutory prohibition against the assignment to a party of limited
interests in community property, we take the view that the holding in McKannay
proscribing trusts in community property, is open to further examination.

   The rule announced in McKannay favors a simple immediate division of
community property between spouses. While it is undoubtedly true in the great
majority of cases that the simplest rules provide the soundest solutions to
problems arising from the severance of the matrimonial relationship,
nevertheless in these days of fragmented property interests and of complex
custodial arrangements for children the simplest rules may not always furnish
the most desirable solutions.  Rules which served their purposes well on the
dissolution of the marital community in Simpson's day in 1889 may be inadequate
today to properly dispose of such property rights as choses in action,
intangible interests, contract claims, deferred compensation, accrued pensions,
annuities to take effect in the future, social security and veterans' benefits,
and, the subject of our concern here, insurance benefits.  If the authority of
the court in a divorce action was ever restricted to an immediate simple
division of community property between the parties, as McKannay suggests, we
think such a restriction no longer reflects current law and has been rendered
obsolete by the development of complex procedures for the deferred disposition
of intricate community property interests.  Flexibility of method and timing in
the disposition of community property is now accepted as a matter of routine.  (
McClenny v. Superior Court, 62 Cal.2d 140 [41 Cal.Rptr. 460, 396 P.2d 916];
Stevenson v. Superior Court, 62 Cal.2d 150 [41 Cal.Rptr. 466, 396 P.2d 922].)
We think it implicit from these cases that the authority of the divorce court
over community property is no longer limited to a simple division of the
community property between the parties.

   The second proposition, that the authority of the court in a divorce action
to order child support is limited to an allowance in money and does not include
the power to allocate specific property to assure support, was articulated in
Miller  v. Miller, 52 Cal.App.2d 443 [126 P.2d 357], a case in which
appellant-husband successfully appealed an interlocutory decree of divorce which
had ordered him to keep in effect a life insurance policy in favor of his child.
The appellate court, citing McKannay v. McKannay, supra, concluded that the
power of the divorce court to provide for the support of the child was limited
to an allowance in money and could not be extended to provide protection by
means of insurance against the death of the obligor.  A married parent is under
no obligation to protect his child by providing insurance on his life in favor
of his child, declared the court, and it could hardly be contended that a
divorced parent falls under a greater obligation towards his child than a
married one.  Additionally, the court found the decree defective because its
provision for insurance  was not specifically limited to the period of the
child's minority.

   Respondent-wife in Miller attempted to sustain the validity of the provision
for insurance as one for reasonable security for child support under Civil Code,
section 140.  The court, however, took the view that section 140 was designed to
secure payment of the suitable allowances for maintenance called for by section
139 in the same way that a mortgage secures periodic payments under a promissory
note, and that the liability for suitable allowances for child support under
section 139 was limited to periodic payments of money and did not comprehend the
maintenance of insurance in favor of a child.

   We do not find the opinion of the Miller case fully persuasive today on the
general propositions it purports to state.  In 1951, Civil Code section 139 was
amended by the legislature to expand the liability of a parent for child
support. At the time Miller was decided, section 139 merely authorized a court
to compel the husband to provide for the "maintenance" of the children of the
marriage.  Under the 1951 amendment liability for support under section 139 was
extended to cover both spouses, and its scope broadened from an obligation
limited to "maintenance" of the children to one which now includes "support,
maintenance, and education" of the children.  At the same time section 140 was
modified to read: "The court may require any person required to make any
payments under the provisions of this article to give reasonable security
therefor and may enforce the same by the appointment of a receiver, or by any
other remedy applicable to the case."  Clearly, the Legislature  in response to
modern needs has extended the parents' liability for child support to broader
territory, territory which now includes an obligation to educate children to
take their place in adult society.  In devising practical means to carry out
these expanded obligations of support imposed by the legislature, the courts, in
California and elsewhere, have been impelled to the use of new techniques to
insure the support, maintenance, and education of the children.  (3 A.L.R.3d
1170, 1178-1181; Farley v. Farley, 227 Cal.App.2d 1, 7 [38 Cal.Rptr. 357];
Guggenheimer v. Guggenheimer, 99 N.H. 399 [112 A.2d 61] (1955); Wallace v.
Wallace, 371 S.W.2d 918 (Texas 1963).) Among these new techniques are compulsory
designation of minor children as beneficiaries of insurance.

   The persistent surfacing of provisions in matrimonial decrees designating
minor children as beneficiaries of life insurance suggests to us that such
provisions serve a useful purpose and satisfy a legitimate need in modern
society.  Children of divorced parents, often excessively vulnerable to an
uncertain future, may need greater protection from the law than children of a
united household.  On separation or divorce, normally both spouses wish to
assure their minor children's future -- insofar as it is possible to do so
without undue sacrifice of present enjoyments.  Insurance provides a relatively
painless manner to achieve this objective, particularly when community property
insurance on the life of a parent exists.  In such circumstances need there be
any insurmountable objection to the enforcement of a decree compelling the
maintenance of insurance for the benefit of minor children? As a general
proposition, we think not.

     Turning to the order in this case, it appears to have been an appropriate
means to secure fulfillment of the obligation of the parent to provide the
support, maintenance, and education for his children required by Civil Code,
section 139.  Under the divorce decree the insured was obligated to pay $ 75 a
month for the support of each of the three minor children, a total of $ 225 per
month.  Apart from his business as a plumbing contractor the insured apparently
had no substantial accumulation of property.  At the time of the divorce Maureen
was 12 years old, Thomas was 10, and Susan was 8.   The obligation for child
support is a continuing one which survives the  death of the obligor and extends
to his estate.  ( Newman v. Burwell, 216 Cal. 608 [15 P.2d 511].)

     It is a reasonable inference that the trial court was attempting to assure
future payments of child support in a  case where it thought such assurance
might well become necessary -- as indeed it did.  We think the court used
appropriate means authorized by Civil Code, section 140, to enforce the parent's
obligation to provide reasonable security for the support of his children.  (
Taylor v. George, 34 Cal.2d 552, 556 [212 P.2d 505].)

   Returning again to the Miller case, its opinion suggested a further
invalidity in the decree under review in that the period of required insurance
could have extended beyond the child's minority to a time when the child was no
longer legally entitled to support.  The same criticism of the decree could be
made in the present case, since the order compelling the designation of
beneficiaries would remain in effect until the youngest of three children
reached majority and could include a period when the elder children had come of
age and were no longer entitled to support.  We reject such an objection for two
reasons: (1) if the decree were too broad, the remedy for its invalidity lay in
an appeal from the decree, the remedy used in the Miller case but not here; (2)
in actual fact at the time of the insured's death all the children were still in
their minority, and the fact that the order might have become ineffective under
certain conditions should not nullify its application to events falling within
its legitimate sphere.

   3. What Remedies Are Available to the Beneficiaries Against Whom

   Assuming the propriety of an order requiring the designation of minor
children as beneficiaries of community property life insurance, we still face
the mechanics of its enforcement -- who may enforce, what remedies are available
against what property, on whom is it binding?

     Who may enforce?  Clearly, the parties to the original divorce decree could
enforce the decree by contempt, by specific performance, or by other suitable
relief.  Likewise, the beneficiaries of the order can seek to enforce it.  A
child may apply to court to enforce a support order directed against its parent.
(Civ. Code, §§ 137.1, 203.)  Since we have concluded that an order requiring the
designation of minor children as beneficiaries of insurance may serve as
security for child support, the children themselves would be able to enforce its
provisions directly against their parent.  (37 Cal.Jur.2d, Parent and Child, §
25.)  Under this reasoning children could sue a parent's estate for damages for
the latter's failure to comply with a designation-of-beneficiary order, in the
same manner they could sue the estate for a failure  to carry out similar
provisions of a property settlement agreement incorporated in a divorce decree.
( Mutual Life Ins. Co. v. Henes, 8 Cal.App.2d 306 [47 P.2d 513]; Waxman v.
Citizens National Bank, 123 Cal.App.2d 145 [266 P.2d 48].) In both instances the
basis for the suit is the neglect of the parent to perform a duty placed on him
by the court.

   What remedies against what property?  The children in their cross-complaint
claim a direct ownership in the insurance proceeds by virtue of the
designation-of-beneficiary order in the divorce decree. In so doing they go
beyond a personal claim against their parent for his failure to perform a
personal duty and seek to establish a direct interest in specific property. Is
this claim justified?  In order to sustain a direct interest in the proceeds
themselves, the children must hurdle problems of jurisdiction as well as
inferences from the test of the order itself.

     On jurisdiction: without question the divorce court had personal
jurisdiction over both spouses and could order them to perform any acts relevant
to the disposition of the community property or the support of the family.  The
court also had personal jurisdiction to determine the community property of the
marriage and allocate it between spouses, a determination and allocation  fully
binding on the parties themselves.  However, when in a divorce we pass from
unquestioned jurisdiction over the person of a spouse to jurisdiction over that
person's property, we enter the haze and fog of uncertainty, both of
jurisdiction and of its exercise.  Normally, for a court to exercise dominion
over property it must take it into its possession.  Only after the court has
seized possession does its power become directly effective on the property
itself.  While the seizure of intangible property is a matter of some
difficulty, a remedy for this difficulty has been provided in divorce
proceedings by the Civil Code provision for the appointment of a receiver. (Civ.
Code, § 140.) If in the present case the court had taken actual or constructive
possession of the policy through the appointment of a receiver, then it could
have taken effective steps to dispose of the policy on terms and conditions and
create a specific lien on the policy and its proceeds as security for the
payment of child support. (Civ. Code, § 140; Willen v. Willen, 121 Cal.App. 351,
353 [8 P.2d 942]; Baylis v. Baylis, 48 Cal.App.2d 674, 676 [120 P.2d 89].) But a
receiver was not appointed, the policy was not taken into the possession of the
court, either actually or constructively, and it appears doubtful to us that a
personal  order of the divorce court could create a direct interest in the
insurance proceeds in favor of third parties which would be binding on other
third parties. An authoritative disposition by the divorce court of future
insurance proceeds would be at the expense of the rights of all other parties,
both those whose interests arose before and those whose interests arose after
the entry of the divorce decree. Other children, other wives, other relatives,
creditors, pledgees, assignees, all have potential claims against the proceeds
which might conflict with the decree of the divorce court.  If, in the absence
of a specific order of the divorce court taking possession of specific property
and charging it with a specific lien, we should attempt to impose an equitable
lien against particular property, we would find ourselves hard-pressed to
formulate a general rule which could operate satisfactorily in relation to the
rights of third parties. In a number of cases our courts have wrestled with
claims of general equitable liens against specific property, and the best
formulation of law they have been able to produce defines the issue as the
determination of the stronger and better equities in each case.  ( Shoudy v.
Shoudy, 55 Cal.App. 344, 352 [203 P. 433].) An illustration of the difficulties
is found in Mutual Life Ins. Co. v. Franck, 9 Cal.App.2d 528 [50 P.2d 480], a
case in which the husband on divorce agreed to maintain his first wife as the
beneficiary of two insurance policies on his life.  The husband remarried, his
second wife paid part of the premiums on the insurance,  and the husband made
his second wife the beneficiary of both policies.  The subsequent litigation on
the death of the insured resulted in a standoff -- the first wife getting the
proceeds of one policy, and the second wife the proceeds of the other.  To
compound the confusion the first wife obtained the proceeds of the particular
policy whose premiums the second wife had paid.

   On inferences arising from the form of the order: the insurance provision in
the divorce decree was couched in purely general terms which failed to identify
the policies of insurance with which it dealt, the companies who were the
insurers, the face amounts of the policies, the value of the policies, the
amounts of the premiums, or the names of existing beneficiaries. On reading the
order itself it seems fairly certain that the divorce court did not attempt to
go beyond the entry of a personal order directing the husband to take certain
action.  The order did not purport to grant the children any interest in the
property itself, but merely charged the husband with an obligation to perform a
specific act, an act  whose enforcement would necessitate further action by the
court.  In that respect the jurisdiction exercised by the court over the husband
appears to have been purely personal, and the remarks of this court in
Tischhauser v. Tischhauser, 142 Cal.App.2d 252, 255  [298 P.2d 551], are
pertinent: "'Such a decree does not operate directly upon the property nor
affect the title.  The decree is made effectual through the coercion of the
parties by directing some action on their part.  . . .  If the court has the
power to order a party to convey land outside the state, it follows that upon
his failure to do so the court has the power to enforce its order by directing
the clerk to execute the conveyance.' ( Chamberlain v. Wakefield, 95 Cal.App.2d
280, 292 [213 P.2d 62].) . . . .

   "The judgment herein purports to make an immediate disposition of the Oregon
properties, but it also provides 'that each of the parties hereto upon request
shall execute, acknowledge and deliver to the other his or her heirs, assigns or
other representatives any and all deeds, releases, bills of sale or instruments
which now or hereafter be necessary to carry out and execute the provisions of
this judgment.'

   "This language, read in the light of the other provisions of the judgment,
was sufficient to require respondent to execute a deed conveying to appellant
the Oregon ranch as her separate property."

   In view of the general terms of the order in the divorce decree, we are not
prepared to recognize a direct interest in the insurance proceeds in the
children.

   4. The Wife Is Bound By the Divorce Decree

     However, in this case it is not essential to a recovery on behalf of the
children for us to hold that such general orders create liens against specific
property and bind nonparties to their proceedings.  Mrs. Kitchens, the
beneficiary under the policy, was a party to the divorce action from whose
decree the rights of the minor children derived.  As a party, she had knowledge
and notice of the terms of the decree, and an opportunity to protest or appeal
its provisions had she desired.  She, too, was, and is, under a continuing duty
to support, maintain, and educate her minor children, a duty binding on her and
her estate.  (Civ. Code, §§ 196, 205, 243.)  While a divorce decree does not
encompass an in rem disposition of property against the entire world, it does
involve a disposition of community property between spouses, which disposition
is fully binding on them as an incident  to the dissolution of the marriage
relationship.  ( McClenny v. Superior Court, 62 Cal.2d 140, 148 [41 Cal.Rptr.
460, 396 P.2d 916].)   We conclude that the provisions of the divorce decree
remain binding on Mrs. Kitchens until modified or revoked in some appropriate
fashion.  We think, too, that customary principles of collateral estoppel and
res adjudicata operate to bar Mrs. Kitchens from seeking to nullify a
disposition of community property which she herself had initiated and which had
become an integral part of a final decree which neither party had appealed.  (
Estate of Williams, 36 Cal.2d 289, 292 [223 P.2d 248, 22 A.L.R.2d 716]; Hughes
v. Bank of America, 78 Cal.App.2d 631, 636-637 [178 P.2d 533].) The principles
apply even in litigation between her and third parties. ( Hughes v. Bank of
America, supra.)   Accordingly, by virtue of the decree we deem Mrs. Kitchens a
constructive trustee of the insurance proceeds for the benefit of her children,
an involuntary trustee who falls under an equitable duty to assign the proceeds
to the children in order to effectuate the terms of the decree to which she was
a party.  (Civ. Code, § 2224; Day v. Greene, 59 Cal.2d 404 [29 Cal.Rptr. 785,
380 P.2d 385, 94 A.L.R.2d 802].) The children may enforce this involuntary trust
in the present suit.

   To summarize: (1) compulsory designation of minor children as beneficiaries
of a community property insurance policy may be an appropriate exercise of the
power of the court under Civil Code, section 140, to provide security for the
support, maintenance, and education of minor children required by Civil Code,
section 139; (2) such orders are not restricted to those arising from voluntary
agreement of the parties but may be imposed upon the parties  by the court; (3)
while such orders may or may not be binding on third parties and may or may not
attach to specific property, they are fully binding on the parties to the
divorce itself, and may be enforced against them by its beneficiaries.

   The judgment of dismissal is reversed.  In reversing we do not foreclose
further pleadings by the parties or a showing by the divorced wife that the
provisions of the divorce decree had been subsequently modified or revoked.


                              53 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          LOIS E. WUEST, Plaintiff and Appellant, v. WILLIAM O. WUEST,
                            Defendant and Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 14946

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

           72 Cal. App. 2d 101; 164 P.2d 32; 1945 Cal. App. LEXIS 983


                                December 7, 1945

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied January 2, 1946,
and Plaintiff and Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court was
Denied February 4, 1946.  Shenk, J., Voted for a Hearing.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  Geo. A. Dockweiler, Judge.

   Action to vacate in part an interlocutory judgment of divorce.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Trial--Findings--Conclusiveness.  --Remarks of the trial judge made in the
course of trial or in a final opinion of the court are ineffective to override
the decision embraced in the findings and conclusions.

(2) Judgments--Equitable Relief--Presumptions.  --In an action to vacate in part
a judgment awarding divorce for cruelty which followed a waiver of express
findings, it is presumed that sufficient evidence was received in support of the
findings.

(3) Divorce--Judgment--Relief from Fraudulent Decree--Evidence.  --In an action
to vacate in part an interlocutory divorce decree, plaintiff's testimony as to
what the judge told her attorney was hearsay, but her testimony that the judge
stated in her presence that the court wanted her to sign a stipulation so that
there would be no appeal was competent evidence.

(4) Id.--Judgment--Relief from Fraudulent Decree--Evidence--Sufficiency.  --In
an action to vacate in part an interlocutory divorce decree, the evidence
supported findings that the parties executed a stipulation to dispose of the
community property in a certain manner and that plaintiff, a sick woman, fearing
that she would be required to go back to a husband who had mistreated her, was
induced by the judge's remark in open court to sign the stipulation which she
did not comprehend and which operated to her disadvantage.

(5) Id.--Judgment--Relief from Fraudulent Decree--Findings.  --In an action to
vacate in part an interlocutory divorce decree, a finding that the judge's
remark in open court caused plaintiff honestly to believe that a divorce would
be denied her unless she joined in a stipulation to divide the community
property in a certain manner was tantamount to a finding of fraud.

(6) Id.--Disposition of Community Property--Determination on Appeal.  --Civ.
Code, § 148, declaring that the appellate court is authorized to revise the
trial court's disposition of community property in a divorce action, is not to
be construed as an authorization that the appellate court must necessarily
interfere with a decision on an issue which is committed to the discretion of
the trial court.

(7) Id.--Disposition of Community Property--Review--Presumptions.  --It is
presumed that before making a division of community property on a dissolution of
the marriage the trial court considered the health of both parties, their
capabilities and all other factors that weigh in a determination of whether it
is necessary to make a partition in kind or by sale. (Civ. Code, § 147.)

(8) Id.--Disposition of Community Property--Division in Kind or Money Award.
--Where one spouse at the time of divorce is ill and the other is capable of
caring for the minor children and of operating the community property, it is not
an abuse of discretion to award the unfortunate partner his share in money in
lieu of a specific interest and award title and possession to that one who is
able therewith to maintain a home and provide for the progeny.

(9) Id.--Disposition of Community Property--Division in Kind or Money Award.
--In a divorce action the court may divide the community estate between the
spouses and award the non-offending party support money in lieu of a share of
the property or in addition thereto.

(10) Id.--Disposition of Property--Determination of Character of Property.  --A
finding that certain land was community property was supported by evidence that
it was purchased on contract after marriage with the earnings of the parties,
that prior to maturity of the contract defendant assigned it to plaintiff who
took title in her name and at defendant's suggestion declared a homestead
thereon, that subsequently the homestead was abandoned and thereafter the
parties at various times joined in executing an encumbrance on the land which
was discharged with their joint earnings.

(11) Husband and Wife--Property--Determination of Character--Presumptions.  --It
is a rebuttable presumption that title to property standing in the wife's name
is her separate property.

(12) Evidence--Opinion Evidence--Value of Property.  --In an action to vacate in
part an interlocutory divorce decree, the evidence supported a finding that the
value of certain property was at the sum fixed by an appraiser appointed in the
divorce action, rather than at the sum fixed by plaintiff's expert witness in
the present action, especially where the appraiser first mentioned was by
stipulation of the parties appointed by the court.

(13) Interest--On Judgment.  --In an action to vacate in part an interlocutory
divorce decree as to disposition of property, plaintiff was entitled to interest
on the value of her share of the community property from the time that such
share was transferred to her husband for a specified sum, pursuant to the
judgment.

COUNSEL: Newby, Holder & Newby for Plaintiff and Appellant.

F. Murray Keslar for Defendant and Appellant.

JUDGES: Moore, P. J.  McComb, J., and Wilson, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: MOORE

OPINION

     Defendant appeals from a judgment of department 33 of the Superior Court of
Los Angeles County which modifies the interlocutory decree of divorce rendered
in department 21 of the same court by Judge Bullock.  He grounds his appeal on
the insufficiency of the findings to support the judgment and the insufficiency
of the evidence to support the findings.  While we cannot enthusiastically agree
that the evidence in the record preponderates in favor of plaintiff on the issue
of fraud in connection with the divorce judgment,  yet our doubts as to the
wisdom of the findings are without potency under the guidance of the familiar
rule that the power of the reviewing court begins and ends with its
determination that there is substantial evidence which will support the findings
and judgment.  ( Crawford v. Southern Pacific Co., 3 Cal.2d 427 [45 P.2d 183];
Fischer v. Keen, 43 Cal.App.2d 244, 248 [110 P.2d 693].)

   Plaintiff is also dissatisfied with certain provisions of the current
judgment and likewise appeals.  A clear understanding of the issues necessitates
a full narrative of the two trials and the causes of the controversies.

   Resume of Past Events and Decisions

   Acting through counsel other than those currently appearing, plaintiff filed
her action for separate maintenance on August 18, 1939.  At that time she was
under observation in a psychopathic ward on the complaint of defendant.  She was
discharged in the following October and the insanity accusation dismissed.  Upon
a hearing of the order to show cause the court awarded plaintiff alimony but
awarded custody of the two children to defendant.  The case came on for trial in
February, 1940, when evidence was taken, and again on April 24 when two
physicians filed their reports declaring plaintiff to be sane but extremely
nervous. Two days later plaintiff by leave filed her amended complaint alleging
extreme cruelty, praying for custody of the children and a "reasonable division
of the itemized community property," support and maintenance and attorney's
fees.  Defendant thereupon filed his answer and cross-complaint for divorce.
Other sessions were held.  On May 22 a stipulation signed by the parties and
their counsel  was approved by the court and on May 31, 1940, the interlocutory
decree was entered whereby plaintiff was awarded the right to a divorce, her
share of the community property "in accordance with the aforementioned
stipulation," and the children were committed to the care of defendant.

   The Stipulation

   Since the stipulation is the storm center of this controversy an outline of
its terms will serve to illuminate our discussion.  It was executed during the
progress of the divorce trial on May 22, 1940.  It established (1) the present
net value of the community property to be $ 34,165.25; (2) one half thereof is
to be paid Lois in full settlement of her community property rights,  at the
rate of $ 50 monthly in two equal installments over a period not to exceed 23.73
years; (3) after her share shall have been wholly paid all her rights shall then
be satisfied and William shall own as his separate estate all the property free
and clear of any claims of Lois; (4) all of such monthly payments shall be in
addition to alimony to be payable to Lois; (5) the $ 17,082.62 shall be a lien
on the three parcels of realty described; (6) the parties will execute all
documents necessary to effectuate the stipulation; (7) William will pay all
indebtedness against the properties; (8) the parties shall divide the home
furnishings as previously agreed; (9) the balance of $ 550 attorney's fees shall
be paid directly to plaintiff's counsel in monthly installments; and (10)
William shall furnish Lois annually a certified copy of his income tax return
made to the federal government.

   The Interlocutory Decree

   In addition to the divorce and award of the $ 17,082.62 plaintiff was granted
an allowance of $ 75 monthly to be paid in two equal installments and defendant
was enjoined from encumbering or disposing of the real property prior to a full
compliance with the stipulation.

   Having unsuccessfully attempted in April, 1941, to cause the divorce decree
to be modified with respect to its disposition of the community property, on May
27, 1941, plaintiff through her counsel herein appearing filed the instant
action demanding that the divorce decree be set aside insofar as it affects the
property rights of the parties; that plaintiff's share of $ 17,082.62 less the
amounts already applied thereon be paid forthwith to plaintiff and that in the
event of default of such  payment the property described in the divorce decree
be sold for the purpose of enforcing the lien thereof.

   The Attack on the Divorce Decree

   The alleged bases of plaintiff's attack upon the divorce decree are as
follows: (1) Plaintiff had suffered from numerous physical assaults upon her by
defendant for several years preceding the commencement of the divorce action;
(2) such assaults, coupled with the fact of plaintiff's passing through a change
of life, caused her to be in a highly nervous condition at all times during the
pendency of the divorce litigation; (3) her health was in such a precarious
condition that she was subjected, during the trial, to investigation by court
assistants and psychiatrists; (4) plaintiff was informed by her own attorney
that the judge of department 21 had stated that plaintiff might not be awarded a
decree of divorce if she should refuse to sign the stipulation so that neither
party could appeal; (5) the judge stated in open court before the stipulation
was signed that she did not think the evidence sufficient to sustain a cause of
action for separate maintenance or divorce and demanded that the agreement of
the parties be put in writing because they might change their minds; (7)
plaintiff signed the stipulation because of such representations, her weakened
mind, her menopause, and the assaults upon her by defendant.

   The complaint also alleged that plaintiff had not been informed before she
signed the stipulation that she would thereby be deprived of applying for a
modification of the judgment with reference to her property rights; that she was
never informed within six months after the divorce decree that she might apply
to the court for relief under section 473, Code of Civil Procedure; that during
the trial of the divorce action the judge in chambers  informed the attorneys
that the court would not divide the property in kind for fear that plaintiff
because of her unstable condition might not be able to hold her property or the
proceeds of a sale thereof, and that plaintiff's share "should be based upon her
life expectancy" and paid to her in monthly installments; that plaintiff had no
knowledge of those conferences until about May 27, 1941; that she never
authorized her attorney to waive written findings.

   A general demurrer to the complaint herein was sustained without leave to
amend.  From a judgment of dismissal plaintiff appealed, resulting in a reversal
with a declaration that if a trial judge is convinced by the evidence that a
plaintiff is  entitled to recover, judgment should accordingly be entered,
leaving plaintiff free to appeal from such portion thereof as may be deemed
unjust.  ( Wuest v. Wuest, 53 Cal.App.2d 339, 345 [127 P.2d 934].)

   The cause was tried in October, 1944, after which the court made findings
that all of the substantial allegations of the complaint are true.  The court
concluded and adjudged that the divorce decree be revised only in the following
particulars: (1) It is void as to the division of the community property; (2) in
lieu of such division plaintiff shall recover $ 17,082.62, the value of her
share as of May 31, 1940, less the sum of $ 3,150 which had been paid since the
latter date; (3) provided that prior to the expiration of 30 days after entry of
judgment defendant may execute his promissory note for the sum awarded in favor
of plaintiff, maturing in ten years, bearing interest at six per cent per annum
from its date, and other customary stipulations of such documents, such note to
be secured by a first mortgage upon the three parcels of real property
constituting substantially the corpus of the community estate; (4) upon his
payment in full of the amount due under the judgment then the title to the three
parcels shall vest in defendant as his own separate estate; (5) this judgment is
not intended to affect the provisions of the interlocutory decree of divorce or
its order for alimony.

     In his effort to demonstrate his theses defendant invokes the statements of
the trial judge made in the course of his colloquies with counsel.  In this he
must fail.  Remarks of the trial judge made in the course of trial or in a final
opinion of the court are ineffective to override the decision embraced in the
findings and conclusions.  ( DeCou v. Howell, 190 Cal. 741, 751 [214 P. 444];
Lord v. Katz, 54 Cal.App.2d 363 [128 P.2d 907]; In re Lasker, 51 Cal.App.2d 120,
124 [124 P.2d 72].)

   The Evidence Supports the Findings

     Plaintiff's right of recovery arises out of a combination of facts.  The
first is that she had suffered extreme cruelties at the hands of defendant.  The
judgment roll in the divorce action was received in evidence.  It established
detailed allegations of extreme cruelty. Judgment for plaintiff awarding divorce
for cruelty having followed a waiver of findings it is presumed that sufficient
evidence was received in support of such findings.  ( Geneusz v. Harrington, 218
Cal. 760, 762 [25  P.2d 4]; Gin S. Chow v. City of Santa Barbara, 217 Cal. 673
680 [22 P.2d 5].) Also the charge of defendant's extreme cruelty was adjudicated
in the divorce action and no appeal was taken therefrom.  Moreover, at the trial
of this action plaintiff testified that he was so abusive she could not go back
to him.

   That plaintiff was suffering a high degree of nervousness was established by
the facts that defendant had in a legal proceeding accused her of insanity and
that she was undergoing examinations by specialists appointed by the court and
found to be highly nervous at the divorce trial.

     While plaintiff's testimony that her own attorney told her that the judge
told him that a divorce might not be granted unless she signed the stipulation
was hearsay and should have been rejected, yet her testimony that the judge
stated in her presence that the court wanted her to sign the document so that
there would be no appeal was competent evidence.  Since it was believed by the
court and all contradictory evidence was rejected, we have the fact established
that the sick woman, fearing that she would be required to go back to a husband
who had mistreated her, was required to sign an agreement the full import of
which she did not comprehend and which operated to her disadvantage.

     The findings are sustained not only by the testimony of Mrs. Wuest but also
by all inferences which might reasonably have been drawn by the trial court.  (
Patten & Davies Lumber Co. v. McConville, 219 Cal. 161, 164 [25 P.2d 429];
Hotaling v. Hotaling, 193 Cal. 368, 379 [224 P.  455, 56 A.L.R. 734]; Morse v.
Custis, 38 Cal.App.2d 573, 576 [101 P.2d 702].) These cases hold that every
substantial conflict in the evidence must be resolved in favor of the finding;
that of two conflicting inferences fairly deducible from the evidence on appeal
that must be accepted which supports the judgment; that in a case where
different inferences may be drawn the reviewing court will not draw from the
facts any inferences contrary to such as might have been drawn by the trial
court.  In view of the eagerness of Judge Bullock to protect plaintiff against
herself it was not an unreasonable inference that in her zeal to confer a
benefit upon the unfortunate woman the judge approved of a division of the
community property which was violative of plaintiff's legal rights.

   The Findings Support the Judgment

     To defendant's contention that the findings do not support the judgment it
will be noted that in addition to  the finding of the execution of the
stipulation by the parties and their counsel and the entry of the judgment in
pursuance thereof the court found true all of the substantial allegations of the
complaint.  The finding that the judge's remark in open court caused plaintiff
honestly to believe that a divorce would be denied her unless she joined in the
stipulation is tantamount to the finding of a fraud.  Plaintiff was at the time
under surveillance and her memory of the psychopathic ward was not mollified by
either her existing nervous condition or her simultaneous examinations by the
psychiatrists From these findings the conclusions and judgment logically follow,
since upon obtaining a divorce on the ground of extreme cruelty she was entitled
to more than the share awarded to defendant who was at fault.  ( Civ. Code, §
146; Tipton v. Tipton, 209 Cal. 443 [288 P. 65].)

   Plaintiff not Entitled to a Division in Kind

   But plaintiff presents her grievances against the decision to which we now
advert.  Her first attack is upon the failure to make a division in kind.   The
provision that the appellate court is authorized to revise the trial court's
disposition of community property ( Civ. Code, § 148) is not to be construed as
an authorization that we must necessarily interfere with a decision upon an
issue which is committed to the sound discretion of the trial judge.  Whether
valuable properties should be transferred to a woman who demonstrates no special
genius for management of business affairs, who is ill and so extremely nervous
as to require a denial to her of custody of her children necessitates a most
careful scrutiny by the court before whom she presents her cause.   It is
presumed that before making a division of community properties upon a
dissolution of the marriage the trial court considered the health of both
parties, their capabilities and all other factors that weigh in a determination
of whether it is necessary to make a partition in kind or by sale.  ( Civ. Code,
§ 147.) While we have reviewed the evidence we find no good reason for altering
the judgment upon that score.  Both judges before whom plaintiff appeared
concluded that her interest in the properties would be best conserved by having
them operated by the defendant.  The "particular circumstances" which plaintiff
asserts must exist in order to justify a cash payment instead of a division in
kind did appear in bold outline at both trials.

     Two of the parcels are revenue-producing properties.  No overpowering
reason is suggested why their operation should not be committed to defendant.
His business experience as well as plaintiff's lack of it and her precarious
health argue sternly for defendant's retention of control of those properties.
While it is true that a wife and mother should as a general rule retain
possession of the home, yet where the husband has the care of the children with
the aid of an employed housekeeper and is required to pay the wife moneys with
which to hire a home, it cannot be said that the court below did not exercise a
sound discretion in awarding money to plaintiff for her interest in that
property.  Where one spouse at the time of divorce is ill and the other is
capable of caring for the minor children and of operating the community
property, it is a wise policy to award the unfortunate partner in the community
his share in money in lieu of a specific interest and award title and possession
of the properties to that one who is able therewith to maintain a home and
provide for the progeny.  ( Bailey v. Bailey, 142 Wash. 359 [253 P. 121].)   It
is the settled practice for the courts to divide the community estate between
the spouses and to award the nonoffending party support money in lieu of a share
of the property or in addition thereto.  ( Webster v. Webster, 216 Cal. 485 [14
P.2d 522]; 3 Cal.Jur. 10-Yr.Supp. 669.)

     Parcel 1 was Community Property

     The finding that parcel 1 was community property is amply supported.  The
lot was purchased on contract after marriage with the earnings of the parties.
About a year prior to the maturity of the contract defendant assigned it to
plaintiff who on September 15, 1919, took title in her name and at defendant's
suggestion declared a homestead thereon.  Three years later the homestead was
abandoned and subsequently they joined in executing a mortgage upon the lot
which was discharged with their joint earnings. Another loan was secured by a
trust deed which was likewise paid with community earnings and a reconveyance
was made in the usual form.  Nine years thereafter defendant obtained a loan of
$ 5,000 on the business lot (parcel 2) which fund he expended in improving the
home.  That loan having become defendant's obligation by virtue of the divorce
decree was thereafter repaid by him.  Finally, when plaintiff filed her first
complaint  for separate maintenance in her amended complaint she alleged that
parcel 1 was community property.

     All lands or personalty acquired after marriage by either husband or wife
with earnings of either is community in character.  ( Civ. Code, § 164.) While
the fact that title to property standing in the name of the wife is presumed to
be her separate property, that is a rebuttable presumption.  Whatever may have
occasioned the placing of the title in her name, the other facts above mentioned
and reasonable inferences fairly deducible therefrom warrant the finding that
parcel 1 was community property. Plaintiff cites many authorities holding that
the husband may make gifts of community property to his wife ( Title Insurance &
Trust Co. v. Ingersoll, 158 Cal. 474 [111 P. 360]; Yoakam v. Kingery, 126 Cal.
30 [58 P. 324]; Miller v. Brode, 186 Cal. 409 [199 P. 531].) But none of these
or any other decision prevents the trial court from deciding upon substantial
evidence that the conveyance of a community asset to the wife was not intended
as a gift thereof to be her separate estate.

   The Evidence Supports the Finding of Value

     Plaintiff contends that the court adopted the values established in the
divorce action and that it exercised no independent judgment to derive a
determination of that issue.  She argues that because her expert witness Rees
called in the latter stages of the trial testified the value of parcel 2 to be $
22,800, the court had no alternative but to adopt that appraisal rather than $
15,000.  Plaintiff overlooks the fact that the court received in evidence the
files in the divorce action which show an appraiser of the Department of Water
and Power of the City of Los Angeles, to be $ 15,000 on parcel 2.  No good
reason appears why the court should have adopted the valuation fixed by Mr. Rees
rather than that by Mr. Elkins.  Moreover, by stipulation of the parties the
court appointed an appraiser for his own "guidance." At any rate, a
determination of a fact upon conflicting evidence is the peculiar function of
the trier of facts.  ( Patten & Davies Lumber Co. v. McConville, supra.)

   Plaintiff Entitled to Interest

     Finally, plaintiff assigns as error the court's refusal to allow her
interest on the value of her share from May 31, 1940.  On this issue she must
prevail.  When plaintiff's share  of the community estate was transferred to
defendant for a specified sum on May 31, 1940, she was entitled to the $
17,082.62 at that time.  That defendant was granted the privilege of discharging
his debt by meager installments should not be interpreted to mean that he was to
be relieved of the obligation to pay interest.  By such a construction plaintiff
received much less than one-half of the value of the properties, contrary to law
and to the intention of the judge who signed the divorce decree. A judgment
bears interest from its date unless the contrary appears.  ( Code Civ. Proc., §
1033; McNabb v. McNabb, 47 Cal.App.2d 623, 627 [118 P.2d 869].) It follows that
the original judgment for $ 17,082.62 bore interest from May 31, 1940, to
October 26, 1944, in the sum of $ 5,260.32, making the amount thereof $
22,342.94.  Deducting therefrom the total payments theretofore made, to wit, $
3,150 and interest on the installments after payment in the sum of $ 357, leaves
$ 18,835.94 as the amount for which the revised judgment should have been
entered.

   It is therefore ordered that the judgment herein be modified by substituting
$ 18,835.94 in place and in stead of $ 13,932.62 and as thus modified it is
affirmed.


                              54 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          WILLIAM HUNSAKER BRILL, Respondent, v. NANCY PIERSON BROOKS
                             MACY BRILL, Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 6394

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, THIRD APPELLATE DISTRICT

          38 Cal. App. 2d 741; 102 P.2d 534; 1940 Cal. App. LEXIS 718


                              May 6, 1940, Decided

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition by Appellant to have the Cause Heard in the
Supreme Court, after Judgment in the District Court of Appeal, was Denied by the
Supreme Court on July 1, 1940.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Ventura
County. Edward Henderson, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Marriage--Annulment--Presumptions--Findings.  --In this action to annul a
marriage on the ground that defendant had a former husband living from whom she
had not been divorced, where there was evidence that the former husband was
living two years and four months prior to the marriage of plaintiff and
defendant, it was to be presumed, under subdivision 2 of section 61 of the Civil
Code, that he was still living at the time of that marriage and the court was
justified in making a finding to that effect.

(2) Id.--Divorce--Evidence--Presumptions--Findings.  --In said action, where
there was evidence that, when defendant left the state in which she had resided
with her former husband, there was pending an order to show cause why he should
not be enjoined from prosecuting an action for divorce in any state, except on
the statutory ground of adultery, it was to be presumed that he did not violate
said order, and in the absence of a showing that plaintiff had committed
adultery, the presumption of her innocence was applicable, and the evidence
justified the finding that the former husband had not obtained a divorce against
defendant at the time of her marriage to plaintiff.

(3) Id.--Jurisdiction--Residence--Evidence--Judgments.  --In said action, where
it had to appear, in order for a sister state to acquire jurisdiction to grant a
divorce, that the person seeking such relief had been an actual and bona fide
resident of that state for six weeks immediately preceding the commencement of
the action, and defendant obtained a divorce in that state within seven weeks
after her arrival, and left shortly thereafter, returning only for a week end
and a two weeks' visit, and the trial court found that she went there for the
sole purpose of securing a divorce and that her residence was merely a simulated
or pretended residence, said decree of divorce was null and void.

(4) Id.--Domicile--Divorce--Judgments--Full Faith and Credit--Comity.  --If
either spouse removes to another state and acquires a domicile, jurisdiction
attaches in that state based on its interest in and right to fix the matrimonial
status of its new member by virtue of which it may decree such status, and after
such length of service as it may prescribe or for such causes as it may allow, a
decree may be granted, effective in that state, but if made on substitutional
service, and perhaps on personal service, if in evasion of the laws of another
state, it is not entitled to full faith and credit in other states, but will, by
comity, be recognized if not detrimental to the other states' policy or
interest.

(5) Id.--Divorce--Jurisdiction--Judgments--Full Faith and Credit--Collateral
Attack.  --If the applicant for divorce is a mere sojourner in a state, in which
the other party is not domiciled, that state has no jurisdiction to grant a
decree on substituted service, and such a decree, even though authorized by its
own laws, is not entitled to full faith and credit as a matter of right or
comity; and the actual residence of one party or the other in the state in which
the decree is granted, being essential to the jurisdiction to make it, whether
such domicile in fact exists may be collaterally inquired into where the decree
is sought to be used in another state.

(6) Id.--Jurisdiction--Consent--Appearance.  --Jurisdiction cannot be conferred
by consent; and in said action, where the appearance of defendant's former
husband in the divorce action brought by her in a sister state was by an
attorney under a power of attorney executed by said husband some two weeks prior
to the filing of the complaint, he could not thereby confer jurisdiction on the
court by consent.

(7) Id.--Annulment--Residence.  --In said action, where plaintiff was a bona
fide resident of this state, and perhaps both parties were, the courts of this
state had jurisdiction to declare the marriage of plaintiff and defendant a
nullity.

COUNSEL: S. S. Hahn and W. O. Graf for Appellant.

Daniel M. Hunsaker for Respondent.

JUDGES: PULLEN, P. J. Thompson, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: PULLEN

OPINION

     The facts are stated in the opinion of the court.

   PULLEN, P. J. -- This is an appeal from a judgment of annulment of marriage.

   The purported marriage between the parties hereto was annulled upon the
ground that at the time of such marriage appellant had a former husband living
from whom she was not divorced. From that order this appeal is taken.

   In 1928, appellant was a resident of New York. In 1928 she married George H.
Macy, and both resided in New York. On June 4, 1934, appellant commenced an
action against Macy in New York from which it appeared that in 1930 she had
obtained a decree of separation from Macy wherein he was ordered to pay her $ 15
a week for support and maintenance; she also set forth that during all of the
times therein referred to she had continuously resided in the city of New York,
and that Macy had brought an action in Connecticut against her for divorce on
the ground of desertion; and prayed for an injunction against Macy restraining
him from prosecuting such action. An order to show cause was issued, and
according to the records, is still pending.

   On October 1, 1934, Macy and appellant entered into a contract wherein Macy
agreed to pay her a lump sum in lieu of support and maintenance as prescribed in
the decree.

   We next find appellant in Reno, where she arrived October 5, 1934. She was
met at the depot by an attorney, whom she had employed to obtain a divorce for
her, -- having telegraphed him before she left New York. She immediately  rented
an apartment in Reno, and on November 21st, filed her action for divorce upon
the ground of extreme cruelty.

   Simultaneously with the filing of the complaint, defendant Macy filed his
answer, through an attorney to whom he had, on November 7, 1934, some fourteen
days prior to the commencement of the action for divorce in Nevada, given a
power of attorney to represent him. On November 21, 1934, a decree was filed
granting appellant a divorce upon the ground of cruelty from George Macy.
Appellant remained in Reno until shortly before Christmas when she went to San
Francisco and then to Hollywood, where she was New Year's eve. She remained in
California until midsummer, returning to Reno over a week end, and later in the
year spent about two weeks in Reno visiting friends. To various persons she
stated her home was in New York and in her marriage license issued to herself
and respondent in March, 1937, she gave her residence as Hollywood, although at
the time of the trial of this action she claimed that she was then and at all
times after October 5, 1934, had been a resident of Nevada. On January 28, 1937,
appellant met respondent in Hollywood, and on March 29, 1937, they were married
in Yuma, Arizona. This action for annulment was tried in the county of Ventura,
California, the residence of respondent.

     The first point urged for reversal is that the evidence is insufficient to
support a finding that at the time of the marriage of respondent to appellant,
she was then the wife of Macy. No direct evidence was adduced at the trial that
Macy was living on the 29th of March, 1937, but respondent, in the absence of
such evidence, relies upon various presumptions to support that fact.

   Section 61 of the Civil Code provides that "a subsequent marriage contracted
. . . during the life of a former husband or wife . . . is illegal . . . unless:

   "1. The former marriage has been annulled or dissolved, . . .

   "2. Unless such former husband or wife is absent and not known to such person
to be living for the space of five successive years immediately preceding such
subsequent marriage, or is generally reputed or believed by such person to be
dead at the time such subsequent marriage was contracted. . . ."

     Macy was alive on November 21, 1934, at which time his answer was filed in
the case of Macy v. Macy, some two years and four months before the marriage of
appellant and respondent, and it would therefore be presumed under the second
subdivision of the foregoing section that he was alive at the date of the
marriage of appellant and respondent. ( People v. Glab, 13 Cal. App. 2d 528 [57
P.2d 588].)

     It is also claimed there is no showing that Macy had not obtained a valid
divorce from appellant prior to her marriage to respondent. In this connection
it will be recalled that at the time appellant left for Reno there was still
pending in New York, an order to show cause directed to Macy why he should not
be enjoined from prosecuting an action for divorce in any state, except upon the
statutory ground permitted in the State of New York. As adultery is the only
ground for absolute divorce recognized in New York, which is also a crime in New
York, in the absence of any showing that appellant had committed adultery, the
presumption of innocence was applicable.  Such a presumption is applicable in
civil as well as criminal cases. (Jones on Evidence, vol. 2, sec. 195; Guidera
v. Lapiana, 52 Cal. App. 460 [199 P. 557].)

   It is also to be presumed that Macy did not violate the order to show cause
and attempt to divorce appellant upon any other ground in another state.

   It would therefore appear there was sufficient evidence in the record in the
absence of anything to the contrary, to justify the finding that Macy was living
on March 29, 1937, and that he had not obtained a divorce against appellant
prior to that date, and inasmuch as presumptions are evidence they may be the
basis for findings of fact. (Sec. 1957, Code Civ. Proc.; Stafford v. Martinoni,
192 Cal. 724 [221 P. 919].)

     The next point urged is that the divorce granted by the courts of Nevada
was null and void.

   In order that Nevada acquire jurisdiction to grant a divorce it must appear
that the person seeking such relief was an actual and bona fide resident of the
State of Nevada for six weeks immediately preceding the commencement of an
action. Appellant arrived in Reno, Nevada, on October 5, 1934. On October 1,
1934, she and her husband had in the State of New York, entered into an
agreement whereby Macy  agreed to pay to appellant the sum of $ 2,500 in full
satisfaction of all claims for alimony, maintenance or further support from him.
On November 21, 1934, a decree of divorce was granted in Nevada, and shortly
thereafter appellant left Nevada as hereinabove set forth.

   The trial court, in the cause now before us, found that appellant went to
Nevada for the sole purpose of obtaining a divorce from George H. Macy, and
almost immediately after she had obtained such divorce, left Nevada and did not
again reside there prior to her purported marriage to respondent. The court also
found that appellant's purported residence in Nevada was solely for the purpose
of obtaining a divorce from Macy, and that her residence in Nevada was merely a
simulated or pretended residence, and that she never had been a bona fide
resident of or domiciled in Nevada.

   Section 9640 of the Nevada Compiled Laws requires that a plaintiff in an
action for divorce shall have resided six weeks in that state before suit is
brought, but the Nevada Supreme Court has held that residence in the state
solely for the purpose of obtaining a divorce is not sufficient to confer
jurisdiction, but that bona fide residence, with the intention of remaining must
appear. ( Walker v. Walker, 45 Nev. 105 [198 P. 433].) In De Bouchel v. Candler,
296 F. 482, the factual situation was quite similar to the instant case.
Plaintiff sued for breach of contract of marriage. The contract and breach were
admitted but one of the defenses was that plaintiff was invalidly divorced from
a former husband. The evidence showed a decree, regular upon its face, granted
in Nevada upon substituted service, although with actual notice to defendant
therein, the jurisdiction of the court resting upon plaintiff's residence in
Nevada for the statutory period, the matrimonial domicile being in the State of
Louisiana. To several, the plaintiff had declared Nevada to be her permanent
home, while to others she stated she had gone to Reno merely to obtain a divorce
. The Nevada divorce was held to be invalid, and the court in upholding that
judgment, pointed out that while the Constitution of the United States required
full faith and credit to judicial decrees of other states, and that principle
was further supplied by the principle of comity, yet each state is given the
right to regulate marriage and divorce within its borders.

    The court there also pointed out that if a decree is void under the laws of
the state where granted, it is void everywhere and subject to collateral attack.
If, however, the divorce is granted by the state of the matrimonial domicile and
that state has first and full jurisdiction over the question of divorce, and if
rendered after regular service, the rights of the parties are fixed, and such
decree must receive full faith and credit in all other states. But if one of the
parties removes from the state of the matrimonial domicile, jurisdiction still
remains to decree a divorce even through substitutional service and such decree
is entitled to full faith and credit everywhere. If both leave the state of the
matrimonial domicile, such domicile ends and the jurisdiction lapses, and such
state has no further concern.

     If either spouse removes to another state and acquires a domicile,
jurisdiction attaches in that state based on its interest in and right to fix
the matrimonial status of its new member by virtue of which it may decree such
status. After such length of service as it may prescribe or for such causes as
it may allow, a decree may be granted, effective in that state; but if made on
substitutional service, and perhaps on personal service, if in evasion of the
laws of another state, it is not entitled to full faith and credit in other
states, but will, by comity, be recognized if not detrimental to the other
states' policy or interest.

     If the applicant for divorce is a mere sojourner in a state, in which the
other party is not domiciled, that state has no jurisdiction to grant a decree
on substituted service. ( Kegley v. Kegley, 16 Cal. App. 2d 216, 220 [60 P.2d
482]; Warren v. Warren, 127 Cal. App. 231 [15 P.2d 556]; Latterner v. Latterner,
51 Nev. 285 [274 P. 194]; Presson v. Presson, 38 Nev. 203 [147 P. 1081]); and
such decree, even though authorized by its own laws is not entitled to full
faith or credit as a matter of right or comity, and the actual residence of one
party or the other in the state in which the decree is granted, being thus
essential to the jurisdiction to make it, whether such domicile in fact exists,
may be collaterally inquired into where the decree is sought to be used in
another state.

     In the instant case the facts show that Macy, the husband, appeared in the
divorce action by an attorney, holding a power of attorney so to do. The fact
this power of attorney  was executed some two weeks prior to the filing of the
complaint, and that the defendant interposed no particular defense, as well as
the circumstances appearing in the record, suggests at least an attempt to
confer jurisdiction upon the courts of Nevada by consent. It is unnecessary to
dwell upon the rule that jurisdiction cannot be conferred by consent. ( Ryder v.
Ryder, 2 Cal. App. 2d 426 [37 P.2d 1069]; Andrews v. Andrews, 188 U.S. 14 [23 S.
Ct. 237, 47 L. Ed. 366].)

     Appellant questions the jurisdiction of the courts of California to inquire
into the matter, but inasmuch as at least one of the parties, Brill, was a bona
fide resident of California, and perhaps both, as appears from the marriage
license, the courts of California had jurisdiction to declare the marriage a
nullity. ( Anderson v. Anderson, 7 Cal. 2d 265 [60 P.2d 290]; Sullivan v.
Sullivan, 219 Cal. 734 [28 P.2d 914].)

   It would therefore appear that the judgment of the trial court was just and
proper under the facts and circumstances as shown by the record, and should be
affirmed. It is so ordered.

   Thompson, J., concurred.


                              55 of 100 DOCUMENTS

               O. B. HENDRICKS, Appellant, v. HELEN W. HENDRICKS,
                                   Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 20036

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division One

          125 Cal. App. 2d 239; 270 P.2d 80; 1954 Cal. App. LEXIS 1871


                                  May 17, 1954

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  Joseph W. Vickers, Judge.

   Action and cross-action for divorce.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Causes for Denying Divorce--Recrimination.  --Trial court is not
"required" to deny a divorce merely because both parties are found to be at
fault.

(2) Id.--Causes for Denying Divorce--Recrimination.  --Where it appears from the
pleadings, affidavit, finding and judgment, as well as from briefs of respective
parties in a divorce case, that legitimate objects of marriage have been
destroyed, no public policy would be served by denying a divorce because each
party was guilty of extreme cruelty towards the other.

(3) Marriage--Nature of Contract.  --A marriage contract differs from other
contractual relations in that there exists a definite and vital public interest
in reference to marriage relation.

(4) Divorce--Causes for Denying Divorce--Recrimination.  --Where divorce case
presents picture of long continued strife not merely between husband and wife
but also involving two children in marital quarrels, and where constant
litigation has produced nothing but additional trouble for entire family, public
policy cannot be served by denying a divorce to both parties because each has
been at fault.

COUNSEL: Lauren M. Handley for Appellant.

Gladys Towles Root and Joseph M. Rosen for Respondent.

JUDGES: Doran, J.  White, P. J., and Drapeau, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: DORAN

OPINION

     The judgment from which plaintiff appeals, dated November 7, 1952, and
entered November 10, 1952, recites that "The above matter came on regularly for
trial on the 14th to 17th and 22nd to 31st days of October, 1952," that both
parties were represented by attorneys, and "the Court having found that by the
evidence produced both parties were entitled to a decree of divorce on the
grounds of extreme  cruelty, and the Court in applying the doctrine of
recrimination under the law is required to deny relief to both parties; and
findings having been expressly waived in open court; It Is Ordered, Adjudged and
Decreed that a divorce be denied to each party and that each party bear his own
costs."

   Appellant's brief states the grounds of this appeal as follows:

    "From an examination of the language contained in the Judgment . . . it
would appear that the Trial Court apparently believed it was required to apply
blindly the Doctrine of Recrimination under a set of fact such as this and was
required to deny relief to both parties.  . . .

   "It was, however, decided in De Burgh v. De Burgh, (39 Cal.2d 858) at page
871 [250 P.2d 598], that no such mechanical application of the Doctrine of
Recrimination is proper and the Court therein expressly disapproved cases which
appeared to have supported such a mechanical application.  . . ."

   The De Burgh opinion, just cited, was decided on November 25, 1952,
approximately two weeks after the entry of the trial court's decision in the
instant litigation.   Holding that a trial court is not "required" to deny a
divorce because of recrimination, the reviewing court at page 871 "concluded
that section 122 of the Civil Code (the recrimination statute) imposes upon the
trial judge the duty to determine whether or not the fault of the plaintiff in a
divorce case is to be regarded 'in bar' of the plaintiff's cause of divorce
based upon the fault of the defendant."

   Further elucidating the rule to be applied in this matter, the De Burgh case
says, "There can be no precise formula for determining when a cause of divorce
shown against a plaintiff is to be considered a bar to his suit for divorce, for
the divorce court, as a court of equity . . . is clothed with a broad discretion
to advance the requirements of justice in each particular case.  In general,
however, certain major considerations will govern the court's decision," namely,
(1) the prospect of reconciliation; (2) the effect of the marital conflict upon
the parties; (3) the effect of the marital conflict upon third parties; and (4)
comparative guilt.  "We have concluded," said the reviewing court, "that in
light of the foregoing discussion the findings and conclusions in the present
case are not sufficient to support the determination that recrimination was
established."

   The appellant's brief avers that, from the pleadings and affidavits on file,
it appears in the present case (1), "That  prospects of reconciliation appear
totally absent (Clerk's Transcript, p. 40); (2) That continued litigation and
marital conflict appear likely to ruin the health and finances of both the
parties (Clk. Tr., p. 41); (3)  That the effect of this discord on the children
of the marriage, both of whom have now almost obtained their majority, appears
degrading and bestial (Clk. Tr., pp. 9-11, 20, 21); (4) It would appear from the
Court's findings that they are both guilty of cruelty." Appellant also calls
attention to the fact "that recrimination was not, apparently, pleaded by either
of the parties."

   Answering the foregoing contentions, respondent's brief states that since
this is an appeal on the judgment roll alone, and there is no transcript of the
evidence, and findings were waived, "The evidence is presumed to support the
judgment in the absence of findings." Respondent further claims that there is no
evidence "that the trial judge blindly adopted the doctrine of recrimination,"
and that "There are no facts before this court to show that the conduct of the
parties was not such as to bar a decree of divorce to each of them." the De
Burgh case, supra, "did not hold," respondent says, "that recrimination could
not bar a divorce but that the question of whether or not it existed in bar of
divorce is one of fact for the trial court to determine."

   The recent case of Phillips v. Phillips, 41 Cal.2d 869, 876 [264 P.2d 926]
(Dec. 24, 1953), reaffirms the rule stated in the De Burgh case, and holds that
"The doctrine of recrimination may not be mechanically applied by a trial judge,
but it is an equitable principle to be followed according to the circumstances
of each case and with a proper respect for the paramount interests of the
community at large.  . . .  The trial court necessarily has a broad discretion.
It must, however, give consideration to the prospects of reconciliation, the
effect of the marital conflict upon the husband, wife, and third parties, and
the comparative fault of the parties."

   The decisions hereinbefore mentioned are, of course, controlling in the
instant controversy.  Applying the rule there announced to the present
situation, it appears that appellant's contentions are sound.   Following the
trial court's explicit finding that "both parties are entitled to a decree of
divorce on the grounds of extreme cruelty," the judgment goes on to state that
the court, "in applying the doctrine of recrimination under the law is required
to deny relief to both parties." (Italics added.) As has been seen from the
cited cases, this is not the law, and although both parties  have been found to
be at fault, the trial court was not "required" to deny relief.

     As was said in the Phillips case, supra, it appears from the pleadings,
affidavit, finding and judgment, as well as from the briefs of the respective
parties, that in the present case "the legitimate objects of the marriage have
been destroyed. No public policy would be served by denying a divorce because
each party was guilty of extreme cruelty towards the other.  It is a degradation
of marriage and a frustration of its purposes to use it as a means of punishing
the parties to the divorce action.  In our opinion, the trial judge should not
have denied the parties a divorce on the ground that recrimination had been
shown."

   Assuming the trial court's statement that both parties were entitled to a
divorce on the ground of cruelty to be a general finding, which respondent does
not admit, then it is conceded that when an appeal is taken on the judgment roll
alone the evidence is conclusively presumed to support the findings.  However,
respondent's further statement that in such case "it is also conclusively
presumed that the said evidence will operate as a bar and prevent both parties
from acquiring a decree of divorce, is not persuasive.  In view of the holdings
in the cases hereinbefore cited, such a conclusion does not necessarily follow.

     It is fundamental that a marriage contract differs from other contractual
relations in that there exists a definite and vital public interest in reference
to the marriage relation. The "paramount interests of the community at large,"
quoting from the Phillips case, supra, is a matter of primary concern.   The
instant case presents a picture of long continued strife not merely between
husband and wife but as well involving the two children in the marital quarrels.
The parties have been married almost 23 years, and as appellant says, it appears
that "their constant litigation has produced nothing so far but additional
trouble for the entire family (Clk. Tr., pp. 40, 41)." Public policy cannot well
be served by denying a divorce to both parties.  Since both parties are, under
the evidence, entitled to a divorce on the ground of cruelty, they should be
granted that relief without further litigation.

   For the reasons hereinbefore stated, the judgment is reversed with directions
to grant a decree of divorce to both parties, each party to bear his own costs
on appeal.


                              56 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            FRANK WOODWORTH, Plaintiff and Appellant, v. DORA DEANE
                      WOODWORTH, Defendant and Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 29222

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

            242 Cal. App. 2d 301; 51 Cal. Rptr. 410; 1966 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1128


                                  May 19, 1966

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  Walter H. Odemar, Judge.

   Action for divorce.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Proceedings--Right to Deny Divorce.  --It is error to refuse to
grant an interlocutory decree of divorce in an uncontested case where
plaintiff's evidence, adequately corroborated, fully establishes a ground for
divorce.

(2) Id.--Public Policy as to Divorce.  --The law seeks to foster and preserve
marriage, but when a marriage has failed and the family has ceased to be a unit,
the purposes of family life are no longer served and divorce will be permitted.
Public policy does not discourage divorce where the relations between husband
and wife are such that the legitimate objects of matrimony have been utterly
destroyed.

(3) Id.--Grounds--Extreme Cruelty--Evidence.  --In a suit for divorce, the
evidence showed that the wife treated her husband with extreme cruelty where,
shortly after the marriage ceremony, she informed him he was not loved, that the
marriage was a mistake, and that she had no intention of continuing it or
fulfilling her obligations thereunder, and where she left him three times within
the first two months of the marriage and ultimately rejected his efforts to
secure a resumption of the marital relationship.

(4) Id.--Causes for Denying Divorce--Collusion.  --That plaintiff's wife had
expressed her desire that a divorce be obtained did not justify denial, on the
ground of collusion, of the divorce sought by plaintiff where plaintiff's
testimony that his wife left him three times during the first two months of the
marriage and finally refused to return, telling plaintiff she did not love him
and that the marriage was a mistake, was corroborated by the wife's letters to
plaintiff expressing her attitude toward the marriage and by the testimony of
one witness to whom the wife had confirmed her lack of love for plaintiff and
her insistent refusal to fulfill her marital obligations, and of another witness
to whom plaintiff had exhibited the wife's letters and who observed their effect
on plaintiff.

(5) Id.--Causes for Denying Divorce--Collusion.  --While conduct of one spouse
for the announced purpose of forcing the other spouse to obtain a termination of
the marriage would not entitle the offending spouse to a divorce, absent some
evidence suggesting that the acts were committed with the consent or agreement
of the injured spouse for the purpose of furnishing the latter with collusive
grounds for divorce, the motives of the offending spouse will not deprive the
other of his right to relief in a suit for divorce.

COUNSEL: Harold Drooz for Plaintiff and Appellant.

No appearance for Defendant and Respondent.

JUDGES: Herndon, J.  Roth, P. J., and Fleming, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: HERNDON

OPINION

     Plaintiff appeals from the judgment denying him the divorce he sought by
reason of the acts of mental cruelty committed by his wife.  Plaintiff's
complaint alleged that the parties had married in Carson City, Nevada, on
February 12, 1964, and separated two months later on April 13, 1964.  They had
acquired no community property and there were no children the issue of their
marriage. Service of summons in the action was by way of publication, since the
last communication plaintiff had received from defendant was a letter on which
she had written the return address "Gen. Delivery, Palm Springs, Calif." No
answer to the complaint was filed and defendant's default was duly entered.

   At the trial, plaintiff testified that during the extremely short duration of
their marriage, defendant had left him three  times stating on each occasion
that she did not love him.  After her last departure she telephoned him and
wrote him two letters, in each instance expressing her desire to terminate the
marriage. These letters were introduced into evidence.

   In her first letter dated April 22, 1964, defendant commented upon the fact
that plaintiff "didn't seem anxious" to obtain a divorce and she therefore
threatened to file a separate maintenance suit against him in which she would
seek $ 200 per month alimony.  In her second letter dated May 4, 1964, defendant
had written:

   "I talked to Mother on the phone yesterday, and she said you had called her
several times.  As I ask before, I really wish you wouldn't keep calling her,
because it just makes her worry more about everything, and she really doesn't
know any more than you do.  . . .  Frank, I think it would do you good to go
back to Denver or Kansas City for awhile, where you could run around with Cecil
& your old friends.  You know down deep that it just isn't going to work out
with us, so why make matters worse than they already are.  You know I want a
divorce, but, you say you won't get it, and you know I sure don't have any money
to pay for it, so guess we will either have to have a separate maintenance like
I mentioned in my other letter, or else I will have to wait until you want it
bad enough to get it."

   One witness called by plaintiff testified that she had known him for five
years and that he had resided continuously in Los Angeles County for one year
preceding the filing of the instant action.  She also testified that he had
shown her the letters he had received from his wife and that she had  observed
that he "was unhappy, very despondent."

   Another witness testified that she had known defendant for some two and
one-half years and had seen the parties together.  She testified that defendant
had come to her just a week after her marriage and told the witness that she had
left plaintiff and did not intend to return to him.  However, defendant did
return for a brief period but she again visited the witness after her final
departure and told her that she didn't love plaintiff and that the marriage had
been a mistake.

     It has long been the established rule in California that it is error to
refuse to grant an interlocutory decree of divorce in an uncontested case where
the evidence of plaintiff, adequately corroborated, fully establishes a ground
for divorce. ( Kirkpatrick v. Kirkpatrick, 152 Cal. 316 [92 P. 853].)   Further,
as stated in De Burgh v. De Burgh, 39 Cal.2d 858, 863-864  [250 P.2d 593]: "In a
divorce proceeding the court must consider not merely the rights and wrongs of
the parties as in contract litigation, but the public interest in the
institution of marriage. The family is the basic unit of our society, the center
of the personal affections that ennoble and enrich human life.  It channels
biological drives that might otherwise become socially destructive; it ensures
the care and education of children in a stable environment; it establishes
continuity from one generation to another; it nurtures and develops the
individual initiative that distinguishes a free people.  Since the family is the
core of our society, the law seeks to foster and preserve marriage. But when a
marriage has failed and the family has ceased to be a unit, the purposes of
family life are no longer served and divorce will be permitted.  '[Public]
policy does not discourage divorce where the relations between husband and wife
are such that the legitimate objects of matrimony have been utterly destroyed.'
[Citations.]" (Italics added.)

     It is clear from the instant record that the trial court accepted the
testimony of plaintiff as truthful in character, and, despite the paucity of
detail, there is certainly nothing therein indicative of fabrication.  It is
equally apparent that one spouse has treated the other with extreme cruelty
where almost immediately after the performance of the marriage ceremony she
informs the other that he is not loved, that the marriage was a mistake, that
she has no intention of continuing it or fulfilling her obligations thereunder,
and confirms the seriousness of these intentions by leaving him three times
within the first two months and ultimately rejecting his efforts to secure a
resumption of the marital relationship.

     The sole ground enunciated by the trial court for denying plaintiff relief
was its belief that it was powerless so to do by reason of section 130 of the
Civil Code which provides: "No divorce can be granted upon the default of the
defendant, or upon the uncorroborated statement, admission, or testimony of the
parties, or upon any statement or finding of fact made by a referee; but the
court must, in addition to any statement or finding of the referee, require
proof of the facts alleged, and such proof, if not taken before the court, must
be upon written questions and answers."

   The trial court indicated that it felt that since defendant had expressed her
desire that a divorce be obtained, plaintiff should be denied a divorce because
his ultimate decision to seek relief by reason of his wife's wrongful conduct
presented  a situation in which both parties had "agreed" to a divorce. Such a
conclusion is based upon a misconception of the purpose and effect of section
130.

   Section 130 is primarily designed to prevent collusion between the parties.
( MacDonald v. MacDonald, 155 Cal. 665, 671 [102 P. 927, 25 L.R.A. N.S. 45].)
However, collusion is not presumed absent unreasonable delay in commencing the
action ( Civ. Code, § 125), and there is nothing whatever in the instant record
tending to indicate collusion. Plaintiff's testimony was corroborated by
defendant's letters (cf.  Fulton v. Fulton, 220 Cal. 726, 727 [32 P.2d  634])
which, inter alia, referred to plaintiff's initial refusal to seek a termination
of the marriage despite the existence of grounds therefor created by defendant's
previous wrongful conduct.

   The facts upon which plaintiff's cause of action is based were further
adequately corroborated by the testimony of the witness to whom defendant had
confirmed her expressed lack of love for plaintiff and her insistent refusal to
fulfill her marital obligations.  Finally, the fact of the wife's abandonment of
plaintiff and the effect upon him of the letters which she wrote to him was
corroborated by the testimony of his second witness to whom he had shown these
letters.

     It is true, of course, that defendant's acts of cruelty toward plaintiff
did not entitle her to a divorce. However, her desires in the premises are
essentially immaterial.  One spouse might well beat the other savagely, engage
in flagrant acts of adultery and desert the other for the statutory period, all
for the announced purpose of forcing the other to obtain a termination of the
marriage. Manifestly, such conduct would not entitle the offending spouse to a
divorce, but, absent some evidence suggesting that the acts were committed with
the consent or agreement of the "injured"  spouse for the purpose of furnishing
the latter with collusive grounds for divorce, the motives of the offending
spouse will not deprive the other of his right to relief. There is not a
scintilla of evidence in the present record from which an inference of collusion
might justifiably be drawn.  Indeed, the remarks of the trial court indicate
that no such factual conclusion had been drawn.  Plaintiff therefore should have
been granted a divorce in accordance with his prayer.

   Parenthetically, it might be noted that if the trial court's interpretation
of section 130 were to be accepted, plaintiff would never be able to free
himself from this marriage notwithstanding  the fact that it had been so
effectively destroyed by his wife's wilful misconduct.  For example, if
plaintiff had chosen not to proceed on the basis of defendant's acts of cruelty,
but had waited until her desertion had continued for one year, he still could
not have obtained relief under the court's view because the corroborative
evidence would have remained the same and defendant's desire to terminate the
marriage would still have been the announced reason for her absence.

   The judgment is reversed with the direction that appellant be granted an
interlocutory judgment of divorce.


                              57 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            HAZEL T. PONZI, Appellant, v. ALDO F. PONZI, Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 5707

            Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District

            157 Cal. App. 2d 772; 321 P.2d 847; 1958 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      2305


                               February 21, 1958

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Riverside
County.  S. Thomas Bucciarelli, Judge pro tem.  *

*   Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

   Action for separate maintenance wherein defendant cross-complained for
divorce or annulment.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Marriage--Validity--Evidence.  --A finding that the marriage of plaintiff
and defendant was invalid was supported by evidence conclusively showing that
when plaintiff married defendant she had not secured her final divorce decree
from another man and that such other man was then living.

(2) Id.--Validity--Evidence.  --Where it appeared that plaintiff, before her
marriage to defendant, was married to her first husband on a date three days
before he had acquired a final divorce decree from his previous wife, but there
was no evidence of a marriage certificate between him and his previous wife, and
where plaintiff married defendant before receiving a final divorce decree from
her first husband and received property from him under a property settlement
agreement, a finding that plaintiff's marriage to her first husband was not
dissolved until entry of the final divorce decree was supported by the evidence.


(3) Id.--By Cohabitation and Reputation.  --A finding in a separate maintenance
action that the parties were not validly married was supported by evidence that
they went through a marriage ceremony before the wife's final divorce decree
from a former husband was entered, that they established a home in this state
but thereafter lived in Texas and Oklahoma, both of which states recognize
common-law marriages, that the husband testified that he never intended to
establish residence in those states but went there only because he was
transferred there in military service and kept all his personal belongings in
the home in this state, and that, while the parties lived together as husband
and wife in those states, they maintained their residence in this state and
there was no discussion between them indicating that they intended to remarry in
Texas or Oklahoma or any other state.

(4) Divorce--Public Policy--Contracts.  --An agreement in which a husband agreed
to pay an encumbrance against property owned by his wife in consideration of
which she would not contest his divorce action was null and void, against public
policy, and lacking in legal consideration, and the court did not err in
refusing to order the property settlement agreement between the parties carried
out.

(5a) (5b) New Trial--Discretion of Court--Review.  --There was no abuse of
discretion in denying a new trial after judgment in a separate maintenance
action that the parties were not validly married because plaintiff wife was
still married to her first husband at the time of the marriage ceremony with
defendant, where a judgment of annulment of plaintiff's first marriage was
considered by the court, but no grounds for the denial were stated, since it was
apparent that defendant was not a party to the annulment action and that prior
to the time the annulment was entered plaintiff had secured a final divorce
decree from her first husband.

(6) Appeal--Presumptions--Orders on Motion For New Trial: Grounds of Decision
Below.  --All presumptions are in favor of the trial court's order denying a
motion for new trial and an appellate court will not interfere unless a manifest
and unmistakable abuse of discretion is shown, the order will be affirmed if it
may be sustained on any ground.

COUNSEL: Hennigan, Ryneal & Nixen for Appellant.

Thompson & Colegate and Harry M. Dougherty for Respondent.

JUDGES: Mussell, J.  Barnard, P. J., and Griffin, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: MUSSELL

OPINION

     In the first cause of action herein, for separate maintenance, it was
alleged that the parties were married in the city of Quartzsite, Arizona, on
February 26, 1950; in the second cause of action that they were married during
the month of May, 1951, by common law in Tulsa, Oklahoma; and in the third cause
of action that they were married by common law in May and June, 1951, in the
state of Texas.  Inability of plaintiff to support herself was alleged in each
cause of action and attorney's fees, costs and an allowance for support were
sought.  It was further alleged that the parties entered into an agreement on
April 16, 1954, wherein defendant agreed to pay certain encumbrances on
plaintiff's property, amounting to approximately $ 5,950.

   Defendant filed an answer in which he admitted entering into a marriage
ceremony with plaintiff on February 26, 1950, but alleged that the marriage was
null and void for the reason that plaintiff was then married to one Joseph
Andrew Carmine.  Defendant denied that common law marriages were effected in
Oklahoma or Texas, as alleged in the complaint.  He also filed a cross-complaint
in which he stated a cause of action for divorce, alleging that the parties
entered into a marriage ceremony in Quartzsite, Arizona, on February 26, 1950,
and in a second cause of action he realleged the said Arizona marriage but
further alleged that at said time plaintiff Hazel T. Ponzi was married to Joseph
Andrew Carmine and that said marriage was in full force and effect and
undissolved by decree of divorce, or otherwise.  It was further alleged that the
parties had acquired since marriage certain property in Sun Valley, California.
In the prayer the cross-complainant asked for a divorce or, in the alternative,
for an annulment, and that the Sun Valley property be divided equally between
the parties.

   The trial court found that at the time of the marriage ceremony in Arizona
Hazel T. Ponzi was still married to Joseph Andrew Carmine, who was then alive,
and that her  marriage to him had not been dissolved by decree of divorce,
annulment, death, or otherwise; that Hazel T. Ponzi owns as her separate
property certain real property known as 12125 Jerome Street, Sun Valley,
California; that on or about April 16, 1954, the parties hereto entered into an
agreement under which the defendant and cross-complainant promised to discharge
certain encumbrances on the said real property; that the sole purported
consideration on the part of the plaintiff for the said agreement was her
promise not to contest a divorce action to be brought by the defendant and
cross-complainant, and that the agreement was therefore against public policy,
lacking in legal consideration and null and void; that no common-law marriage
was entered into between the parties in the state of Oklahoma or in the state of
Texas; that on or about April 2, 1944, Hazel Ponzi, under the name of Hazel T.
Beuschel, entered into a marriage with Joseph Andrew Carmine, also known as Joe
Carmine Occhogross, in the state of Texas and that said marriage was not
dissolved by a final decree of divorce until August 16, 1950; that at the time
cross-complainant participated in said marriage ceremony with Hazel Ponzi, he
did so without any knowledge that the cross-defendant was then and there a
married woman, being married to Joseph Andrew Carmine, and as such, was not free
to marry the cross-complainant.

   The court concluded that the marriage ceremony in Quartzsite on February 26,
1950, was of no force and effect and null and void for the reason that Hazel
Ponzi was at that time married to Joseph Andrew Carmine, who was then and there
alive and that said marriage had not been dissolved by divorce, annulment,
death, or otherwise; that the agreement entered into on the 16th day of April,
1954, is invalid, null, and void and of no force and effect for the reason that
the said agreement was against public policy and lacking in legal consideration;
that no common-law marriage status existed between the parties; and that the
plaintiff, Hazel T. Ponzi, is not entitled to any of  the relief prayed for in
her first amended complaint.  Judgment was entered in accordance with these
findings and conclusions and plaintiff, Hazel Ponzi, appeals therefrom.

   A marriage license was issued to appellant and respondent in Arizona on
February 26, 1950, and they entered into a marriage ceremony on that date.
Appellant testified that she married Joseph Carmine in Texas on April 2, 1944;
that she knew him in 1943 and knew that he had applied for a  divorce. A
certified copy of a final judgment of divorce between Carmine Occhogross and
Josephine Occhogross, entered by the Superior Court of Los Angeles County on
April 5, 1944, was introduced in evidence without objection.  The final decree
contains the recital that the interlocutory decree therein had been entered on
March 29, 1943.  In this connection plaintiff testified that Carmine Occhogross
named in that document was the same person she married on April 2, 1944.  On
August 12, 1949, an interlocutory decree of divorce was entered in an action by
Hazel T. Carmine (appellant herein) against Joseph Andrew Carmine and a final
decree of divorce in that action was filed and entered on August 16, 1950.  In
this connection appellant testified that when she procured her divorce from
Joseph Carmine, she acquired from him, under property settlement agreement,
certain property in Sun Valley, California.

   Respondent, Aldo F. Ponzi, testified that he met appellant in 1949; that he
had never been married before; that appellant told him she had been previously
married to Joseph Carmine and that she had divorced him; that at the time of the
marriage ceremony in Arizona, he did not know that appellant had not procured
her final decree of divorce from Joseph Carmine; that he (Ponzi) had no
knowledge of the invalidity of his marriage to appellant until he discussed his
domestic problems with an attorney in January or February, 1954.

   At the time appellant filed the separate maintenance action herein respondent
was a sergeant in the air force, having been called back into service a short
time after entering into the Arizona marriage ceremony with appellant.  He
testified that after meeting appellant they discussed marriage on several
occasions; that they decided to drive to Quartzsite, Arizona, to enter into a
marriage ceremony; that in May or June, 1951, after being recalled into military
service, he was transferred to an air field in Texas; that during this time
appellant went to Oklahoma and visited with her mother and sister for a short
period, an apartment was rented, and he visited appellant on several week ends.
Respondent further testified that he had no intention of establishing his
residence in either Oklahoma or Texas; that he intended to maintain his
residence at the Sun Valley property, which was the property owned by appellant
and in which they resided; that their furniture was kept at that address and
also his civilian clothes and personal belongings; that when he entered the  Air
Force he was living at 12125 Jerome Street (the Sun Valley property); that he
went to Texas and Oklahoma because he was transferred there but that he had no
intention of creating a legal residence in either of said states; that when
appellant left Texas, she returned to California and to the Sun Valley property.

     The record conclusively shows that when appellant married the respondent in
Quartzsite, Arizona, she had not secured her final decree of divorce from Joseph
Andrew Carmine and that he was then living.  Under these circumstances, the
marriage of appellant and respondent in Arizona was invalid ( Civ. Code, § 61),
and the trial court's finding to that effect is amply supported by the evidence.

     Appellant contends that her marriage to respondent was valid, claiming that
her marriage to Joseph Andrew Carmine was void and that she was therefore a
single person with full capacity to marry the respondent.  In support of this
contention she relies upon her testimony that Carmine had been previously
married to Josephine Occhogross and further relies upon a final decree of
divorce between Carmine and Josephine Carmine entered on April 5, 1944.
However, no marriage certificate was produced showing Carmine and Josephine were
married and appellant testified that she did not know Josephine and had never
met her.  It is apparent that appellant's statement that Josephine and Carmine
were married was based upon statements made to her by Carmine and not from
actual knowledge.  The final decree of divorce between Carmine and Josephine,
entered April 5, 1944, only determined that the parties were thereafter free to
remarry as far as their relations to each other were concerned.  It did not
establish validity of their marriage against respondent herein, who was not a
party in that action and had no right to be heard therein.  ( Rediker v. Rediker
, 35 Cal.2d 796, 801-803 [221 P.2d 1, 20 A.L.R.2d 1152].) The record shows that
appellant filed a divorce action against Carmine in February or March, 1947;
that she secured an interlocutory decree in that action on August 12, 1949, and
a final decree therein on August 16, 1950.  It also appears that she acquired
the Sun Valley property from Carmine under a property settlement agreement. The
trial court's finding that the marriage of appellant and Joseph Carmine was not
dissolved by final decree of divorce until August 16, 1950, is supported by the
record.

     Appellant contends that two common law marriages  were established and
proved, one in Oklahoma in May, 1951, and the other in Texas in the months of
May and June, 1951.  We cannot agree with this argument.  There was substantial
evidence that the respondent herein, during the months of May and June, 1951,
retained his home at the Sun Valley property in California; that he had no
intention of establishing his residence in Oklahoma or Texas and went to those
states because he was transferred there in military service; that he had no
knowledge of the invalidity of his marriage to appellant until he discussed his
domestic problems with an attorney in January or February, 1954.  It is apparent
that appellant knew when she married respondent herein that her marriage to him
was invalid and that until she obtained her final decree, she was living in a
meretricious relationship with respondent.

   The California law governs the presumptions and inferences to be drawn from
the evidence herein ( Estate of Winder, 98 Cal.App.2d 78, 84 [219 P.2d 18]), and
the adulterous relationship of the parties was presumptively continued after
August 16, 1950.  ( Burger v. Burger, 136 Cal.App.2d 360, 363 [288 P.2d 926].)
In 55 Corpus Juris Secundum, Marriage, section 36, pages 882-883, it is said
that

   "Where the relationship was meretricious at its inception, it will be
presumed so to continue, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, and in such
case the removal of the disability will be ineffectual to create an informal or
common-law marriage, unless a new contract is entered into, and this is
particularly true where the parties do not know of the removal of the
impediment; . . ."

   It does not appear from the evidence that the appellant and respondent
entered into a new contract or agreement to remarry after the Arizona marriage.
While the evidence shows that they lived together as husband and wife, they
maintained their residence in California, and there was no discussion between
them indicating that they intended to remarry in Texas or Oklahoma or in any
other state in which respondent might be temporarily stationed by reason of his
military service.

   In Estate of McKanna, 106 Cal.App.2d 126, 133 [234 P.2d 673], the court said
that the law of Texas was that where the contract of marriage is invalid under
the law of the state in which it is made, the status of the parties thereto will
be regarded as being meretricious and that that status will follow them during
any stay in Texas, unless there is a new  agreement of marriage made in Texas,
followed by cohabitation and a public holding out, or unless they become
domiciled in that state.

   In Burdine v. Burdine, 206 Okla. 170 [242 P.2d 148], the Supreme Court of
Oklahoma  held that since the parties had entered into what would have been a
valid common law marriage except for the fact that defendant was already married
to another and since after such impediment was removed by divorce, the parties
evidenced an intent to be husband and wife, their conduct and consenting minds
validated the common law marriage. However, in Burger v. Burger, supra, the
parties, after entering into a void marriage in Yuma, lived together in Oklahoma
and the court held that their living together in Oklahoma where a common law
marriage is recognized did not confer upon them the sanctity of marriage; that
if they lived together for a year in an adulterous relationship, (until the
final decree of divorce was obtained) the same relationship was presumptively
continued thereafter.

   The question of whether the appellant and respondent were married by common
law marriage in Oklahoma and Texas was a question of fact for the determination
of the trial court and, under the circumstances shown, we cannot say there was
no substantial evidence to support its determination of this question.

     Appellant contends that the court erred in refusing to order the property
settlement agreement between the parties carried out, solely upon the conception
that it was against public policy. The evidence shows in this connection that
the parties had discussed divorce proceedings on several occasions; that in
April, 1954, the appellant telephoned to respondent and requested that he come
to the home in Sun Valley and discuss financial arrangements; that the parties
then discussed their financial problems and it was agreed that respondent would
pay certain obligations in consideration of which appellant would not contest
any divorce action. The following day the parties went to the office of
appellant's attorney, where a letter was prepared and which was signed by
respondent, and is in part as follows:

   "April 16, 1954.

   "Hazel P. Ponzi,

   San Fernando, California.

   "Dear Hazel:

   "You can use this letter as an Agreement on my part, inasmuch as you are not
going to contest my contemplated  divorce, that I, in turn, agree to pay the
encumbrance against the property commonly known as 12125 Jerome Street, Sun
Valley, California, . . . (description of property) as said encumbrance becomes
due.  This encumbrance is in the form of a note secured by deed of trust on said
property by the San Fernando Valley Savings & Loan Association in the
approximate sum of $ 4,600.00.  Also, if you encumber this said property any
further for my benefit and/or your benefit and if I consent to said further
borrowing I hereby agree to pay the new encumbrance as well as the old
encumbrance as it becomes due.

   "I again reiterate to make these payments as they become due and my failure
to do so is necessary for you to bring legal action against me for said failure,
I hereby agree to pay all reasonable attorney's fees and court costs for said
action."

   The trial court found that this agreement was null and void, against public
policy, and lacking in legal consideration. This finding is supported by the
record.  In Beard v. Beard, 65 Cal. 354 [4 P. 229], plaintiff transferred real
and personal property to defendant in consideration of her executing to him four
notes, securing the payment of the same by a mortgage, abandoning her defense in
an action of divorce then pending between them, and doing nothing to resist, or
prevent, or delay him in obtaining a decree of divorce therein.  It was held
that the agreement of the wife with respect to the divorce proceedings was a
fraud upon the court and, as it constituted an essential and inseparable part of
the consideration, the entire transaction became  tainted by fraud and no action
would lie to enforce the payment of the notes.

   In Hill v. Hill, 23 Cal.2d 82, 87 [142 P.2d 417], the court said:

   "Agreements not to defend or to abandon a defense in a divorce action, to
destroy or conceal evidence in proceedings for divorce, and to procure or
furnish testimony of certain facts which will successfully support or defeat a
divorce action, or which provide that payment to the party procuring evidence to
be used in such an action is contingent upon the result of the action have been
held void as parts of collusive arrangements to facilitate divorce." (Citing
many cases, including Beard v. Beard, supra.)

   In Brown v. Brown, 8 Cal.App.2d 364, 367 [47 P.2d 352], it is said that

   "Where a husband and wife agree that a divorce shall be obtained by one or
the other, and adjust their affairs in  contemplation of a divorce by entering
into a settlement conditioned thereon, of their property rights and make
promises of an executory nature pertaining thereto, and such facts are
established in a subsequent action on the contract, they have no right to
receive the aid of the court in the enforcement of their agreement, which the
law condemns as a violation of the policy of the state."

   We find no prejudicial error in the trial court's refusal to enforce the
agreement involved.

     The clerk's transcript herein shows that a motion for a new trial was made
and that at the hearing thereon a judgment of annulment in an action between
Hazel T. Carmine and Joseph Carmine was considered by the trial court.  The
motion was denied.  However, the grounds for the denial were not stated.  It is
apparent that the respondent was not a party to the annulment action and that
the judgment therein was entered on November 9, 1955, and that prior thereto
appellant had secured a final judgment of divorce from said Joseph Carmine.
All presumptions are in favor of the trial court's order in denying the motion
for a new trial and an appellate court will not interfere with its action unless
a manifest and unmistakable abuse of discretion is shown and the order will be
affirmed if it may be sustained on any ground.  ( Mazzotta v. Los Angeles Ry.
Corp., 25 Cal.2d 165, 169 [153 P.2d 338].)   We have examined the affidavits and
the files used on the motion for a new trial and find no abuse of discretion in
the order made.

   Judgment affirmed.


                              58 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             FAYETTA LENORA RHEA, Respondent, v. H. C. MILLSAP, as
              Special Administrator, etc., Defendant; VIVIAN RHEA,
                                   Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 14570

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division One

          68 Cal. App. 2d 449; 156 P.2d 941; 1945 Cal. App. LEXIS 783


                                 March 19, 1945

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County and from an order refusing to vacate the judgment and enter a new and
different judgment.  Ingall W. Bull, Judge.

   Motion to set aside interlocutory and final judgments of divorce and to
dismiss the divorce action.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Judgment--Vacation--Relief from Fraudulent Judgment--Jurisdiction.
--The trial court had jurisdiction to set aside interlocutory and final divorce
decrees on the wife's motion therefor, where it appeared that, after entry of
the interlocutory decree, a reconciliation between the parties was effected;
that the wife's attorney, unaware of such reconciliation, had procured entry of
the final decree; that subsequent to such entry the wife was lulled into a sense
of security by the husband's statements that their reconciliation rendered both
decrees ineffective; and that the husband had thereafter remarried. The question
of the second wife's innocence and good faith was immaterial.

COUNSEL: Robert J. Sullivan for Appellant.

William Ellis Lady for Respondent.

JUDGES: York, P. J.  Doran, J., and White, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: YORK

OPINION

     The facts which form the basis of the instant litigation appear to be
briefly as follows:

   On or about March 3, 1940, Robert Stephen Rhea and respondent Fayetta Lenora
Rhea were married at Covington, Kentucky; that on September 2, 1941, said
respondent filed suit for divorce against Robert Stephen Rhea and the
interlocutory decree therein was entered October 3, 1941.  Thereafter, during
the month of June, 1942, "Fayetta Lenora Rhea and Robert Stephen Rhea, had a
reconciliation of their differences, and agreed to resume marital relations, and
pursuant thereto and in accordance therewith they did resume marital relations .
. . and continued to live together as husband and wife at all times thereafter
until about January 1, 1943, when the said Robert Stephen Rhea, as a Second
Lieutenant in the Air Force of the United States Army was ordered to service in
the Arctic Circle." Being unaware of the reconciliation of the parties to the
divorce action, respondent's attorney made application to the trial court for
the entry  of the final decree of divorce which was duly entered on October 13,
1942.  On October 17, 1942, said attorney advised respondent of his action by
letter, enclosing a copy of said final decree. Respondent testified that upon
receipt of this communication, Robert Stephen Rhea took it to an attorney in San
Francisco, who told him to disregard it; that it was unnecessary to do anything
about the final decree of divorce as long as they were reconciled. On December
30, 1942, Lieutenant Rhea signed an authorization for an allotment of $ 100 per
month to respondent (Plaintiff's Exhibit 15) and on the same day executed a
change of beneficiary designating his wife, Mrs. Faye Rhea, and his mother, Mrs.
Dorothy Black, as beneficiaries of his National Service Life Insurance
(Plaintiff's Exhibit 14).

   Respondent testified further that in the latter part of December of 1942,
Lieutenant Rhea told her he expected to get his orders for overseas duty and it
was agreed between them that respondent should come to Los Angeles to stay with
her sisters while her husband was away; that she, Lieutenant Rhea and one of her
sisters drove from San Francisco to Los Angeles arriving at the latter place
around 11 o'clock in the morning of January 1, 1943; that they went to the
apartment of another sister at 420 South Union Avenue; that Lieutenant Rhea did
not stay there "because my sister just had the one bedroom in the apartment, and
so he left about 2:00 o'clock to go down to a hotel room, and he said he would
come back and call for me, and I was to stay and wait for him." That he
telephoned her three days later and that she did not hear from him again until
January 14, 1943, when he telephoned her from Seattle and told her he had been
married. On February 13, 1943, respondent received a telegram from his
commanding officer notifying her of Lieutenant Rhea's death.

   Immediately after learning of Lieutenant Rhea's remarriage, respondent
consulted her attorney and was advised that the final decree of divorce should
be set aside so long as she and her husband had been living together.
Accordingly, on February 16, 1943, respondent filed her petition to set aside
the interlocutory and final decrees and to dismiss the divorce action, and an
order to show cause therein was served upon Vivian Rhea, the second wife, who
filed her answer thereto.  Thereafter, an order was made substituting as
defendant in the divorce action H. C. Millsap, Special Administrator of the
Estate of Robert Stephen Rhea, deceased, whereupon respondent filed a second
petition to set aside the final and interlocutory decrees and to dismiss the
divorce action, and another order to show cause was served on said Vivian Rhea.

   The matter came on for hearing, and the trial judge made complete findings of
fact from which he drew the following conclusions of law:

   "1. That it should be ordered, adjudged and decreed that the entry of the
final decree of divorce herein on or about the 13th day of October, 1942, was
the result of a fraud committed and practiced upon the court itself, in this,
that at the time  of the signing and entry of said final decree of divorce it
was represented to the Court that there had been no reconciliation of plaintiff
and defendant Robert Stephen Rhea, and that plaintiff and defendant Robert
Stephen Rhea were living separate and apart; that the aforesaid representations
were unwittingly made by the attorney for the plaintiff at a time when he
himself believed that there had been no reconciliation of plaintiff and
defendant . . . and that (they) were living separate and apart, whereas in truth
and in fact when the representations aforesaid were made by said attorney,
plaintiff and defendant Robert Stephen Rhea had had a reconciliation and at said
time they had become reconciled and were living together as husband and wife and
continued to live together as husband and wife until on or about January 1,
1943; that said attorney would not have made the representations aforesaid or
requested the entry of said final decree of divorce if at said time he had known
that plaintiff and defendant Robert Stephen Rhea had become reconciled and were
then living together as husband and wife, and likewise the Court would not have
signed and entered said final decree of divorce if it had been disclosed to the
Court at said time that plaintiff and defendant Robert Stephen Rhea had become
reconciled and were then living together as husband and wife, and by reason of
all the matters and things aforesaid a fraud was committed and practiced upon
the Court and by reason thereof said final decree of divorce should be and is
hereby vacated and set aside.

   "2. That it should be further ordered, adjudged and decreed that the final
decree of divorce entered herein was entered  through mistake, inadvertence,
fraud, surprise and excusable neglect as well as the fraud practiced upon the
Court as found in the findings on file herein and hereinbefore adjudged, and
that it should be and is hereby vacated and set aside as of the date of entry
thereof, to-wit, October 13, 1942, and that the interlocutory decree of divorce
should be and is hereby vacated and set aside and that the above entitled action
should be and the same is hereby dismissed.

   "3. That it should be further ordered, adjudged and decreed that the said
Fayetta Lenora Rhea do have and recover of and from Vivian Rhea, also known as
Vivian Ahlers, the costs and disbursements incurred herein. . . ."

   From the judgment which was thereafter entered pursuant  to said conclusions
of law, Vivian Rhea prosecutes this appeal, and as well from the order denying
her motion to vacate the judgment and for the entry of a new and different
judgment under sections 663 and 663a of the Code of Civil Procedure.

     While appellant's opening brief urges that the instant proceeding under an
order to show cause to set aside the interlocutory and final decrees of divorce
was improper and not within the jurisdiction of the trial court, her closing
brief concedes that three of the cases cited by respondent are in point, to wit:
Aldrich v. Aldrich, 203 Cal. 433 [264 P. 754]; Tomb v. Tomb, 120 Cal.App. 438 [7
P.2d 1104], and Raps v. Raps, 20 Cal.2d 382 [125 P.2d 826].

   In the Aldrich case it was held that a trial court has inherent power to set
aside a judgment obtained through a fraud committed upon it, and its right to do
so is not derived from section 473 of the Code of Civil Procedure, nor limited
to the time therein specified; and that the defendant in such a case has a
remedy in a new equitable proceeding to set aside the judgment on the ground of
fraud but notwithstanding that fact a motion to set the same aside in the
original action is proper.

   In Tomb v. Tomb, supra, at pages 441, 442, it is stated: "It is a
well-recognized principle that a court of general jurisdiction has the inherent
power to set aside a judgment obtained through fraud practiced upon the court.
( McKeever v. Superior Court, 85 Cal.App. 381 [259 P. 373]; McGuinness v.
Superior Court, 196 Cal. 222 [40 A.L.R. 1110, 237 P. 42, 45].) . . .

   "In the case now under consideration the court had jurisdiction to set aside
the interlocutory and final decrees, being satisfied that they were obtained
through fraud practiced by the husband.  . . .  The fraud alleged in the motion
to set aside the interlocutory and final decrees, is that the husband by the
said reconciliation led respondent to believe that no further proceedings would
be taken in the divorce action, and then took advantage of that situation and
without the knowledge of respondent and without informing the court that there
had been a reconciliation between him and his wife secured first the
interlocutory decree and thereafter secured the final decree."

   In Raps v. Raps, 20 Cal.2d 382, 387 [125 P.2d 826], the Supreme Court held
that "The affidavits presented by Elias  Raps on the hearing of the motion
alleged facts sufficient to establish that the plaintiff Rose Raps had
surreptitiously secured the entry of the divorce decrees after there had been a
reconciliation between the spouses.  In granting the motion the court
necessarily determined that the decrees were obtained by means of extrinsic
fraud practiced upon the husband and the court and that they should be vacated.
The order was within the jurisdiction of the court on the facts presented. (
Britton v. Bryson, 216 Cal. 362 [14 P.2d 502]; McGuinness v. Superior Court, 196
Cal. 222 [237 P. 42, 40 A.L.R. 1110].)"

   It was held in McGuinness v. Superior Court, 196 Cal. 222, 229, 236 [237 P.
42, 40 A.L.R. 1110], that the facts therein presented a case of extrinsic fraud
where it appeared that after the entry of the interlocutory decree of divorce,
the parties resumed marital relations and during said time the husband obtained
a final decree of divorce without the knowledge of the wife.  The Supreme Court
there stated: "We are therefore satisfied that notwithstanding the fact that the
divorce action has abated in so far as any further trial or determination of the
issue as to the marital relations of the parties to it is concerned [through the
death of the husband], the court retained its inherent power and jurisdiction to
conduct the investigation into the integrity of its records which the
plaintiff's motion suggests and which the court of its  own motion is proposing
to undertake." (See, also, Britton v. Bryson, 216 Cal. 362, 369 [14 P.2d 502].)

   In the case of Gump v. Gump, 42 Cal.App.2d 64, 69 [108 P.2d 21], appellant
argued that the relief granted, vacating a final decree of divorce, was
improper, because "though the action purported to be in equity, it sounded in
law and should have been treated as a motion made under section 473, Code of
Civil Procedure, to set the decree aside." The court there held that a suit in
equity may be prosecuted to vacate a judgment procured by extrinsic fraud, even
though there may be available the remedy by motion under section 473, Code of
Civil Procedure.

   In the instant proceeding the trial court found upon substantial evidence
that a reconciliation was effected between Robert Stephen Rhea and Fayetta
Lenora Rhea about the months of June or July, 1942, and that subsequent thereto
a final decree of divorce was entered and a copy thereof sent  to the
respondent, but that said respondent "Fayetta Lenora Rhea took no steps to have
it vacated and set aside until sometime in January or February, 1943, and the
reason that said Fayetta Lenora Rhea did not take any steps prior to that time
was because of the fact that she was lulled into a sense of security by
statements said Robert Stephen Rhea made to her that the aforesaid
reconciliation made said interlocutory decree of divorce ineffective for any
purpose and that said final decree of divorce was likewise ineffectual for any
purpose, and in that connection the court further finds that subsequent to the
entry of said final decree of divorce, and after knowledge of the entry thereof
and the receipt of a copy of said final decree of divorce, said Robert Stephen
Rhea continued to conduct himself as though said interlocutory decree of divorce
had been vacated and said final decree of divorce had not been entered . . .
that any lack of diligence on the part of said Fayetta Lenora Rhea to have said
final decree of divorce set aside was due to the conduct and statements of said
Robert Stephen Rhea as hereinbefore found and not otherwise."

   Applying the foregoing principles of law to the facts presented herein, it is
obvious that the trial court had jurisdiction under the procedure followed by
respondent to render the judgment appealed from.

   The question of the innocence and good faith of appellant is not material,
because as so aptly stated by the Supreme Court in Nelson v. Nelson, 7 Cal.2d
449, 452 [60 P.2d 982], "While it is regrettable that defendant had remarried in
the interim, this fact, standing alone, cannot serve to deprive plaintiff of the
relief to which she is entitled.  Moreover, this fact was before the court below
and was undoubtedly weighed by it in determining the cause.  It is unfortunate
that one of two apparently innocent persons must suffer by reason of defendant's
fraud."

   For the reasons stated, the judgment and order appealed from are, and each of
them is, affirmed.


                              59 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             Estate of NAOMI UNDERWOOD, Deceased.  CLAIRE SANTIAGO,
                  Appellant, v. BERT E. UNDERWOOD, Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 18453

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

            170 Cal. App. 2d 669; 339 P.2d 154; 1959 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      2263


                                  May 26, 1959

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Monterey
County determining heirship.  Anthony Brazil, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1a) (1b) Decedents' Estates -- Heirship Proceedings -- Petition--Amendment.
--In an heirship proceeding, it was not an abuse of discretion to deny an
adopted daughter's motion to amend her petition so as to deny that the objector
was decedent's surviving husband as she originally alleged where, though the
objector's former wife secured a California divorce after his marriage to
decedent, testimony was introduced to show that the objector was divorced from
his former wife in Nevada and then married decedent there the same day, that the
two then left for California, that shortly thereafter he returned to Nevada and
worked there for about 10 months before going back to California where he and
decedent lived until her death, the court being of the opinion that the
information as to invalidity of that divorce "was as readily available to
[petitioner] before we entered into trial or appeared in court" as at time of
trial, and it appearing that petitioner made no showing of excusable mistake or
surprise.

(2) Pleading--Amendment--Time to Amend--At Trial.  --Amendment of a pleading
during trial is not a matter of right, but rests in the sound discretion of the
court.

(3) Divorce--Foreign Divorces--Res Judicata.  --Where a husband procured a
divorce in Nevada and then married another woman there the same day, the fact
that the former wife later procured a California divorce does not alone show
invalidity of the Nevada divorce, and is not res judicata of the continued
existence of the first marriage to the date of the second divorce.

(4) Decedent's Estates--Heirship Proceedings--Evidence.  --A surviving husband's
testimony in an heirship proceeding that, after procuring a divorce from his
former wife in Nevada and then marrying decedent there the same day, he was not
free to marry decedent "according to California laws, as I understand it," was a
mere conclusion of law, not binding on the court.

(5) Divorce--Foreign Divorces--Estoppel to Question Validity.  --Assuming that
evidence introduced in an heirship proceeding showed the invalidity of a Nevada
divorce procured by the surviving husband before he married decedent, decedent's
actions to and including the date of her marriage to the surviving husband did
not effect an estoppel to deny the validity of the marriage where she was not
party to the divorce action and there was no showing that she aided him to
procure the decree or had knowledge of anything indicating that it might be
invalid, but if a subsequent divorce decree obtained by the former wife in
California determined the invalidity of the Nevada divorce, decedent's conduct,
after knowledge of that decree, in drawing checks in payment of alimony thereby
awarded the former wife would estop her from asserting the invalidity of the
Nevada decree, and would also operate to bar assertion of such invalidity by her
heir, an adopted daughter.

COUNSEL: Harold D. Mefford for Appellant.

J. T. Harrington for Respondent.

JUDGES: Draper, J.  Kaufman, P. J., and Dooling, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: DRAPER

OPINION

     This is a proceeding to determine heirship. The trial court found that the
sole surviving heirs are an adopted daughter and the surviving husband, and that
the estate is wholly separate property of decedent. It ordered distribution of
the intestate portion thereof in equal shares to daughter and husband ( Prob.
Code, § 221).  The daughter appeals, contending that the marriage of respondent
and decedent was invalid, and that Underwood thus has no right to share in
distribution.

   Appellant's petition alleged that respondent was the surviving husband of
decedent, but relied upon a claimed antenuptial agreement as a bar to his
sharing in the estate.  The claim based upon this agreement has been abandoned
on appeal.  Respondent had been divorced in Nevada before marrying decedent. In
cross-examination of respondent, it developed that Ellen, his former wife, had
secured a divorce decree from him in Monterey County after respondent's marriage
to the decedent, Naomi.  Appellant then sought leave to amend her statement so
as to deny that respondent was the surviving husband. The court took the motion
to amend under submission  and permitted introduction of evidence upon the
validity of the Nevada divorce, subject to motion to strike.

   The evidence so taken showed that respondent was divorced from Ellen May 22,
1950, and on the same day married Naomi in Reno.  He and Naomi lived together as
man and wife from that date until her death December 31, 1956.  Respondent had
worked in Reno before February, 1950.  In February, 1950 (no date specified) he
went to Reno and remained there until about a week after his divorce and
remarriage, when he and Naomi left Reno for Salinas.  Shortly thereafter he
returned to Reno, where he worked for about 10 months before going back to
Salinas, where he and Naomi lived until her death.  After May 22, 1950, Ellen
filed an action for divorce against respondent in Monterey County.  Respondent
answered, alleging the Nevada divorce, but later abandoned defense of the
action.  Interlocutory decree was granted to Ellen.  Respondent was asked "At
the time that you married Naomi West you were not free to marry?" and answered
"Not according to California laws, as I understand it."

     After hearing this testimony, the court denied appellant's motion to amend
her petition and statement of interest, and struck the testimony relating to the
Nevada divorce, on the ground that the information as to invalidity of that
divorce "was as readily available to you before we entered into trial or
appeared in court" as at time of trial.

   This ruling was sound.  Appellant made no showing of excusable mistake or
surprise.   Amendment of a pleading during trial is not a matter of right, but
rests in the sound discretion of the trial court.  ( Richter v. Adams, 43
Cal.App.2d 184, 187 [110 P.2d 486]; Dibblee v. Title Ins. & Trust Co., 55
Cal.App.2d 286 [130 P.2d 775].)   We find no abuse of discretion in denying
appellant leave to amend.

   Even if it were erroneous, the ruling in no sense prejudiced appellant.  We
may look to the evidence to determine whether the claim sought to be pleaded by
appellant had any merit.  ( Davies v. Symmes, 49 Cal.App.2d 433 [122 P.2d 102].)
Before ruling, the trial court heard all the evidence offered relating to the
claimed invalidity of respondent's marriage to decedent. But the evidence so
admitted wholly fails to show such invalidity. The mere fact that respondent and
decedent returned to Salinas a week after their Reno marriage is not
determinative, particularly in view of the fact that respondent shortly returned
to Reno and worked there for some time.  There is no evidence that respondent
went to Reno solely for  the purpose of procuring a divorce.  The fact that
Ellen later procured a California divorce does not, alone, show invalidity of
the Reno divorce  and is not res judicata of the continued existence of the
first marriage to the date of the second divorce. ( Rediker v. Rediker, 35
Cal.2d 796, 800-804 [221 P.2d 1, 20 A.L.R.2d 1152].)   Of course, respondent's
testimony that he was not free to marry Naomi "according to California laws, as
I understand it" is a mere conclusion of law, not binding upon the court.  Also,
it related to his opinion as of the date of his testimony in 1957, rather than
at the date of the remarriage in 1950 or at any other date during his marriage
to Naomi.  Since the evidence did not show invalidity of the Nevada divorce,
appellant was not prejudiced by the court's striking that evidence and refusing
to permit amendment of appellant's statement.

     If, however, the evidence did show invalidity of the Nevada divorce, it
also showed an estoppel to assert such invalidity. It is doubtful that the
actions of Naomi to and including the date of her marriage to respondent
effected an estoppel within the rule stated in Rediker v. Rediker, supra, at
page 805. She was not a party to the Nevada divorce action nor is there any
showing that she aided respondent to procure the decree or had knowledge of
anything indicating that it might be invalid. However, the evidence does show
that after the subsequent Monterey County decree Naomi drew checks in payment of
the alimony there awarded to Ellen.  Thus if the Monterey County decree of
September, 1950, determined the invalidity of the Nevada divorce, as appellant
contends, there can be little question that the conduct of Naomi, after
knowledge of the Monterey decree, would estop her under the rationale of the
established rule.  ( Rediker v. Rediker, supra; Estate of Davis, 38 Cal.App.2d
579 [101 P.2d 761, 102 P.2d 545]; Dietrich v. Dietrich, 41 Cal.2d 497, 505 [261
P.2d 269]; Estate of Shank, 154 Cal.App.2d 808, 811 [316 P.2d 710].) Estoppel of
Naomi, the ancestor, operates to bar assertion of invalidity of the Nevada
decree by her heir, appellant.  ( Estate of Coleman, 132 Cal.App.2d 137, 140
[281 P.2d 567]; Estate of Shank, supra, p. 812.)

   Order affirmed.


                              60 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          ELIZABETH F. QUEEN, Respondent, v. CLYDE L. QUEEN, Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 11478

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FIRST APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION ONE

          44 Cal. App. 2d 475; 112 P.2d 755; 1941 Cal. App. LEXIS 1019


                            April 25, 1941, Decided

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied May 24, 1941, and
Appellant's and Respondent's Petitions for a Hearing by the Supreme Court were
Denied June 23, 1941. Carter, J., Voted for a Hearing.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of the City and
County of San Francisco. John J. Van Nostrand, Judge. Action for unpaid balance
due under property settlement agreement, and supplemental agreement.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Proceedings--Pleading--Issues and Proof--Broadening of Issues.
--In a divorce proceeding issues may be broadened at the trial to include
questions not made an issue by the pleadings.

(2) Id.--Disposition of Property--Effect of Agreement.  --In a divorce action,
the court as representative of the public interest has the power, irrespective
of a contract settlement or the silence of the pleadings with reference thereto,
to make a fair and just disposition of property rights in consonance with Civ.
Code, § 136 et seq.

(3) Id.--Disposition of Property--Effect of Agreement--Incorporation of
Agreement in Decree.  --While a property settlement, although merely referred to
in the decree as such, may become res judicata, it must be sufficiently certain
and definite or a reasonable means of ascertaining its terms must be available
from the pleadings or evidence, before it may be enforced and constitute an
estoppel between the parties.

(4) Id.--Disposition of Property--Effect of Agreement--Incorporation of
Agreement in Decree--Res Judicata.  --An interlocutory divorce decree which
merely recited that the parties had entered into a property settlement
agreement, which declared that it was approved and made a part thereof, and
which directed that the terms thereof be performed, could not be relied upon in
the wife's subsequent action to collect an unpaid balance due her under the
settlement as an adjudication of the terms of the settlement.

(5) Husband and Wife--Transactions Inter Se--Property Settlement Agreements--
Operation and Effect.  --Where a property settlement provided that it should
become effective when within six months a divorce was granted to the wife, but
should be void if a divorce should not be granted, or if a decree did not
provide for settlement of property rights or contained additional or
inconsistent provisions, it became effective when an interlocutory decree of
divorce was granted to the wife within the six-months period and the agreement
was approved in such manner that the court intended that it should govern the
question of property rights and the wife's support.

(6) Judgments--Form and Requisites--Certainty--Reference to Instruments.
--Where an instrument is referred to in a decree, it should be made a part of
the decree or sufficiently described to obviate any question of its identity
arising thereafter.

(7) Husband and Wife--Transactions Inter Se--Property Settlement Agreements--
Agreement as Contra Bonos Mores.  --An agreement between husband and wife which
recited that the parties had separated and that the wife had stated that she was
about to institute an action for divorce and that the parties were desirous of
settling their property rights and provided for the wife's support in the event
that a divorce be granted to her was not void as against public policy, since
the agreement was incidental to the divorce, and was the means employed in
disposition of their property and the husband's assumption of an obligation to
support the wife.

(8) Id.--Transactions Inter Se--Property Settlement Agreements--Enforcement--
Recovery of Attorneys' Fees--Consideration for Agreement.  --A wife seeking to
enforce a property settlement agreement providing for monthly payments to her
could not recover attorney's fees under a supplementary contract which provided
that if she was obligated to resort to court action to collect sums due under
the agreement the husband would pay reasonable attorney's fees, where on the
date of the supplementary agreement the husband was not in default, and the
agreement was accordingly without consideration.

(9) Contracts--Consideration--Forbearance to Sue--Promise to Forbear.
--Forbearance to sue unless upon a promise to forbear is not a good
consideration.

COUNSEL: H. W. Glensor for Appellant.

Walter H. Duane for Respondent.

JUDGES: WARD, J. Peters, P. J., and Knight, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: WARD

OPINION

     WARD, J. -- This is an appeal by defendant from a judgment in the sum of $
4,800, together with interest, $ 500 counsel fees, costs and disbursements. The
action arose in connection with an unpaid balance due plaintiff under a property
settlement agreement in which defendant obligated himself to pay her the sum of
$ 150 a month until a total of $ 9,000 had been paid.

   Plaintiff and defendant married on September 6, 1916; they separated on
November 2, 1931. Thereafter, on January 7, 1932, a written property settlement
agreement as above mentioned was entered into between them, following which
plaintiff filed a divorce action on January 21, 1932, to which defendant
answered by general denial. On March 11, 1932, an interlocutory decree of
divorce was entered. On January 19, 1934, a supplemental agreement was entered
into by the parties, the purport of which was that, in the event of court action
or proceeding to collect any of the amounts due under the first agreement, the
defendant husband should pay a reasonable  attorney's fee in the prosecution of
such action, also that in case of default in the payment of any installment, the
entire balance should, at the option of the wife, become immediately due. The
final judgment and decree of divorce was entered on February 5, 1934. The
present action, filed July 16, 1934, is based upon the two agreements.

   Appellant contends that the original property settlement agreement is void
because contrary to public policy and morals; and that it gains no validity by
its approval in a subsequent divorce action. He also asserts that there was no
consideration for the supplemental agreement providing for attorney's fees.

   It is respondent's contention that the parties separated as the result of
domestic difficulties, the wife determining to sue for divorce; that after a
separation of approximately two months they entered into an agreement settling
their property rights, which agreement was subsequently approved by the court in
the divorce action; that two years later, and while the said agreement was in
full force and effect, by reason of the default of the husband and in
consideration of the wife's forbearance to take legal action against him, the
parties entered into the supplemental agreement which among other things
confirmed the original agreement.

   The pertinent portions of the original agreement in dispute in the present
action are as follows: "This agreement shall be and become effective if, as, and
when within a period of six (6) months from the date hereof a decree of divorce
is entered granting to the party of the second part a divorce from the party of
the first part and including as a part of its terms the provisions herein
contained. If a divorce shall not be so granted or shall be granted but shall
not contain as provision for the settlement of property rights the provisions of
this agreement, or shall contain additional provisions, or provisions
inconsistent herewith, then this agreement shall be and become forthwith null
and void and of no effect . . . provided that the party of the first part shall
not be obliged to make any payments after the 15th day of June, 1932, unless a
decree of divorce has been obtained by the party of the second part as herein
contemplated, but in the event such decree of divorce has been obtained the
party of the first part shall continue payments from and after the time of
obtaining such decree of divorce and until the said sum of nine thousand ($
9,000.00) dollars has been paid."

   The interlocutory decree contains the following: "And it further appearing to
said court that said parties have heretofore entered into an agreement settling
their property rights, and said agreement having been presented to this court
for its approval, it is hereby adjudged and decreed that said agreement be and
the same is hereby approved and made by reference a part of this interlocutory
decree of divorce, and it is further ordered, adjudged and decreed that the
parties to said agreement, to-wit: the plaintiff and defendant in the
above-entitled action, fully and completely perform said agreement all in
accordance with the terms thereof." This is the only reference in the decree to
a property settlement.

   Respondent argues that the approval of the agreement by the court in the
divorce action renders the question of its validity res judicata. Neither the
complaint in that action nor the answer contained any reference to a property
settlement or support for the wife. The complaint prayed for dissolution of the
bonds of matrimony and for such other and further relief as to the court seemed
proper.   In a divorce proceeding issues may be broadened at the trial to
include questions not made an issue by the pleadings.   The court as
representative of the public interest has the power, irrespective of a contract
settlement or the silence of the pleadings with reference thereto, to make a
fair and just disposition of property rights in consonance with the law thereon.
(Civ. Code, div. 1, pt. 3, tit. 1, ch. 2, art. 4; Moog v. Moog, 203 Cal. 406
[264 P. 490]; Robertson v. Robertson, 34 Cal. App. 2d 113 [93 P.2d 175].)   A
property settlement although merely referred to in the decree as such, may,
under circumstances not necessary to enumerate herein ( Wallace v. Wallace, 136
Cal. App. 488 [29 P.2d 314]), become res judicata, but it must be sufficiently
certain and definite or a reasonable means of ascertaining its terms must be
available from the pleadings or evidence ( Moran v. Moran, 3 Cal. 2d 342 [44
P.2d 546]; Armstrong v. Armstrong, 132 Cal. App. 609 [23 P.2d 50]; Wallace v.
Wallace, supra; Atlass v. Atlass, 112 Cal. App. 514 [297 P. 53]; Cohen v. Cohen,
150 Cal. 99 [88 P. 267, 11 Ann. Cas. 520]; Ettlinger v. Ettlinger, 3 Cal. 2d 172
[44 P.2d 540]), before  it may be enforced and constitute an estoppel between
the parties. (1 Freeman on Judgments, p. 126; 14 Cal. Jur., p. 954.) Plaintiff
could not have the same rights on the judgment in a divorce case, which while
purporting to confirm a property settlement lacks the necessary details thereof,
as on a judgment setting forth the terms of the agreement.

     It is suggested that plaintiff's testimony that she was satisfied with a
settlement giving her $ 150 a month, taken with a statement of her counsel, is
sufficient to identify the agreement. This was adequate to establish that a
property settlement had been made by the parties,  but not sufficient to
identify its terms. The statement by the attorney is as follows: "Yes, he is
providing a life insurance policy which he is paying for, and it is placed in
escrow, and in the event of his death, the amount that may then remain over the
balance of $ 9,000 will be paid from that policy to this plaintiff. As regards
the payments during his life, we have no guarantee other than the agreement that
he will pay." Referring to the payments, counsel further stated "that it is so
provided in the decree". However, the decree does not so provide. Without
incorporating the agreement therein ( Moran v. Moran, supra), or referring
specifically to its terms, or introducing it in evidence, the decree simply
directs that it be performed. The agreement in question covered disposition of
household furniture, real property, moneys and securities, the assumption of
indebtedness, the maintenance in good standing of a life insurance policy, etc.
The decree in the divorce action could not furnish a basis for execution or for
contempt proceedings. ( Lazar v. Superior Court, 16 Cal. 2d 617 [107 P.2d 249].)
The approval in the decree of the agreement is insufficient to be relied upon in
the present proceeding as an adjudication of its terms. However, independent of
the decree, it may be a valid agreement.

     In the present action the court found: "That on the 7th day of January,
1932, the said parties entered into an agreement in writing, wherein and whereby
they settled their rights as to community property and the sum to be paid to
Elizabeth F. Queen by Clyde L. Queen for the maintenance and support of the said
Elizabeth F. Queen; that it was provided in said agreement that Clyde L. Queen
should pay to  Elizabeth F. Queen the sum of $ 150.00 per month, each and every
month, until the total sum of $ 9,000.00 was paid; that said agreement was and
is in all respects valid, lawful and not contrary to public morals or to public
policy."

   Appellant urges that the agreement was absolutely void because contrary to
public policy and morals; that the instrument never became an agreement between
the parties because it could be binding only if a decree of divorce should be
granted the wife within a period of six months; that its provisions should have
been included in the decree of divorce, and further that it should have been
confirmed by the court in the divorce proceedings. Passing for the present the
contention that the agreement is against public policy and morals, the
interlocutory decree at least -- which is the only one that could have been
considered -- was granted within the six months' period.

   When the contract is read in its entirety, with particular consideration
given to provisions objected to by appellant, it is plain that the purpose of
the agreement was to assure to the husband that the full measure of his
obligation had been met, and that if the wife obtained the rights accorded her
therein she should have no additional rights against him in respect to property
or support. The parties evidently recognized the power of the court to disregard
the agreement and to provide other terms which to it might seem fair and just (
Moog v. Moog, supra; Robertson v. Robertson, supra); but, to guard against the
imposition of additional terms or the possibility of a double obligation, the
husband was protected by the provision in the agreement that its terms should be
a part of the decree, and that if the decree contained any additional or
inconsistent provisions the agreement should become forthwith null and void. The
agreement was approved in the divorce proceeding, ineffectively in so far as the
doctrine of res judicata is concerned, but there was sufficient reference to the
property settlement to indicate the intention of the court that an agreement
executed by the parties should govern the question of property rights and the
wife's support. The husband's attorney was present during the hearing on the
merits, and could have requested the insertion of the agreement as part of the
decree. The purpose of the agreement was satisfied when no terms were provided
in the decree inconsistent therewith. A specific approval in the decree of the
terms of the agreement would have placed a more onerous burden on the husband
than the enforcement of the property settlement as a contract only. If a part of
the decree, the terms would have been enforceable by contempt proceedings. When
considered in connection with the terms of the agreement as they appear in the
present proceeding, the language of the decree sufficiently meets the
requirements of the instrument as to performance of the conditions precedent to
insure its effectiveness. Cases cited by appellant dealing with various
subjects, such as completeness of a record on appeal ( Northern Ry. Co. v.
Jordan, 87 Cal. 23 [25 P. 273]), insufficient description of property in
replevin actions ( Cooke v. Aguirre, 86 Cal. 479 [25 P. 5], Welch v. Smith, 45
Cal. 230), description in a quiet title action ( Powers v. Perry, 12 Cal. App.
77 [106 P. 595]), are not sufficiently in point to assist his contention.
Where an instrument is referred to in a decree, it should be made a part of the
decree or sufficiently described to obviate any question of its identity arising
thereafter ( Emeric v. Alvarado, 64 Cal. 529 [2 P. 418]), but in the present
case no one has challenged the fact that a property settlement was signed and
that the instrument under consideration is the particular instrument in
controversy.

     It is not contended that the divorce was collusive, but that the agreement
was void as against public policy and morals in that it was an inducement not
only to obtain a divorce but that it be obtained within six months. The
contention is based solely upon the terms of the agreement. No testimony was
presented upon this subject. If it is claimed that the six months' period was
inserted to expedite the divorce, why did the parties delay the matter? It is a
well-known fact that an interlocutory decree under the circumstances herein
presented may be obtained in a much shorter period. Irrespective of the time
limit, if the contention is that by the agreement the wife was persuaded to
obtain a divorce, the answer appears in the opening paragraphs of the agreement:
"That Whereas, said parties have separated and said party of the second part has
stated that she is about to institute an action for divorce from the party of
the first part; and Whereas, said parties are desirous of arriving at an
agreement respecting the settlement of their property rights and  providing for
the support and maintenance of the party of the second part in the event that a
divorce shall be granted to the party of the second part. . . ." We adopt the
language used in Cookinham v. Cookinham, 219 Cal. 723, 725 [28 P.2d 1045]:
"Appellant's contention is, as is apparent from our recital of the allegations
of the complaint, that the agreement was contra bonos mores, and, therefore,
null and void, and may be so declared in this action. With this assertion we
cannot agree. First, it is to be observed that the parties were living separate
and apart and the agreement conclusively establishes their intent to amicably
settle and adjust all of their property rights. This they were competent to do
and were authorized by law to do."

   The agreement does not indicate that it was promotive of divorce but rather
incidental thereto, the means employed in the disposition of the property of the
parties and the assumption of an obligation to support the wife. It is
unnecessary to differentiate between the facts in this case and in the cases
cited by appellant which have received consideration in later decisions. (
Howard v. Adams, 16 Cal. 2d 253 [105 P.2d 971, 130 A. L. R. 1003]; Morrow v.
Morrow, 40 Cal. App. 2d 474 [105 P.2d 129].)

      Respondent's right to recover attorney's fees and to declare the entire
unpaid balance due in accordance with the original agreement depends on the
validity of the January 19, 1934, supplementary agreement, the consideration for
which was the forbearance of the wife to pursue any claims she had against the
husband. The trial court found that on the date of the supplementary agreement
the husband was delinquent in monthly payments. The evidence shows to the
contrary. The husband and wife testified that on the date of the agreement the
husband was not in default. It is the law in this state that forbearance to sue
unless upon a promise to forbear is not a good consideration. ( Wine Packing
Corp. of Cal. v. Voss, 37 Cal. App. 2d 528 [100 P.2d 325].) Accordingly
plaintiff is precluded from the collection of attorney's fees, and is bound by
the provisions of the original settlement agreement, namely, the recovery of
delinquent payments at the rate of $ 150 per month.

   The trial court is directed to modify the findings and the judgment in
accordance with the views herein expressed. As  modified, the judgment is
affirmed, each party to pay his or her own costs on appeal.

   Peters, P. J., and Knight, J., concurred.


                              61 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            ALVERA M. ALDABE, Plaintiff and Appellant, v. CHARLES D.
                ALDABE, Defendant and Respondent.  (Two Cases.)

                             Civ. Nos. 10397, 10507

            Court of Appeal of California, Third Appellate District

            209 Cal. App. 2d 453; 26 Cal. Rptr. 208; 1962 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1705


                                November 9, 1962

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied December 6, 1962,
and Respondent's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court was Denied January
3, 1963.  Peek, J., did not Participate Therein.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEALS from a judgment of the Superior Court of Sierra County
and from an order terminating a temporary alimony and child support order.
Winslow Christian, Judge.

   Wife's action for divorce.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Appeal--Questions of Law and Fact--Consideration of Evidence.  --Ordinarily
it is the obligation of the appellate court to resolve all conflicts in the
evidence in respondent's favor.

(2a) (2b) Appeal--Harmless and Reversible Error--Examination of Entire Cause.
--Where the appellate court concludes that substantial error was committed by
the trial court in rejecting the appellant's evidence and offers of proof, it is
the court's duty to examine the entire record and, in effect, to some extent
weigh the evidence to determine whether such error resulted in a miscarriage of
justice that requires reversal and remand to the trial court so that the
evidence can be fully weighed and conflicts resolved.

(3) Divorce--Proceedings--Residence.  --Jurisdiction to grant a divorce rests on
a bona fide domicile. Where neither party is domiciled within the state, no
divorce can validly be granted and all proceedings, as well as the judgment, are
void.

(4) Id.--Proceedings--Jurisdiction.  --Where domicile is a jurisdictional
prerequisite, the parties to a divorce action cannot, by consent, confer
jurisdiction on the courts of a state where they are not domiciled.

(5) Domicile--Acquisition--Union of Act and Intent.  --A domicile can be gained
or lost only by the union of act and intent; the act alone is insufficient; the
intent alone is insufficient.

(6) Id.--Definitions.  --Domicile is a place where a person lives or has his
home, to which, when absent, he intends to return, and from which he has no
present purpose to depart.

(7) Id.--Evidence.  --Where the abode of a married couple has been in California
continuously for 17 years, evidence that the couple intended during that same
period to live in Nevada is legally irrelevant to the issue of domicile.

(8) Divorce--Foreign Decrees--Domicile.  --Where the parties to a divorce action
were domiciled in California, the state of Nevada had no legitimate interest in
the marital status of the parties and therefore the Nevada courts were without
jurisdiction over the subject matter of the action.

(9) Id.--Foreign Decrees--Collateral Attack.  --The requirements of full faith
and credit bar a defendant from collaterally attacking a divorce decree on
jurisdictional grounds in the courts of a sister state where there has been
participation by defendant in the divorce proceedings, where defendant has been
accorded full opportunity to contest the jurisdictional issues, and where the
decree is not susceptible to such collateral attack in the courts of the state
which rendered the decree.

(10) Judgments--Sister State Judgments--Want of Jurisdiction.  --The rule that
the adjudication by a sister state of jurisdictional facts is res judicata
involves the drawing of a distinction between the mere assumption, or recital,
of jurisdiction by the court which rendered the original judgment and an express
adjudication of the point after a full contested hearing. A distinction has also
been made between a finding by the foreign court of the existence of facts
which, if true, would give it jurisdiction (this adjudication is conclusive) and
a finding that it had jurisdiction, on a state of facts which did not give it
jurisdiction (this adjudication is not conclusive).

(11) Divorce--Foreign Divorces--Domicile.  --In a Nevada divorce proceeding,
because the parties lacked a Nevada domicile, the Nevada court was without
jurisdiction of the subject matter, therefore, the Nevada divorce decree was
invalid in Nevada.

(12) Judgments--Void Judgments and Collateral Attack--Want of Jurisdiction.
--Where lack of jurisdiction appears on the face of the record, the judgment is
subject to collateral attack in California as well as elsewhere regardless of
participation by the parties in the proceedings.

(13) Conflict of Laws--Presumptions.  --In the absence of proof to the contrary,
it will be presumed that the laws of Nevada and California are consonant.

(14) Judgments--Sister State Judgments--Want of Jurisdiction.  --The rule that a
judgment cannot be collaterally attacked for want of jurisdiction unless such
want appears on the face of the record does not apply to a foreign judgment.

(15) Id.--Sister State Judgments--Want of Jurisdiction.  --A recital of
jurisdiction in the judgment of a court of a sister state ordinarily is not
conclusive and may be contradicted by extraneous evidence.

(16a) (16b) Id.--Sister State Judgments--Full Faith and Credit.  --Where a
California appellate court concludes that rejected evidence, if believed, would
have justified the trier of fact in finding that the "participation" of a wife
in Nevada divorce proceedings was not such that she had her day in court, the
appellate court need not give full faith and credit to the Nevada divorce decree
but may remand the case for determination of the issue of "participation."

(17) Divorce -- Proceedings--Appeal--Evidence.  --Where a prior Nevada divorce
decree was interposed in a California divorce action, it was error to reject an
offer of proof on the question of the husband's and his attorney's knowledge of
the parties' California domicile when the wife's theory of the case was that the
husband and the attorneys for both parties had participated in a fraud on the
Nevada court, which granted the husband a divorce, in pretending a Nevada
domicile.

(18) Id. -- Proceedings -- Appeal -- Evidence.  --It was prejudicial error to
reject evidence that the husband's attorney advised the husband that he could
bring a divorce action in Nevada when this evidence tended to impeach the
attorney's denial of ever having advised the wife that she could bring a divorce
action in Nevada, and to sustain the wife's contention that, if she in fact did
participate in the Nevada divorce action, such participation was induced by the
husband's attorney.

(19) Id.--Proceedings--Appeal--Evidence.  --In a divorce action, it was error to
reject evidence of a statement by the husband that "my lawyer just told me to
say I was a resident of Nevada by intent . . ." when the wife's theory of the
case was that the husband and the attorneys for both parties had participated in
a fraud on the Nevada court, which granted the husband a divorce, in pretending
a Nevada domicile.

(20) Id.--Foreign Decrees--Notice.  --Plaintiff wife was not prevented from
collaterally attacking a Nevada divorce decree where the acts which combined to
prevent her from having a fair trial were not solely the product of her
attorney's conduct but were participated in by her husband and his attorney.

(21) Id.--Proceedings--Appeal--Evidence.  --In a California divorce action, it
was error to exclude evidence pertaining to the community property nature of a
ranch since the evidence was material to the wife's contention that she never
had a fair chance to be heard in Nevada divorce proceedings, in part, because of
an unauthorized and undiscovered stipulation that the ranch was the husband's
separate property, made for her by the attorney she had dismissed in the Nevada
proceeding.

(22) Judgments--Equitable Relief--Fraud--Necessity That Fraud Be Extrinsic.
--The final judgment of a court having jurisdiction can be collaterally attacked
only if an alleged fraud or mistake is extrinsic rather than intrinsic.

(23) Id.--Equitable Relief--Fraud--What Is Extrinsic Fraud.  --Fraud or mistake
is extrinsic when it deprives the unsuccessful party of an opportunity to
present his case to the court.

(24) Id.--Equitable Relief--Mistake.  --The circumstances which deprive an
adversary of a fair notice of a hearing or which prevent him from having a fair
hearing may be acts of the opponent not amounting to actual or intentional
fraud. Extrinsic mistake is sufficient.

COUNSEL: Charles W. Luther, Landis & Martin and Thomas W. Martin for Plaintiff
and Appellant.

Wilke, Fleury & Sapunor and Sherman C. Wilke for Defendant and Respondent.

JUDGES: Pierce, J.  Peek, P. J., and Schottky, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: PIERCE

OPINION

     Two appeals by the wife in this divorce action, one from an order
terminating a temporary alimony and child support order and the other from a
judgment dismissing the divorce action, have been consolidated, by stipulation.
Both involve the same evidence and questions of law.

   On November 9, 1959 plaintiff-appellant (hereinafter "Alvera") filed her
complaint in divorce in Sierra County, California, through attorney Gordon I.
Smith, alleging that she was a resident of said county and state, that her
husband defendant-respondent (hereinafter "Charles") had been guilty of extreme
cruelty, that the community property included a ranch located partly in Sierra
County and partly in Washoe County, Nevada, livestock thereon, equipment,
corporate shares and bank deposits.  (Aggregate value of the community property
is not set forth in the complaint.  In a subsequent affidavit filed Alvera fixes
its value at $ 250,000.)

   After preliminary proceedings orders were made for temporary alimony and
child support in said action.  In February 1960 Charles, who had not theretofore
appeared, filed a motion to quash summons on the grounds: (1) that Alvera was
not a resident of California when the action was filed, and, (2) that there was
another action pending in the State of Nevada  between the parties based on the
same cause of action.  After hearing, the court, on August 17, 1960, denied the
motion.

   On September 19, 1960, Charles filed his answer and notice of motion to
terminate temporary alimony and support based upon the fact that intermediate
the order denying the motion to quash service of summons and the answer and new
motion, the Nevada action had been heard, resulting in a valid Nevada decree
dissolving the marriage.

   The motion was heard on November 28 and 29, 1960, and resulted in the order
from which this appeal was taken, which order found that the Nevada decree was
entitled to full faith and credit and consequently the court terminated the
previous order for temporary alimony and child support.  Thereafter when the
action came on for trial a stipulation was entered into that the issues be
submitted on the same evidence produced at the previous hearing.  The judgment
appealed from followed.

     Ordinarily it would be our obligation to consider the evidence which was
before the trial court subservient to the rule which resolves all conflicts in
respondent's favor.   Here, however, we are bound by a different rule; for we
have concluded that substantial error was committed by the trial court in the
sustaining of respondent's objections to certain evidence sought to be adduced
by appellant and in the rejection of offers of proof (the nature of which
evidence and the law applicable thereto can be more facilely stated in the
discussion to follow).  And in determining whether such error is prejudicial,
resulting in a miscarriage of justice to require reversal (Cal. Const., art. VI,
§ 4 1/2), it is our duty to examine the entire record; in effect, to some extent
weigh the evidence to determine whether in our opinion "a result more favorable
to the appealing party would have been reached in the absence of the error." (
People v. Watson, 46 Cal.2d 818, 836 [299 P.2d 243]; 3 Witkin, Cal. Procedure,
Appeal, § 100, p. 2269; Vallejo etc. R.R. Co. v. Reed Orchard Co., 169 Cal. 545
[147 P. 238].)

   Charles and Alvera were married October 5, 1941.  In August 1942 they bought
the Flynn Ranch. This ranch is partly in Washoe County, Nevada, and partly in
Sierra County, California.  But the residence and all of the outbuildings are
located in California.  During their married life together this residence has
been their home and their only home at all times after its acquisition.  It is
where Charles still resided at the time of the hearing.  There is  no conflict
in the evidence in this regard.   There is a conflict on the expressed desires
of the spouses as to where they wished their legal residence to be.

   Automobile registration had been in Nevada.  In years past the parties had
voted in Nevada, although in 1956 Charles' voting registration had been
canceled.  The parties kept a post office box in Reno as their mailing address.
They shopped in Reno (much closer than any California shopping center) and
banked there.

   On the other hand, the Aldabes both knew that their house was in California.
(They had had a survey made which had established that fact.) They paid Sierra
County taxes on the portion of the ranch which is in California and on the
improvements; also on household furniture and equipment in California.  The
joint federal income tax returns filed in 1957 showed the Aldabes to be
residents of California.  The 1958 returns (with no change of abode) declared
them to be Nevada residents. Fire insurance policies showed them as California
residents.

   The Aldabes have two children, Aileen and Bertrand, ages at hearing 16 and 12
respectively.  As a matter of convenience these children attended Washoe County,
Nevada, schools with Sierra County, California (on the theory the parents were
Sierra County residents) paying for their transportation.

   During the middle fifties the parties had marital difficulties.  One Robert
Adams, a Reno attorney of the firm of Adams, Reed and Bowen, had long been
attorney for Aldabe's family, and Alvera and Charles had both consulted him
regarding their domestic problems.  Alvera testified that she asked Adams to
represent her in a proposed action but he told her he would not represent either
because he had been the attorney for both of them.  Adams, called as a witness,
testified that both spouses together had consulted him regarding their problems
and that he had also talked with Alvera separately; that he had told them
together that he would not want to "represent either of them." Alvera testified
that Adams, after she had stated her case to him, advised her that "definitely
it should be in California." Adams denied this.

   Alvera then sought other representation and ultimately on July 9, 1959,
employed attorney Jack Streeter of Reno.  No recommendation by either Charles or
Adams entered into her selection.  Alvera stated that she informed Streeter that
her home was in California and his notes of the conference show "she lives on a
ranch 17 miles north of Reno on Highway 395.  Ranch was partly in California and
partly in Nevada but  the house and buildings were located in California ."
(Emphasis supplied.) Alvera also testified that Streeter told her he could bring
the action in Nevada as well as he could handle it in California.  When, several
days later, Alvera returned to the attorney's office to verify the complaint,
she testified she called attention to the allegation alleging Nevada residence,
which was not true, but was told "he'd have to put this to read like this in
order to go through the courts of Nevada," and she thought "well, he knows the
law, if it's supposed to read that way, it's supposed to read that way." The
daughter Aileen who was present at the time corroborated this conversation.
Streeter denied it.

   The complaint was filed on July 13, 1959.  Charles filed an answer and
counterclaim. Adams appeared as his attorney.  In the original answer he alleged
that the ranch was partly community and partly his separate property. In the
counterclaim he alleged that both he and Alvera were residents of Washoe County,
Nevada.

   Alvera and her daughter, Aileen, visited Streeter in his office on October
19, 1959.  A dispute arose between client and attorney.  The record is not clear
as to the cause of the dispute.  It is clear, however, that as a result of the
conversation there was a mutual agreement Streeter was no longer to represent
Alvera.  Alvera said she discharged him; Streeter said he withdrew.

   Adams denied that Streeter advised him at that time of the termination of the
attorney-client relationship, but Streeter's notes of the incident read: "Office
conference with Mrs. Aldabe on what time was spent on the case and advised her
to obtain other counsel.  Telephone conference with Mr. Adams and Bowen on
substitution." (Emphasis supplied.) A court hearing had been scheduled in the
action that day.  Charles and his attorney were ready to proceed.  The hearing
was canceled.  Appellant's theory is that Adams was ready to proceed on October
19th, that Charles was available to testify and that since the termination of
Streeter's representation of Alvera was assigned as the reason for the
continuance, both Adams and Charles knew this.  Substantial evidence supports
this contention.  Both Alvera and Aileen, the daughter, testified to a
conversation with Charles in which he related that Adams had told him of
Streeter's discharge.  Charles admitted he knew of trouble between Alvera and
Streeter as the cause of the continuance but thought the information came from
Alvera.  A trier of facts could well have concluded that Adams knew,  as of that
date, that Streeter, although the attorney of record, was no longer actively
representing Alvera.  And subsequent activities of both attorneys shortly
thereafter lend further support to the theory.

   Streeter testified he dictated pleadings to present a motion for his
withdrawal as Alvera's attorney of record. The motion was never presented.
Streeter asserted this was because Alvera had left the state and he could not
serve her, but since the dictated pleadings were apparently never transcribed,
it seems doubtful that any attempt at service was made.  Alvera during this
period was temporarily living in Reno (see infra).  Adams, about this time,
found no difficulty in having Alvera personally served with a restraining order
in the Nevada action.

   On November 9, 1959, Alvera filed the complaint in the instant proceedings in
California, through Attorney Gordon Smith, having been advised by him and also
(according to Alvera) by another Nevada attorney, Norman Samuelson, that since
both parties were domiciled in Sierra County, California was the proper state in
which to proceed.

   On the same date letters were sent to Streeter, one by Smith, advising him of
the filing of the California action "inasmuch as we are convinced this is her
proper place of residence and she never has been a legal or bona fide resident
of the State of Nevada." The other letter was by Alvera (prepared by Smith)
referring to the Nevada action "in which action you have formerly represented me
. . . and I hereby make demand upon you to immediately prepare and file a
dismissal of my complaint in this action." (Emphasis supplied.)

   Smith's letter to Streeter also stated: "Please address your bill for
services to date in care of me for discussion with Mrs. Aldabe, and I would
suggest that you carefully itemize it as I believe it will not be too well
received."

   Streeter testified he phoned Smith informing him he could not dismiss the
Nevada action because of the counterclaim on file.  Smith was not called as a
witness.

   The filing of the California action and the sending of the above letters were
followed by these activities on the part of the Nevada lawyers:

   (1) Streeter and Adams entered into a written stipulation on November 23,
1959 (without any authorization from Alvera) that $ 1,300 of proceeds from
livestock sales being held in trust by Adams -- and being claimed by Alvera as
community property -- be withdrawn and paid as attorneys' fees, $ 650 to
Streeter and $ 650 to Adams.  This stipulation was thereupon presented to the
court by said attorneys and an order was  obtained and the funds so disbursed;
all of this again without any authorization from Alvera; Adams made no inquiries
of Streeter regarding Alvera's authorization of the fee payments.  On the
contrary, Streeter, according to Adams, suggested that he "felt the court should
enter the order and he made a comment something to the effect I don't think she
wants any attorney to be  paid anything." When the stipulation was presented to
the court for approval by these attorneys they withheld from the court
information that Streeter had been discharged as attorney and that Alvera had
not authorized payment of the fee.

   (2) Contemporaneously with their stipulation regarding attorney's fees,
Streeter and Adams made another stipulation that Charles' counterclaim which
originally had alleged that the ranch was partly community and partly separate,
could be amended to allege that all of said ranch was separate property; it was
further stipulated that a reply to this amended counterclaim be made, denying
the allegation of the amendment.  Verification both of the amendment and of the
reply were waived.  This obviated the necessity of taking up the matter with
Alvera and she in fact was never notified of the amendment, according to her
testimony (undenied by Streeter).

   (3) Ex parte proceedings were instituted by Adams to restrain Alvera from
further prosecution of her California action.  As a part of the foundation
therefor Adams' affidavit (the sole one filed) alleged (not on information and
belief) that "Charles D. Aldabe, is now, and for many years last past, has been
a resident of the State of Nevada . . . ." A temporary restraining order was
issued on November 12, 1959 on this affidavit.  Streeter on November 23, 1959
stipulated (also without Alvera's authorization) that this and the other matters
above referred to could be heard by the court two days later (November 25,
1959).  Alvera was never notified of the hearing nor was any effort made to
reach her.  Streeter appeared in court, purporting to represent her.  For some
unexplained reason the temporary restraining order was dissolved.  Alvera was,
however, found guilty of contempt regarding child custody and, without hearing,
she was deprived of the custody of her youngest child, Bertrand.  By this order,
both firms of attorneys were as hereinbefore mentioned allowed their fees.
Alvera was never notified by either attorney of these orders.

   The Nevada action was heard on April 28, 1960.  Adams  gave notice of date of
trial to Streeter and Norman Samuelson.  Adams stated he included the latter
because Samuelson, in a casual conversation with Adams, had indicated he might
be "in the case" although afterwards Adams had found he was not.  No notice of
the trial was sent by Adams to Alvera and no inquiry was made by Adams to
ascertain her whereabouts.  Charles testified he knew where she was living at
this time.  No notice of trial was given to Smith by Adams.  In correspondence
between Adams and Smith during this period regarding the California proceeding,
Adams makes no mention of the fact that he had had a date set for the Nevada
trial.  Streeter did not attempt to get in touch with Alvera to inform her
regarding the trial date.  He did notify Smith by mail and Smith phoned him
stating that "Mrs. Aldabe had taken the file from his office and he didn't know
what she was going to do."

   Alvera testified that she never had any notice of the trial nor (until long
afterward) of the decree which followed; in fact she had no notice or knowledge
of any of the proceedings subsequent to Streeter's discharge as attorney and the
service of the temporary restraining order shortly thereafter.  She stated she
thought the action had been dismissed pursuant to her letter to Streeter.

   When, on April 23, 1960, the case was called for trial, Streeter appeared and
his statement to the court (which respondent's brief characterizes as "a full
and fair statement") was as follows:

   "I represented Mrs. Aldabe and filed her complaint here some time ago, on the
basis that she was a Nevada resident. We had several hearings before your Honor
regarding custody of the children and certain restraining orders.

   "Then she became dissatisfied with my services and conferred with three or
four other local Reno attorneys, and was dissatisfied with their advice.

    "She then found a sympathetic ear in California, through a California
attorney, and there filed suit then on the grounds that she was a California
resident.

   "I have endeavored to have her appear here or at least substitute counsel for
me to appear at this hearing and for the purpose of this trial, but I have been
advised by her attorney that they are not going to appear here and make any
effort to contest the counterclaim of the defendant.

   "Therefore, I ask leave of Court to be absent during the  hearing because I
am not prepared to cross-examine or present any evidence."

   No evidence before us discloses that Alvera would not appear.  Also, Streeter
omitted to mention that Alvera's contention of California residence was based
upon the fact that she and Charles had been domiciled there for 17 years and at
all times during the proceedings, that she had discharged Streeter (or that he
had withdrawn) as her attorney and that the only reason he was still attorney of
record was that dictated pleadings to effect such substitution had not been
prepared or served.  Also, contrary to his assertion to the judge, he was
prepared to present evidence of the community status of the ranch (because he
testified in the California proceeding he had been informed of the facts and was
of the opinion as a result thereof that the property was community -- he still
believed this at the time of the hearing).

   Based upon the above statement by Streeter, the court granted his request.

   The case then proceeded to trial on the following evidence: One David Evans
and Jack Sweeney, both neighboring ranchers, testified that Charles lived on a
ranch, a part of which was in Nevada and a part in California.  Charles was
called and testified similarly.  (No one informed the court that the residence
and outbuildings of the ranch were wholly in California.) Charles testified that
it was his sincere belief that he was domiciled in Nevada, that in income tax
returns he had stated his residence as Nevada (but he did not inform the court
regarding income tax returns listing California as his residence), that he had
voted in Nevada, that his motor vehicles were registered there, that he banked
there, etc.

   In support of the contention that the Flynn ranch proper was Charles'
separate property, Charles testified that he had owned certain sheep and 440
acres of land at the time of his marriage to Alvera (purchased from a family
partnership); that he had sold wool and the sheep and had used the proceeds to
buy the Flynn ranch shortly after his marriage.

   In this connection, in the California proceedings Alvera had offered to prove
that the sheep had not been owned outright but that the purchase from the
partnership had been by a promissory note; that this loan had merely been
refinanced after the marriage to include both sheep and the  Flynn ranch; that
the refinanced loan was paid off with community earnings after the marriage.
After considerable evidence had been taken (in the California action) objection
was made and sustained by the court.  Error in the rejection of this proof will
be discussed below.

   None of this was brought out at the Nevada trial.  The following excerpt from
the reporter's transcript is revealing in this regard: "Q. [By Adams to Charles]
We were discussing the matter of assets.  Am I correct that the real property is
entirely your own, separate property? The Court: Well, let's not go into that.
Mr. Adams: All right.  Do you have that in mind, your Honor?  The Court: Yes."

   No evidence was given as to the value of the ranch. Values were given as to
certain cattle and farm equipment, with offsetting indebtedness.  Alvera was
stated to have $ 1,700-$ 1,800 in household furniture and a 1951 Oldsmobile
automobile.

   Based upon this evidence and other evidence as to the grounds for divorce,
the court, at the outset, stated: "You don't  have to go into too many things,
because it is apparent a divorce should be granted here," and after other
evidence regarding the children the court made its decree. It found the parties
to be both domiciled in and residents of Nevada.  It awarded a divorce to
Charles.  It awarded sole custody of the youngest child, the son, to Charles,
joint custody of Aileen to Charles and Alvera (inviting a designation by Aileen
as to which parent she preferred to reside with); it ordered Charles to pay $ 60
per month child support while Aileen resided with Alvera.  It found both the 440
acres of range land and the entire Flynn ranch to be the separate property of
Charles; it found the livestock and ranch equipment to be community property and
awarded it all to Charles; it stated that livestock association shares were part
separate and part community and awarded all of them to Charles; furniture was
awarded to the party then in possession thereof; no alimony was awarded Alvera.

    The questions of law under the foregoing facts are whether the Nevada court
had jurisdiction of the subject matter and whether the judgment is entitled to
full faith and credit inviolable against collateral attack.  The traditional
view has been that: "Jurisdiction to grant a divorce rests on a bona fide
domicile. Where neither party is domiciled within the state, no divorce can
validly be granted and all proceedings, as well as the judgment, are void." (16
Cal.Jur.2d 356, and cases there cited.)

    This concept is based upon the governing principle: ". . . [That] marriage
is a matter of public concern, the public, through the state, has an interest
both in its formation and in its dissolution, and the state which has that
interest is the state of domicile, because that is where the party 'dwelleth and
hath his home.'" (Goodrich, J. in Alton v. Alton, 207 F.2d 667.)

   Or as stated by Justice Frankfurter in Williams v. North Carolina, 325 U.S.
226, 229, 230 [65 S.Ct. 1092, 89 L.Ed. 1577, 157 A.L.R. 1366]: "Under our system
of law, judicial power to grant a divorce -- jurisdiction, strictly speaking --
is founded on domicil. . . .  The framers of the Constitution were familiar with
this jurisdictional prerequisite, and since 1789 neither this Court nor any
other court in the English-speaking world has questioned it.  Domicil implies a
nexus between person and place of such permanence as to control the creation of
legal relations and responsibilities of the utmost significance."

   The Alton decision (arising in a case where the statute of the Virgin Islands
purported effectually to give that territory jurisdiction to grant divorces to
nondomiciliaries) held that the statute violated the due process clause (the 5th
Amendment there, but if applied to a state the 14th Amendment).  The decision
touched off a flood of law review comments (34 Boston U.L.Rev. 216, 54 Colum.
L.Rev. 415, 39 Cornell L.R. 293, 42 Georgetown L.J. 450, 67 Harv. L.Rev. 516 and
23 U. Cincinnati L.Rev. 266) and the decision was vacated and the case dismissed
by the Supreme Court (347 U.S. 610 [74 S.Ct. 736, 98 L.Ed. 987]) after the case
became moot.

   In the concurring opinion of Justice Traynor in Scott v. Scott, 51 Cal.2d 249
[331 P.2d 641], at pp. 254-255, the concept of domicile as the "touchstone of
divorce jurisdiction" is criticized, since it can be conceived that "a country
other than the domicile may have a legitimate interest in the marital status of
the parties, even though it does not accept the common law jurisdictional
concept of domicile." He does point out, however, that if the place foreign to
the domicile in fact has no legitimate interest in the marital status, then an
attempt to assert jurisdiction would violate due process.

     We need not, perhaps, pursue this inquiry further, since Nevada by an
express statute prescribes domicile as a jurisdictional prerequisite.   ( Nev.
Rev. Stats., § 125.020(2).)

   It is well settled that where domicile is required the parties to a divorce
action cannot, by consent, confer jurisdiction upon the courts of a state where
they are not domiciled.  ( Roberts v. Roberts, 81 Cal.App.2d 871, 879 [185 P.2d
381]; Eriksen v. Eriksen, 57 Cal.App.2d 532 [134 P.2d 825].)

     To establish a domicile the union of act and intent is necessary.  This
rule has been expressed in a number of California cases where the question
involved was whether a declared intent was real, the act, i.e., physical
presence within the state being conceded; as where one party to a divorce moves
into a state, remaining there just long enough to meet the residence
requirements of that state, then obtains a divorce and moves back to the state
of original domicile -- or on to a new state.  ( Crouch v. Crouch, 28 Cal.2d 243
[169 P.2d 897]; DeYoung v. DeYoung, 27 Cal.2d 521, 524 [165 P.2d 457]; Sampsell
v. Superior Court, 32 Cal.2d 763 [197 P.2d 739] at p. 774, footnote.) But the
rule is equally applicable where the intent, a bona fide one, is conceded, but
the question is whether it has been acted upon.

   ". . . [A] residence can be gained or lost only by the union of act and
intent, but as the act alone is insufficient, so the intent alone is
insufficient." ( Bragg v. Bragg, 32 Cal.App.2d 611 [90 P.2d 329], at p. 614.)

     Domicile is "an abode animo manendi, a place where a person lives or has
his home, to which, when absent, he intends to return, and from which he has no
present purpose to depart." (See note 159 A.L.R. 499 and cases cited, including
Ungemach v. Ungemach, 61 Cal.App.2d 29 [142 P.2d 99].)

   It is stated by Professor Beale (1 Beale, Conflict of Laws, pp. 149, 150):
"It is not enough that a man desires to acquire or to keep a 'legal residence'
or 'legal domicil;' the intention necessary for the acquisition of a domicil is
an intention as to the fact, not as to the legal consequences of the fact.  'A
man's home is where he makes it, not where he would like to have it'.  . . .

   "One cannot have his only home in one place and a domicil in another, as he
may have a mere residence in one place and a domicil elsewhere.  A place which
is a man's home must be his domicil (except where he has in fact more than one
home).  The intention requisite to acquire a domicil is the intention to have a
home, and that is the only legally relevant intention; the domicil follows as a
legal consequence, without regard to whether the consequence is desired or not.
'When you intend the facts to which the law attaches a consequence, you must
abide the consequence whether you intend it or not.'" (See also Blaine v. Murphy
, 265 F. 324, 325.)

     Under these rules the Aldabes were domiciled in  California,
notwithstanding where they wished to live.  They had maintained their only abode
there continuously for 17 years; they lived there when the Nevada proceedings
were commenced -- and Charles still resides there.  (After the filing of the
divorce action, Alvera, claiming molestation by Charles, left the ranch home and
sojourned briefly and temporarily in Reno with the children before returning to
California, where she still resides. According to her testimony she never
intended to establish a home in Reno.)

   The evidence which was introduced, both in the Nevada and California actions,
with reference to the parties' declarations of intent, their banking, shopping,
voting and car registration were, therefore, merely evidence of a desire to
enjoy some of the benefits of Nevada residence, evidence which, because it
collided with the fact that they made their only home in California and intended
to do so, became legally irrelevant.

     It follows from these facts that the State of Nevada had no legitimate
interest in the marital status of these parties and therefore the Nevada court
here was without jurisdiction over the subject matter.

    The questions remain, however: (1) Can the Nevada decree, although in
proceedings without subject-matter jurisdiction, be attacked collaterally? (2)
How does the fact that appellant "participated" in the proceedings in Nevada
affect the matter?

    Where the collaterally attacking spouse had NOT participated in the
proceedings in the divorce forum the first question was answered affirmatively
by our Supreme Court in May 1946, in the case of Crouch v. Crouch, 28 Cal.2d 243
[169 P.2d 897]. There the husband, a California domiciliary, entered and
remained in Nevada, as the lower court found, "solely for the purpose of
obtaining a divorce from the plaintiff" (also a California domiciliary).  The
wife had been served constructively but did not appear in the Nevada action.
The Nevada decree contained a finding that the husband was both domiciled in
Nevada and had established a residence there.  The lower court had held that the
decree of the Nevada court was entitled to full faith and credit.  Reversing,
the Supreme Court said (on p. 249):

   "It is a well established rule that jurisdiction to grant a divorce rests
upon bona fide domicil. Where neither party is domiciled within the state, no
divorce can validly be granted and all proceedings, as well as the judgment, are
void.  Stated  in another way, a decree of divorce rendered in one state may be
impeached and denied recognition in another upon the ground that neither of the
parties had domicil at the divorce forum, and this is true notwithstanding the
recital in the decree from the other state of the jurisdictional fact of domicil
or residence.  [Citing cases.] This principle has been recognized by the United
States Supreme Court in recent decisions ( Williams v. North Carolina, 325 U.S.
226 [65 S.Ct. 1092, 89 L.Ed. 1577, 157 A.L.R. 1366]; Esenwein v. Pennsylvania,
supra [325 U.S. 279 (65 S.Ct. 1118, 1119, 89 L.Ed. 1608, 157 A.L.R. 1396)], and
has been consistently followed by courts of other states.  [Citing cases.]"

   The court in Crouch also cited cases holding that although there is a
presumption of validity, "it is always competent to collaterally impeach a
decree of divorce rendered in another state by extrinsic evidence showing that
the court pronouncing it did not have jurisdiction either of the parties or the
subject matter. Thus the decree may always be attacked upon the ground that the
foreign court had no jurisdiction because the petitioning party had not
established a bona fide domicil." And the court adds: "A decree based upon
either personal or constructive service or even a personal appearance may be
attacked upon this ground." (Emphasis supplied.)

    Crouch v. Crouch, supra, with its statement last quoted (unnecessary there
since Mrs. Crouch had NOT personally appeared in the Nevada action), was decided
before the United States Supreme Court decision in Sherrer v. Sherrer (334 U.S.
343 [68 S.Ct. 1087, 1097, 92 L.Ed. 1429, 1 A.L.R.2d 1355]) June 1948, where the
wife had left the marital domicile in Massachusetts, taking with her the
children, purportedly for a vacation in Florida.  Having arrived there, however,
she notified her husband that she did not intend to return to him.  Thereafter
she obtained housing accommodations, placed her older child in school and
secured employment for herself.  Some months thereafter (more than the six
weeks' residence requirement of Florida) she instituted divorce proceedings.
The husband personally appeared and participated at the trial and was
represented by counsel.  Evidence of domicile and residence was introduced and a
decree of divorce was entered, specifically finding bona fide residence and
jurisdiction of the subject matter. After the decree the wife remarried, but
remained in Florida with her new husband for several months, ultimately
returning with him to Massachusetts.  When the husband brought a Massachusetts
action  with allegations challenging the validity of the Florida decree, the
Massachusetts courts refused to accord it full  faith and credit and held that
the wife had never been a bona fide resident of Florida.  On certiorari the
ruling was reversed by a seven-to-two decision.  The majority opinion written by
Chief Justice Vinson held that the husband having appeared and participated in
the Florida proceeding without availing himself of the opportunity to raise the
jurisdiction question, the divorce court's finding of jurisdiction was res
judicata and entitled to full faith and credit in Massachusetts.  As stated in
the summary, "The desirability of according full faith and credit to judgments
of courts of a sister state was thought to outweigh the interest of
Massachusetts in the regulation of the marital relations of its citizens." Two
significant statements in the majority opinion are to be noted:

   (On p. 1435 [92 L.Ed.]) "It should also be observed that there has been no
suggestion that under the law of Florida, the decree of divorce in question is
in any respect invalid or could successfully be subjected to the type of attack
permitted by the Massachusetts court.  The implicit assumption underlying the
position taken by respondent and the Massachusetts court is that this case
involves a decree of divorce valid and final in the State which rendered it; and
we so assume."

     The opinion in Sherrer also states (on p. 1439 [92 L.Ed.]) that there had
been "findings of jurisdictional fact made by a competent court in proceedings
conducted in a manner consistent with the highest requirements of due process
and in which the defendant has participated" and the holding of the Sherrer case
is (on p. 1436 [92 L.Ed.]):

   ". . . [The] requirements of full faith and credit bar a defendant from
collaterally attacking a divorce decree on jurisdictional grounds in the courts
of a sister State where there has been participation by the defendant in the
divorce proceedings, where the defendant has been accorded full opportunity to
contest the jurisdictional issues, and where the decree is not susceptible to
such collateral attack in the courts of the State which rendered the decree."

    Sherrer v. Sherrer, supra, was cited and its rule applied by our Supreme
Court in Heuer v. Heuer (1949) 33 Cal.2d 268 [201 P.2d 385], where the portion
of the Sherrer decision last quoted above was also quoted (on p. 271).

   Under the rule in Sherrer two conditions must combine before it can be said
that California must give full faith and credit to the decree of a sister state:
(1) the decree must be  one not susceptible to collateral attack in the courts
of the state which rendered the decree, and (2) there must be participation by
the party aggrieved under circumstances which have afforded him full opportunity
to contest the jurisdictional issues.  We will try on the first of these
conditions to see if it fits the facts.

   We have before us the entire record in the Nevada proceeding.  From this
record it appears that no proof of a Nevada domicile by either party was ever
made.  At the trial counsel for Charles avoided, and seemingly studiously
avoided, bringing out where the Aldabe abode was.  The questions and answers put
to Charles and two other witnesses sum up to: Q. Where do you (or does he)
reside? A. On a ranch. Q. Where is the ranch? A. It is partly in California and
partly in Nevada.  Never once is the court apprised of the undisputed fact that
the Aldabes' only abode on this ranch was in California.

   It is one thing to say that where a court of one state decides it has
subject-matter jurisdiction on conflicting evidence, another state, taking a
different view of those facts, may not relitigate the matter.  That was the
situation in Sherrer.  It is quite another thing to say that such lack of
jurisdiction may not be litigated when on the record in the sister state
proceedings it appears that there existed no proof to give the court
jurisdiction.  That is the situation here.

     It is stated in 30A American Jurisprudence, Judgments, section 267, page
333: ". . . The rule [that the adjudication by a sister state of jurisdictional
facts is res judicata] involves the drawing of a distinction between the mere
assumption of jurisdiction by the court which rendered the original judgment or
the mere recital of jurisdiction in the judgment, and an express adjudication of
the point after a full contested hearing.  A distinction has also been made
between a finding by the foreign court of the existence of facts which, if true,
would give it jurisdiction and a finding that it had jurisdiction, upon a state
of facts which did not in fact give it jurisdiction.  In the former situation,
the foreign adjudication as to jurisdiction has been held to be conclusive; in
the latter, the foreign adjudication as to jurisdiction has been held not to be
conclusive." (And see cases cited in the text quoted.)

   The soundness of this rule seems manifest.   Since the parties lacked a
Nevada domicile the Nevada court was without jurisdiction of the subject matter.
Being without jurisdiction, the Nevada judgment was invalid in  Nevada, and it
would seem to follow, since absence of proof of domicile appears on the face of
the Nevada record, it should be subject to collateral attack there as well as
elsewhere regardless of participation by the parties in the proceedings (who, it
must be remembered, cannot confer jurisdiction by consent).  This is the rule in
California as applied to void judgments other than in divorce. (See 28 West
Cal.Dig., Judgment, § 485, p. 343 [13B McK. Dig., Judgments, §§ 293-295].)  No
Nevada case or statute has been found inharmonious to this.  In the absence of
proof to the contrary, it will be presumed that the law of Nevada and California
are consonant.  ( Gagnon Co., Inc. v. Nevada Desert Inn, Inc., 45 Cal.2d 448
[289 P.2d 466].)   Even had the absence of facts necessary to give the Nevada
court jurisdiction not appeared on the face of the Nevada record, "[the] rule
that a judgment cannot be collaterally attacked for want of jurisdiction unless
such want appears on the face of the record . . . does not apply to a foreign
judgment." (50 C.J.S., Judgments, § 893c (1), pp. 502, 530.)  "A recital of
jurisdiction in the judgment of a court of a sister state ordinarily is not
conclusive, but may be contradicted by extraneous evidence." (50 C.J.S.,
Judgments, § 893 (2), p. 504, citing Hammell v. Britton, 19 Cal.2d 72, 81 [119
P.2d 333].)

   It has been suggested, however, that where the unsuccessful party fully
participates in the proceeding, he or she is estopped collaterally to attack the
void judgment even though there is no jurisdiction.  No case has been found so
holding where, as here, the evidence of domicile in either party was wholly
lacking.  So to hold would be to give vitality to the weekend stopover Mexican
divorce trade.  We will not assert the rule contended for here.  However, we
need not declare the opposite rule.   Because we have reached the conclusion
that the evidence would have justified the trier of facts to find that
"participation" of appellant in the Nevada proceedings was not such that she
"has been accorded full opportunity to contest the jurisdictional issues;" and
therefore the second limitation or condition of the rule in Sherrer v. Sherrer,
supra, was not met.

     True, Alvera herself instituted the Nevada proceedings.  She contends,
however, that she did so not only upon the advice of her own attorney, Streeter,
but also upon the advice of the attorney who ultimately represented her husband.
And this brings us to the offer of proof rejected by the court, which rejection
we find to be error.  Specifically,  the offer of proof was this: That several
months after the Nevada divorce had been obtained, Charles visited Alvera at her
Yolo County residence (at the home of her mother).  Present were Charles,
Alvera, Aileen, the daughter, the mother, Mrs. Deshom, and a friend, Virginia
Mahoney; that at this meeting Charles made the statement that Adams  had
originally advised him "he could get a Nevada divorce decree and still live on
the ranch but that after the divorce proceedings were instituted Mr. Adams
advised him that it would be necessary for him to move into Reno . . ."; that
Mr. Aldabe "told him that he wasn't going to move into Reno but that he was
going to stay on the ranch; [that] at that time Mr. Adams instructed him to
testify that it had been his intent to live in Nevada at all times during the
period when he was actually a resident in California."

   It was the theory of appellant that Charles and his attorney, as well as her
own attorney, had participated in a fraud on the court in pretending a Nevada
domicile, knowing the parties were domiciled in California.  This evidence would
have supported this theory, and it was error to exclude it.  (See Isserman v.
Isserman, 2 N.J. 1 [65 A.2d 508, 511].)

     Also Adams had categorically denied Alvera's contention that he, when
acting as her legal adviser, had told her, as he was said to have advised her
husband Charles originally, that she could bring a Nevada divorce action. This
rejected evidence tended to impeach Adams' denial.  Since participation by
Alvera in the Nevada proceedings was, if real, a vital factor,  any proof which
tended to substantiate her contention that such participation was induced by the
husband's attorney was of great importance and its rejection was prejudicial.

     Similarly, the trial court rejected an offer of proof through a Mrs.
Johnson, as follows: That in another conversation with Charles Aldabe she asked
him how he could get a Nevada divorce while residing in California, or did he
reside in Nevada at the time, to which Aldabe had replied: "'No, I got it by
intent,'" and Mrs. Johnson asked him, "Intent of what?" And he said, "'Well, I
don't know, my lawyer just told me to say I was a resident of Nevada by intent
and that is what I said.'" Rejection of this evidence was error for the same
reason.  If, as Alvera contends, the representations of her own attorney and of
Charles' attorney combined to take her into the Nevada court, their activities
in the proceedings subsequently were certainly not "conducted in a manner
consistent with the highest requirements of due process."  On the contrary, they
seem calculated to prevent her from having her day in court.  We cite: (1) the
failure of Streeter to withdraw as attorney of record after termination of the
attorney-client relationship and his continuing to purport to represent Alvera;
(2) entry by Streeter into a stipulation, without Alvera's authorization and
against her known wishes, by which $ 1,300 claimed by Alvera as community funds
were disbursed to pay his fee and Adams' fee; (3) the entry by him into another
stipulation without Alvera's knowledge or consent by which the issues regarding
the character of the very substantial properties of the party were materially
changed; (4) failure of Streeter to notify Alvera of the consequences of this
stipulation; and his failure to notify her of the date of trial (he states he
relied upon notification to Smith, although he had previously learned that
Alvera had taken her file from Smith's office); (5) Streeter's representation to
the Nevada court on the date of the trial that the Aldabes were Nevada
domiciliaries when he knew their home was in California, and the inference to
the Nevada court, implicit in his comment of her having found a "sympathetic ear
in California," that her claim to California residence was a sham; (6) his
statement to the court that "I have been advised by her attorney that they are
not going to appear here" which, from the record before us, does not appear to
accord with the facts.

   Respondent cites Preston v. Wyoming Pac. Oil Co., 197 Cal.App.2d 517 [17
Cal.Rptr. 443], which holds that an unsuccessful party cannot collaterally
attack a judgment obtained "in consequence of the neglect, inattention, mistake,
or incompetency of [her] attorney, unless caused by the opposite party."

     Here, however, the acts which combined to prevent Alvera from having a fair
trial were not solely the product of the conduct of her own attorney.  They were
participated in by Charles and by Charles' attorney.

   We pass the question of the dubious propriety of Adams representing one party
to a divorce suit after having advised both regarding their marital problems and
come to the events after Adams received the telephone call from Streeter (and we
must accept the fact as probable) that he was withdrawing as Alvera's attorney.
The agreement to split the $ 1,300 of claimed community funds all without
Alvera's knowledge or consent was not unilateral on Streeter's part.  Adams, the
trustee of the fund, not only failed to assure himself of the consent of the
cestui que trust but had been informed by Streeter that it would not be
forthcoming, since he was told  that Alvera did not want her attorney to be paid
anything.  The contemporaneous act by the attorneys -- changing the issues of
the divorce proceeding regarding the status of the ranch and doing so in a
manner that Alvera would not even have to know about it was ill-designed to
afford Alvera a chance to meet Charles' new contention that this property was
entirely separate, not partly community.  Accepting Alvera's contention that she
had no notice whatever of any of the proceedings after she discharged Streeter
and adding to this Adams' knowledge of the break, plus the fact that knowledge
of Alvera's whereabouts was available to Adams through Charles during this
period, we cannot avoid the conclusion that both Charles, her adversary, and
Adams, his attorney, were not free from responsibility for the withholding of
notice and for the fact that Alvera never had a fair chance to be heard in this
proceeding.

     Certainly, she never has had a fair chance to raise the issue that the
ranch, which she values at around a quarter of a million dollars, is community
property. She has not even had a chance to put on her evidence in this regard in
the California action.  Objection to the introduction of this evidence was
sustained and this ruling was error since the evidence was material as part of
her proof that the unauthorized and undiscovered stipulation late in the
litigation changing the issues vitally prejudiced her chance to defend her
rights.

   Finally, in the manner in which the case was presented to the Nevada court, a
divorce obtained, property disposed of and child custody changed -- practically
as an ex parte matter -- Streeter was not the sole offender.  The withholding of
the fact of the California residence of the parties was Adams' responsibility,
so possibly is the way in which the ranch was represented to the court to be the
separate property of Charles if the contentions of Alvera can be established:
That at the time of the marriage the parties owned the barest equity in the
ranch which was paid for out of community earnings.

     In Westphal v. Westphal, 20 Cal.2d 393 [126 P.2d 105], after stating the
rule that final judgments (of courts having jurisdiction) can be collaterally
attacked only if an alleged fraud or mistake is extrinsic rather than intrinsic,
our Supreme Court (per Justice Traynor) states on page 397:

     ". . . Fraud or mistake is extrinsic when it deprives the unsuccessful
party of an opportunity to present his case to the court.  [Citing cases.] If an
unsuccessful party to an action has been kept in ignorance thereof [citing
cases] or  has been prevented from fully participating therein [citing case],
there has been no true adversary proceeding, and the judgment is open to attack
at any time.  A party who has been given proper notice of an action, however,
and who has not been prevented from full participation therein, has had an
opportunity to present his case to the court and to protect himself from any
fraud attempted by his adversary.  [Citing cases.] Fraud perpetrated  under such
circumstances is intrinsic.  . . ."

   In McGuinness v. Superior Court, 196 Cal. 222 [237 P. 42, 40 A.L.R. 1110],
the court, illustrating instances in which there had been "in fact no adversary
trial" quoting from United States v. Throckmorton, 98 U.S. 61, 66 [25 L.Ed. 93]
states: "'[Where] the unsuccessful party has been prevented from fully
exhibiting his case by fraud or deception practiced upon him by his opponent, as
by keeping him away from court by a false promise of a compromise; or where the
defendant never had knowledge of the suit, being kept in ignorance by the acts
of the plaintiff; or where an attorney fraudulently or without authority assumes
to represent a party and connives at his defeat; or where an attorney regularly
employed corruptly sells out his client's interest to the other side, -- these
and similar cases which show that there has never been a real contest in the
trial or hearing of the case'; such are, in the view of that tribunal, instances
of extrinsic fraud."

     The circumstances which deprive an adversary of a fair notice of a hearing
or which prevent him from having a fair hearing may be acts of the opponent not
amounting to actual or intentional fraud.  Extrinsic mistake is sufficient.  (
Antonsen v. Pacific Container Co., 48 Cal.App.2d 535 [120 P.2d 148]; Davis v.
Davis, 185 Cal.App.2d 788, 793, 794 [8 Cal.Rptr. 874].) It is stated in the
latter case (on p. 794): ". . . It is well established that in cases where the
aggrieved party is unable to make out a case of intentional fraud, the courts .
. . will extend a liberal interpretation to relieve him from a judgment taken
without a fair adversary hearing.  [Citing cases.] The basis for equitable
relief in these cases, whether it be denominated 'extrinsic fraud' or 'extrinsic
mistake' is that which has resulted in a judgment taken under circumstances of
unfairness and injustice without affording a party the opportunity to
participate in the proceedings."

   The following cases, all decided after Sherrer, should be noted.

   In Burden v. Burden (1957) 44 Tenn.App. 312 [313 S.W.2d  566, 568, 569],
where the wife had appeared in an Ohio action but had believed that a
reconciliation had occurred and that the action was dismissed, but where her
attorney had received notice of the trial, it was held by the Tennessee court
that "[whether], as complainant claims, the Ohio decree was fraudulently
obtained, it is apparent that a chain of circumstances prevented notice of the
hearing being brought home to complainant" and the court, finding that "the
requirements of due process have not been observed" refused to give full faith
and credit to the Ohio decree. (See also Ryan v. Ryan (D.C. 1954) 139 F.Supp. 98
; Winters v. Winters (1959) 236 Miss. 624 [111 So.2d 418, 420, 421].)

   In Isserman v. Isserman, supra, 2 N.J. 1 [65 A.2d 508], the wife, after a
Nevada divorce obtained by the husband, contended that, although she had
appeared in the Nevada proceedings and had even been present at the trial, she
had been actually "denied her day in court" (under circumstances far less
convincing than here) and the New Jersey Supreme Court (noting the same
quotation from Sherrer which we have set forth above) stated that she should not
be precluded by the rule in Sherrer from collaterally attacking the Nevada
decree. 1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Reversal
of the lower court decision in Isserman was, however, as we have noted above,
because of error in the rejection of evidence by the lower court.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In Chirelstein v. Chirelstein (1950) 8 N.J.Super 504 [73 A.2d 628], after
stating the rule in Sherrer, the court observes (on p. 634 [73 A.2d]):

   ". . . But I do not believe that these cases go to the length of requiring
full faith and credit to be given to a decree which the plaintiff herself
acknowledges  to have been obtained by a fraud practiced upon the Florida court,
as well as upon the State of New Jersey, and where the defendant's
'participation' in the proceeding did not apparently extend beyond the filing of
a perfunctory answer, which at most operated to lift the Florida suit to a
scarcely perceptible level above an ex parte proceeding.  . . .  The State of
Florida certainly has no interest which is infringed by a refusal to recognize a
decree thus confessedly obtained by fraud upon it, with respect to persons with
whom that state has no domiciliary concern."

     We have stated, in outline, the evidence in the record pro and con which we
deem material to the issues raised.  We were required to do this, as stated
above, to  point out why errors in the rejection of evidence were prejudicial.
This does not mean, however, that we may substitute ourselves for the trier of
facts to weigh evidence and resolve conflicts where such weighing and resolution
will determine which way the evidence preponderates to establish whether there
was no real participation by Alvera in the Nevada proceedings, and whether she
was,  or was not, prevented from having a full opportunity to defend.   From the
record before us and from the evidence offered by appellant but rejected
(assuming it to be true) the superior court, as the discussion above frankly
infers, might well have reached the conclusion that Alvera was so prejudiced.
But the rejected evidence has not been proved; it has only been stated by
Alvera's counsel.  When received in evidence, it may or may not have the impact
which the statement suggests.  After correcting the errors in rejection of
evidence and after the admission of evidence relevant to the issues, in
accordance with the views herein expressed, it will remain for the trier of
facts from all the evidence then before the court to determine whether or not
Alvera actually had her day in court in the Nevada proceeding.

   The order and the judgment appealed from are both reversed; the case is
remanded for further proceedings and a new trial in accordance with the views
expressed herein.


                              62 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           PASQUALE N. PIETRO, Appellant, v. MADELINE HUNTER PIETRO,
                                   Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 21685

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

            147 Cal. App. 2d 788; 305 P.2d 916; 1957 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      2316


                                January 24, 1957

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  Maurice C. Sparling, Judge.

   Action to set aside a divorce judgment and to compel defendant to convey
realty.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Evidence--Judicial Notice--Court Records.  --In an action to set aside a
divorce judgment and to compel the wife to convey to the husband certain realty
involved in the divorce action, the judge may take judicial notice of the
divorce action file presented to him and referred to in the complaint.

(2) Judgments -- Equitable Relief -- Fraud -- Extrinsic Fraud.  --Fraud that
will justify the setting aside of a final judgment by a court of equity must be
of such character as prevents trial of the issues presented to the court for
determination, and where it is collateral to and outside of court so that a
party is, because of such fraud or concealment, effectively deprived of
presenting his case or all of his defense, it is extrinsic and equity will give
relief.

(3) Id.--Equitable Relief--Fraud--Extrinsic Fraud.  --To constitute extrinsic
fraud, there must have been some representation or concealment by a party that
prevented the adversary from having his day in court.

(4) Id.--Equitable Relief -- Fraud -- Extrinsic Fraud.  --It is not extrinsic
fraud for defendant's attorney in a divorce action to retain agreements,
notwithstanding such retention allegedly prevents plaintiff from proving
ownership of realty involved in the action, where he could have forced
production of the agreements by a subpoena duces tecum or a demand in open
court.

(5) Id.--Equitable Relief--Fraud--Extrinsic Fraud.  --Concealment by a party of
evidence which, if disclosed, would tend to overthrow his case is not extrinsic
fraud, and therefore not ground for suit to set aside a judgment.

(6) Divorce--Judgment--Relief From Fraudulent Decree.  --In an action to compel
plaintiff's former wife to convey to him certain realty involved in her divorce
action, no extrinsic fraud appears in plaintiff's allegation that, by
substituting deeds, the wife took the realty as grantee rather than as trustee
for him, where the deed was recorded four months before she filed the divorce
action and the court therein found against him on an allegation in his
cross-complaint charging that she held the realty in trust for him.

(7) Id.--Judgment--Relief From Fraudulent Decree.  --In an action to set aside a
divorce decree and compel defendant wife to convey to plaintiff husband certain
realty involved in the divorce action, the husband's allegation that the wife's
attorney had been employed by the husband in connection with refinancing of
property and other relief, and that the attorney thus obtained information that
the wife held the property in trust for the husband, is not an allegation of
fraud, extrinsic or otherwise.

(8a) (8b) Id.--Judgment--Relief From Fraudulent Decree.  --In a husband's action
to set aside a divorce judgment and compel the wife to convey to him certain
realty involved in the divorce action, an allegation that she and her attorney
represented that certain realty standing in her name would be returned to the
husband if he would not contest the divorce action and that he relied on the
representation does not lay any foundation for setting aside the judgment, where
it appears that the husband contested the divorce action and thus did not rely
on the representation.

(9) Pleading--Subject Matter--Facts Judicially Noticed.  --An allegation in a
complaint that is out of harmony with a fact of which a court takes judicial
notice must be disregarded.

COUNSEL: Pasquale N. Pietro, in pro. per., for Appellant.

Minsky & Garber for Respondent.

JUDGES: Fox, J.  Moore, P. J., and Ashburn, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: FOX

OPINION

     By his third amended complaint plaintiff seeks to set aside the divorce
decree awarded to his wife and to compel her to convey to him certain real
property (and to  account for the income therefrom) involved in that suit.  In
his pleading plaintiff gave the title of the divorce action, the date on which
it was filed (April 14, 1953), its file number in the clerk's office, the
department of the superior court in which the case was tried, and the date the
judgment was entered.  He then alleged that he was denied recovery of the real
property here in question in that action.  His motion for a new trial was
denied, as was his motion under section 473, Code of Civil Procedure, to set
aside the judgment on the ground of asserted fraud.   He appealed from the
judgment in the divorce case but later abandoned his appeal.

   In the instant action plaintiff alleged that the property was owned by him
and that Madeline held it in trust for him.

   As a basis for setting aside the former judgment, plaintiff alleged (1) that
Madeline's attorney in the divorce case retained two written agreements which
prevented him from proving the ownership of the property; (2) that her attorney
had handled certain legal matters for plaintiff which disqualified him from
acting as attorney for her in the divorce action; (3) that Madeline and her
attorney had informed plaintiff that they would return the property in question
to him if he did not contest the divorce suit, and that, relying on that
representation, he did not contest the divorce suit; and (4) that when the
property was conveyed to Madeline on December 10, 1952, by plaintiff's former
wife, Madeline fraudulently substituted deeds so that the conveyance did not
show that she held the property in trust for plaintiff.

     When this case came on for trial, the file in the divorce suit was
presented to the judge.  He examined it, as he was permitted to do in view of
its specific identification, the references to the case in plaintiff's
complaint, and the nature of the relief he sought.  This was sufficient to
warrant the court in taking judicial notice of it.  ( Estate of Wilson, 116
Cal.App.2d 523, 527 [253 P.2d 1011]; Christiana v. Rose, 100 Cal.App.2d 46, 52
[222 P.2d 891]; Hammell v. Britton, 19 Cal.2d 72, 75 [119 P.2d 333].) Plaintiff
did not object to this procedure.  Perusal of the file disclosed, in accordance
with plaintiff's allegation, that the ownership of the property in controversy
had been litigated in the divorce suit and decided adversely to plaintiff
herein.  The file also revealed that the divorce decree had not been by default
but that there had been a four-day trial in which plaintiff herein had been
represented by counsel and during which a number of witnesses had testified and
various documents were received in evidence.

    With the pleadings in this condition, counsel for defendant objected to the
introduction of further evidence on the ground that the complaint did not state
facts sufficient to constitute a cause of action, i.e., facts that would justify
setting aside the portion of the judgment in the divorce decree that denied him
any interest in the real property in controversy.  This objection was sustained
and the case was dismissed.  It is from the judgment of dismissal * that
plaintiff prosecutes this appeal.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*   Although
two other persons are named as defendants, neither of them is involved in this
appeal.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Plaintiff's theory is that the judgment in the divorce case was induced by
extrinsic fraud. Defendant insists that no extrinsic fraud is shown.

     As stated in Gale v. Witt, 31 Cal.2d 362, 365 [188 P.2d 755]: "The fraud
which will justify the setting aside of a final judgment by a court of equity
must be of such character as prevents a trial of the issues presented to the
court for determination.  [Citations.] Where the fraud practiced is collateral
to and outside of court so that a party is, because of such fraud or
concealment, effectively deprived of presenting his case or all of his defense,
it is extrinsic and equity will give relief."  The court further pointed out, on
page 366, that "to constitute extrinsic fraud,  there must have been some
representation or concealment by the defendant which prevented the plaintiff
from having his day in court . . ." (To the same effect: Westphal v. Westphal,
20 Cal.2d 393, 397 [126 P.2d 105]; United States v. Throckmorton, 98 U.S. 61, 65
[25 L.Ed. 93]; In re Griffith, 84 Cal. 107, 112-113 [23 P. 528, 24 P. 381]; Pico
v. Cohn, 91 Cal. 129, 133-135 [25 P. 970, 27 P. 537, 25 Am.St.Rep. 159, 13
L.R.A. 336].)

   Measured by these principles, it is clear that plaintiff's allegations do not
show extrinsic fraud.

     Plaintiff's first charge is that Madeline's attorney retained two written
agreements which prevented him from proving his ownership of the property.
Plaintiff could have forced the production of these documents by a subpoena
duces tecum directed to her counsel, or by an appropriate demand in open court.
Concealment by a party of evidence which, if disclosed, would tend to overthrow
his case, is not extrinsic fraud and therefore is not ground for a suit to set
aside a judgment.  ( Hogan v. Hogan, 131 Cal.App.2d 281, 283-284 [280 P.2d 64];
In re Griffith, supra; Pico v. Cohn, supra; Burch  v. Hibernia Bank, 146
Cal.App.2d 422, 432 [304 P.2d 212].)

     Plaintiff's allegation that when the property was conveyed to Madeline she
substituted deeds and thereby received a deed showing title in her as grantee
instead of a deed conveying it to her as trustee for plaintiff in accordance
with their agreement, does not show extrinsic fraud. The deed in question was
acknowledged on December 10, 1952, and recorded the next day.  This was four
months before Madeline filed her complaint for divorce. Furthermore, it appears
from the divorce file that plaintiff herein filed a cross-complaint in the
divorce action in which he alleged that Madeline held the property in trust for
him.  The court held against him on this question.  It is thus apparent that the
issue was litigated and decided in the prior action and that plaintiff's
allegation does not amount to extrinsic fraud. ( Hanley v. Hanley, 114 Cal. 690,
693 [46 P. 736]; Gale v. Witt, supra; Burch v. Hibernia Bank, supra.)

     Plaintiff's allegation that Madeline's attorney had been employed by him in
connection with the refinancing of the property and to recover for him and his
former wife certain other property, and that he thus obtained information that
Madeline held this property in trust for him is not an allegation of fraud,
extrinsic or otherwise.  If plaintiff believed there was any impropriety in
counsel's representing Madeline in the divorce action he should have drawn the
matter to the attention of the trial court, for he was then in possession of all
the facts.  It does not appear that he made any such suggestion.

     Plaintiff alleged that Madeline and her attorney represented to him that
they would return the property in question to him if he did not contest the
divorce suit, otherwise they would force the property into foreclosure and it
would be lost to him; that he relied on the representation; and that the fear of
losing the property "caused him not to contest the divorce suit." Considered by
itself, this allegation would be impressive but when supplemented by the file in
the divorce suit, of which the court was entitled to take judicial notice ( Weil
v. Barthel, 45 Cal.2d 835, 837 [291 P.2d 30]; Hammell v. Britton, supra; Estate
of Wilson, supra; Christiana v. Rose, supra), it loses its significance.  For it
then becomes apparent that plaintiff did not rely on the alleged representation,
but did, in fact, contest the divorce case throughout a four-day trial in which
he was represented by counsel and during which many witnesses testified and
numerous documents were received in evidence.   An allegation of a complaint out
of harmony  with a fact of which a court takes judicial notice must be
disregarded. ( Young v. Boy Scouts of America, 9 Cal.App.2d 760, 764 [51 P.2d
191]; Bell v. Southern Pac. Co., 189 Cal. 421, 425 [208 P. 970]; French v.
Senate, 146 Cal. 604, 607-608 [80 P. 1031, 2 Ann.Cas. 756, 69 L.R.A. 556].)
Thus the allegation relied on fails to establish a foundation for setting aside
the former judgment or any portion thereof.

   If, perchance, there was any technical procedural error in considering the
file in ruling on defendant's objection to the further introduction of evidence
it was obviously not prejudicial, for that file demonstrated the lack of merit
in plaintiff's case.

   Plaintiff suggests that the trial judge was biased in favor of defendant.
There is no  support whatever in the record for this suggestion.

   Other arguments made by plaintiff are not of sufficient substantiality to
require consideration.

   Judgment affirmed.


                              63 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          ISABELLE G. JONES, Appellant, v. BURTON I. JONES, Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 6156

            Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District

          182 Cal. App. 2d 80; 5 Cal. Rptr. 803; 1960 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      2080


                                 June 21, 1960

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of San Diego
County.  C. M. Monroe, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Marriage--Validity--Law Governing.  --Validity of a marriage, ordinarily, is
determined by the laws of the state in which it is contracted.

(2) Divorce--Foreign Divorces--Effect.  --The effect of a divorce decree is
determined by the laws of the state in which it is obtained.

(3) Id. --Foreign Divorces--Extraterritorial Effect of Prohibition on
Remarriage.  --Another state's statute imposing only a prohibition on a
subsequent marriage within a designated waiting period constitutes the adoption
of a policy that will not be enforced extraterritorially in this state.

(4) Id. --Foreign Divorces--Extraterritorial Effect of Prohibition on
Remarriage.  --Where a statute of another state continues the marriage of
parties to a divorce proceeding in force during a prescribed period after
rendition of a decree, it determines the status of the parties during that time
and controls the decision of the courts of this state when their status is in
issue although it also effects a waiting period policy.

(5) Statutes--Construction--Acts of Other States.  --When a question arises in
the courts of this state as to the construction or effect of a statute of
another state, the courts of this state will follow the interpretation placed on
such statute by the court of last resort of the enacting state.

(6) Courts--Conflicting Opinions.  --Where there is a conflict between opinions
of the same court on a given principle of law, the latest should be given
preference.

(7) Divorce--Foreign Divorces--Extraterritorial Effect of Prohibition on
Remarriage.  --In a divorce action in this state, the court properly awarded
defendant an annulment on the ground that the parties' marriage in this state
was invalid where it appeared that plaintiff was previously married in Oregon,
that she obtained a divorce in that state, but married defendant less than six
months after the Oregon decree was entered in violation of an Oregon statute
providing that neither party is capable of remarrying a third person within six
months after the date of the decree, and that the decisions of the Oregon courts
have held that the effect of such statute is to terminate the marriage for all
purposes except for the purpose of enabling either party to marry another person
within the stated time.

(8) Id. --Foreign Divorces--Extraterritorial Effect of Prohibition on
Remarriage.  --A marriage in this state which was void because the wife, who had
been married in Oregon and had received a divorce in that state, married the
husband less than six months after the date of the divorce decree in violation
of an Oregon statute making either party to a divorce incapable of remarriage
with a third person within such time, was not validated by an Oregon curative
statute, since such curative statute had no extraterritorial effect and since it
was not in effect at the time of the rendition of the judgment in this state
annulling the void marriage, it having been passed pending the appeal from such
judgment.

COUNSEL: Ashley & Brady and John A. Brady for Appellant.

Jennings, Engstrand & Henrikson and Paul D. Engstrand, Jr., for Respondent.

JUDGES: Coughlin, J.  Shepard, Acting P. J., and Shea, J. pro tem., * concurred.


*   Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: COUGHLIN

OPINION

     The plaintiff brought this action to obtain a divorce from the defendant
who cross-complained seeking an annulment of their marriage. An annulment was
granted and the plaintiff appeals.

   For several years prior to June, 1956, the plaintiff resided  in the State of
Oregon during which time she was the wife of Draper Santry.  She became
estranged from her husband; had not lived with him for a considerable period of
time; in May of that year met the defendant; in June of that same year filed an
action for divorce from Santry; and on July 9, 1956, obtained a decree of
divorce through the Circuit Court of the State of Oregon.  Her divorce
proceedings were a part of the plans agreed upon between herself and the
defendant whereby they were to be married in Santa Barbara, California, on July
28, 1956.  Pursuant to these plans the plaintiff left Oregon immediately
following entry of the divorce decree; went to Santa Barbara; married the
defendant on the scheduled date; and thereafter lived with him as his wife, in
California, until her separation a few months before the commencement of this
action.

   The defendant contends that his marriage to plaintiff is invalid because, at
the time thereof, she was not legally capable of entering into a marriage; that
her Oregon divorce decree did not terminate her prior marriage so as to enable
her to marry again until the expiration of six months.

     The validity of a marriage, ordinarily, is determined by the laws of the
state in which it is contracted. ( Colbert v. Colbert, 28 Cal.2d 276, 280 [169
P.2d 663]; Mohn v. Tingley, 191 Cal. 470, 476 [217 P. 733]; Estate of Sanders,
147 Cal.App.2d 450, 454 [305 P.2d 655]; Estate of Keig, 59 Cal.App.2d 812, 816
[140 P.2d 163].) Section 61 of the Civil Code declares that a subsequent
marriage contracted by any person during the life of a former spouse, other than
with such spouse, is illegal and void, "unless the former marriage has been
annulled or dissolved."

     The effect of a decree of divorce is determined by the laws of the state in
which it is obtained.  ( Estate of Sanders, 147 Cal.App.2d 450, 452 [305 P.2d
655]; Estate of Winder, 98 Cal.App.2d 78, 87 [219 P.2d 18]; Means v. Means, 40
Cal.App.2d 469 [104 P.2d 1066]; People v. Goddard, 84 Cal.App. 382 [258 P. 447];
People v. Woodley, 22 Cal.App. 674, 676 [136 P. 312].)

   By statute the law of Oregon provides that: "A decree declaring a marriage
void or dissolved at the suit or claim of either party shall have the effect to
terminate such marriage as to both parties, except that neither party shall be
capable of contracting marriage with a third person, and if he or she does so
contract, shall be liable therefor as if said decree had not been given, until
the suit has been heard and  determined on appeal; but in no case until the
expiration of six months from the date of said decree." (Emphasis added.) (See
In re Ott's Estate, 193 Ore. 262, 279 [238 P.2d 269, 271].)

   The effect of a statute requiring parties in a divorce proceeding to wait a
stated period of time after rendition of the divorce decree before entering into
marriage with another person, depending upon the language used therein,
generally is either (1) to prohibit the subsequent marriage and invoke a
prescribed penalty for violation without affecting its validity, or (2) to
maintain the former marriage in force for the stated period and thus render void
any subsequent marriage contracted within that time.   The statute of another
state which imposes only a prohibition upon a subsequent marriage within the
designated waiting period constitutes the adoption of a policy which will not be
enforced extraterritorially in this state.   ( Estate of Wood, 137 Cal. 129, 135
[69 P. 900]; Estate of Winder, 98 Cal.App.2d 78, 87 [219 P.2d 18]; People v.
Woodley, 22 Cal.App. 674 [136 P. 312].)  On the other hand, where the statute of
another state continues the marriage of parties to a divorce proceeding in force
during the prescribed period after rendition of that decree, it determines the
status of the parties during that time, and controls the decision of the courts
of this state when their status is in issue even though it also effects a
waiting period policy.  ( Means v. Means, 40 Cal.App.2d 469 [104 P.2d 1066];
People v. Woodley, 22 Cal.App. 674, 676 [136 P. 312].)   When a question arises
in the courts of this state as to the construction or effect of a statute of
another state, our courts will follow the interpretation placed upon such
statute by the court of last resort of the enacting state.  ( Hospelhorn v. Van
Dusen, 40 Cal.App.2d 257, 259 [104 P.2d 888]; Interstate Lumber Co. v. Tweedy,
28 Cal.App.2d 208, 209 [82 P.2d 208]; People v. Goddard, 84 Cal.App. 382, 386
[258 P. 447].)

   In McLennan v. McLennan, 31 Ore. 480 [50 P. 802, 803, 38 L.R.A. 863, 65
Am.St.Rep. 835], the Supreme Court of Oregon held that a decree of divorce,
although terminating a marriage for all other purposes, did not terminate it for
the purpose of enabling either of the parties to marry another person until the
expiration of six months after entry of the decree, and that a subsequent
marriage before expiration of that period of time was void. In this case the
plaintiff obtained a decree of divorce in Oregon and, before the expiration  of
the six months period, entered into a marriage in the State of Washington.  The
court said:

   "It is clear that a marriage in this state in violation of this section would
be null and void, because, by its provisions, the parties are incapable of
entering into such a relation within the time specified, for the reason that the
decree does not to that extent terminate the former marriage. . . .  Until the
expiration of such time, the status of the parties, so far as the right to
remarry is concerned, remains the same as if no decree had been rendered.  . . .
During that time the decree is suspended or inoperative to that extent, and both
parties, without regard to their guilt, are utterly powerless to make a valid
contract of marriage with a third person. It will be observed that the statute
declares that neither party to the decree shall be capable of contracting
marriage with a third person during the time such decree is subject to review by
an appellate tribunal, and not merely that it shall not be lawful for them to do
so.  It goes directly to their ability or capacity to contract, and there is a
distinction made in the books between the marriage of divorced parties declared
by law incapable of remarrying and a marriage in violation of some statutory
prohibition penal in its nature.  In the one case the marriage is absolutely
void, and in the other it is often held to be valid, although the party may be
punished criminally for violating the prohibitory statute.  . . .  Indeed, it is
not seriously contended that a marriage contracted in this state within the
prohibited time would be valid; but the contention is that, as the marriage in
question was solemnized in the state of Washington, the plaintiff was freed from
the restraint imposed upon her by the decree of divorce. The general rule is
unquestioned that a marriage between persons sui juris, valid where solemnized,
is valid everywhere; but this plaintiff, having been previously married, and her
former husband being alive, could not contract a second valid marriage anywhere,
unless the incapacity arising from her previous marriage had been at the time
effectively and completely removed by a decree of divorce, and this was not the
case at the time of the solemnization of the marriage between plaintiff and
defendant, because the statute  under which the decree was obtained provided
that the divorce did not completely sever the tie of marriage,  so as to enable
either to become a party to a new one, until the lapse of a specified time after
the decree, and her marriage was contracted in violation of this statute.  . . .
The provision of  our statute is not imposed as a punishment, nor is it penal in
its character, but applies to the innocent as well as the guilty.  It goes to
the capacity of either party to remarry within the prescribed time, . . ." (
McLennan v. McLennan, 31 Ore. 480 [50 P. 802, 803, 38 L.R.A. 863, 65 Am.St.Rep.
835].)

   This decision was followed in the case of Hooper v. Hooper, 67 Ore. 187 [135
P. 525] even though in the interim, the Oregon court had said that the statute
in question was "penal in character," a statement later disapproved.  ( Wallace
v. McDaniel, 59 Ore. 378 [117 P. 314, 315, L.R.A. 1916C 744].) However, an
interpretation contrary to the original holding is intimated in the later case
of Twigger v. Twigger, 110 Ore. 520 [223 P. 934], which considered the effect of
a curative statute declaring marriages contracted within the six-month period
after decree to be valid.  In the course of its opinion the court stated that
the decision in McLennan  v. McLennan, 31 Ore. 480 [50 P. 802, 38 A.L.R. 863, 65
Am.St.Rep. 835], was based on "legislation in its then condition," intimating
that there had been a change in the statute.  However, no material change had
occurred.  The court then proceeded to state that none of the prior Oregon
decisions went "so far as to say that the marriage would be otherwise than valid
for all purposes in Washington," although it then was considering only the
validity of the subject marriage in Oregon and held it to be valid under the
curative statute.  The reason for the observation with respect to the validity
of the subject marriage in Washington is not clear and, as indicated in the
opinion of the trial court in the case at bar, may be pure dicta.  Nevertheless,
after the decision in Twigger v. Twigger, supra, 110 Ore. 520 [223 P. 934], a
California court held that the subsequent marriage in California of a party to
an Oregon divorce within the six-month period, was valid ( People v. Goddard, 84
Cal.App. 382 [258 P. 447]) and, after quoting from the case of Twigger v.
Twigger, 110 Ore. 520 [223 P. 934], said:

   "These authorities lead us to the conclusion that the highest court of Oregon
has decided that that court has never held that the Oregon laws of divorce have
any extraterritorial application to marriage contracted in some other state.  We
are entitled, therefore, to assume that the law of Oregon is the same as the law
of the state of California." ( People v. Goddard, 84 Cal.App. 382, 386 [258 P.
447].)

   However, the California court did not consider the case of  Vnuk v. Patterson
, 118 Ore. 602 [247 P. 766, 769, 47 A.L.R. 394], decided in the previous year,
which approved and applied the doctrine of the McLennan case ( McLennan v.
McLennan, supra, 31 Ore. 480 [50 P. 802]) and clearly indicated that a
subsequent marriage within the six-month period was invalid in Oregon, not
because the statute prohibited such a marriage, but because, under the statute,
the parties were incapable of contracting such a marriage.

   Previously another California court, in considering the effect of the Oregon
divorce statute, declared that the doctrine of the McLennan case ( McLennan v.
McLennan, supra, 31 Ore. 480 [50 P. 802]) had been overruled by the decisions in
Wallace v. McDaniel, 59 Ore. 378 [117 P. 314, L.R.A. 1916C 744], heretofore
referred to, and in State v. Leasia, 45 Ore. 410 [78 P. 328], which held that a
wife who had obtained a decree of divorce might testify against her husband in a
criminal case even though the time for appeal therefrom, or its equivalent
six-month period, had not expired.  ( People v. Woodley, 22 Cal.App. 674, 677
[136 P. 312].) The decision in State v. Leasia, however, did not consider the
effect of the divorce decree upon the status of a party to marry another within
the designated period.

    Since the Goddard case ( People v. Goddard, supra, 84 Cal.App. 382), the
Supreme Court of Oregon has reiterated the rule declared in McLennan v.
McLennan, supra, 31 Ore. 480 [50 P. 802], by stating:

   "The first time the act in question was construed by the court was in 1897,
by the able and illuminating opinion of Mr. Justice Robert Bean in McLennan v.
McLennan, . . .  It was held that the marriage was absolutely void.

   "The next case in order directly attacking the validity of a premature
marriage after divorce is Hooper v. Hooper, 67 Ore. 187 [135 P. 205, 525]. The
Hooper case was a suit for the annulment of another Vancouver, Washington,
marriage celebrated in that city within four months after the defendant had
obtained a divorce in Washington county, Oregon.  Predicated solely upon the
rule laid down in the McLennan case, the Hooper alliance was declared void.

   "The rule of the McLennan case has ever since been our guiding star and
followed and applied without deviation except in the minor respect hereinafter
referred to.  As was well said by Mr. Justice Burnett in Vnuk v. Patterson, 118
Ore. 602 [247 P. 766, 769, 47 A.L.R. 394], as late as 1926 the doctrine
announced in the McLennan and Hooper cases  has 'never been overturned or
doubted.' We are compelled to reiterate the same conclusion 25 years later.

   "The minor deviation from the tenor of the McLennan case above referred to is
found in Wallace v. McDaniel, 59 Ore. 378, at page 383 [117 P. 314, at page 315,
L.R.A. 1916C, 744], where the court referring to Sec. 9-916, O.C.L.A., then Sec.
515, L.O.L., says: 'This section is penal in character.' This is directly contra
to the holding in the McLennan case, 31 Ore. 480 at page 486, 50 P. at page 803,
where it is said: 'The provisions of our statute is not imposed as a punishment,
nor is it penal in character.  . . .' Insofar as the Wallace case so holds, it
is now expressly overruled.

   "The McLennan and Hooper cases have also controlled our judgment when
marriages have been collaterally attacked as being void under Sec. 9-916.
Twigger v. Twigger, 110 Ore. 520, 223 P. 934; Wallace v. McDaniel, supra. Both
were suits involving the determination of title to real property." ( In re Ott's
Estate, 193 Ore. 262, 279 [238 P.2d 269, 271].)

   It appears that the basic determination of the McLennan case ( McLennan v.
McLennan, supra, 31 Ore, 480 [50 P. 802] is the law of Oregon at this time,
i.e., that under the statute in question, until the expiration of the stated
period of time "the status of the parties, so far as the right to remarry is
concerned, remains the same as if no decree had been rendered" (50 P. 802, 803);
"During that time the decree is suspended or inoperative to that extent . . ." (
50 P. 802, 803); and ". . . the parties are incapable of entering into such a
relation within the time specified, for the reason that the decree does not to
that extent terminate the former marriage."  (50 P. 802.)

   The issue for determination in the case at bar does not concern the status in
Oregon of the marriage of the parties to this action, but rather the status of
the plaintiff at the time of the rendition of her Oregon divorce decree. The
only Oregon decision which has spelled out the effect of a decree on the
marriageable status of a party thereto, i.e., legal capacity to marry another,
is in the case of McLennan v. McLennan, supra, 31 Ore. 480 [50 P. 802]. The
holding in Wallace v. McDaniel, supra, 59 Ore. 378 [117 P. 314] that the
provisions of the statute which continue the incapacity of a married person to
marry another during the six months after obtaining a divorce decree are penal
in nature, was expressly  overruled by the latest decision of the Oregon Supreme
Court upon the subject, i.e., In re Ott's Estate, 193 Ore. 279 [238 P.2d 269].
The intimation in the Twigger opinion ( Twigger v. Twigger, supra, 110 Ore. 520
[223 P. 934] that this statute terminated the marriage status for all purposes
and imposed merely a prohibition against a subsequent marriage within the
sixmonth period, enforceable only in Oregon,  is in similar conflict with the
Ott's Estate decision ( In re Ott's Estate, 193 Ore. 262, 279 [238 P.2d 269]),
and is not controlling.   Where there is a conflict between opinions of the same
court on a given principle of law the latest thereof should be given preference.
( Estate of Keig, 59 Cal.App.2d 812, 816-817 [140 P.2d 163].)

     We conclude that the decree of divorce obtained by the plaintiff in Oregon
did not terminate her marriage to Santry for the purpose of enabling her to
marry another until the expiration of six months from the date of that decree.
Therefore, the marriage of plaintiff and defendant in California was void under
the provisions of section 61 of the Civil Code, and the determination of the
trial court accordingly was proper.

     The plaintiff further contends that her marriage to the defendant was
validated by a curative statute passed by the Oregon legislature pending the
appeal in this matter, i.e., on April 14, 1959.  Under the authorities
heretofore noted this statute would have no extraterritorial effect; would
validate marriages under consideration by the courts of Oregon ( Twigger v.
Twigger, 110 Ore. 520 [223 P. 934]); but would not be binding upon or enforced
by the courts of California.  Moreover, as contended by the defendant, the state
of the law as of the date of rendition of the judgment herein would control in
determining its correctness.  ( Barry v. Barry, 124 Cal.App.2d 107, 112 [268
P.2d 147].)

   The judgment is affirmed.


                              64 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In the Matter of the Adoption of BENETTA DeLEON, an Infant

                                 Civ. No. 2782

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, THIRD APPELLATE DISTRICT

              70 Cal. App. 1; 232 P. 738; 1924 Cal. App. LEXIS 80


                           November 26, 1924, Decided

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition by Appellant to have the Cause Heard in the
Supreme Court, after Judgment in the District Court of Appeal, was Denied by the
Supreme Court on January 22, 1925.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from an order of the Superior Court of Solano County
vacating an order and judgment of adoption. W. T. O'Donnell, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Adultery--Cruelty--Award of Custody of Minor to Offending Party--
Jurisdiction.  --Notwithstanding the fact that a divorce may be granted against
a party on the grounds of his adultery or cruelty, the court having jurisdiction
of the proceeding has both the discretion and the jurisdiction to award the
custody of a minor child to the offending party.

(2) Adoption--Minors--Custody--Subdivision 2, $ =<$ =T4*CA_CIV_224 $
=L0001000001000001*000001 Section 224, Civil Code$ =>--Construction of.
--Subdivision 2 of section 224 of the Civil Code, which provides in effect that
consent to the adoption of a child is not necessary from a father or mother
adjudged guilty of adultery or cruelty, does not, in and of itself, purport to
make any disposition or authorize any orders in relation to minor children, but
relates simply to the question of consent, and in and of itself does not
authorize any disposition of a minor child, such disposition being governed by
section 138 of the Civil Code.

(3) Divorce--Minors--Termination of Jurisdiction.  --The care and custody of a
minor child can only be inquired into in a divorce proceeding while the child is
and continues to be, in contemplation of law, the child of the divorced parents;
and if by any legal proceeding this relationship is extinguished, the
jurisdiction and power of the court in which the divorce proceedings were taken
and had immediately terminate.

(4) Id.--Death of Parent to Whom Custody is Awarded--Order of Award Inoperative.
--When the parent to whom the custody of a child in a divorce proceeding is
awarded dies, the order of award becomes immediately of no force or effect, for
the reason there is no one upon whom it can operate or anyone in existence
capable of asserting any rights thereunder.

(5) Id.--Parties to Whom Custody may be Awarded.  --It is within the power of
the superior court in making disposition of a minor child of divorced parents to
award the care, custody, and control thereof to persons other than either of the
parents of such child as well as to either the innocent or the offending party
when the decree is entered, based upon an act of cruelty or adultery.

(6) Adoption -- Consent -- Subdivision 2, $ =<$ =T4*CA_CIV_224 $
=L0001000001000001*000001 Section 224, Civil Code$ =>--Construction.
--Subdivision 2 of section 224 of the Civil Code, which provides in effect that
consent to the adoption of a child is not necessary from a father or mother
adjudged guilty of adultery or cruelty, must be interpreted and applied to the
circumstances and conditions disclosed by the facts in each case and also read
in connection with section 138 of the Civil Code.

(7) Id.--Judgment--Collateral Attack.  --Neither the parties to an adoption
proceeding nor their heirs or personal representatives are entitled to attack
collaterally a judgment of adoption because of errors or irregularities in the
matter of procedure, after the order has been recognized and treated as valid by
the parties thereto.

(8) Divorce -- Death of Parent to Whom Custody is Awarded -- Right of Surviving
Parent to Custody -- Effect of Decree upon.  --A decree of divorce which simply
awards the custody of a minor child either to an offending or unoffending
parent, in legal effect, suspends and does not in and of itself absolutely
terminate or end the natural and common-law right of a parent of a child, and
upon the death of the parent to whom the child has been awarded, the surviving
parent has a natural and commonlaw right to be heard as to the disposition to be
made of the child after the death of the parent to whom the child has been
awarded.

(9) Id.--Custody of Minors--Modification of Decree.  --Irrespective of the terms
or the wording of the decree awarding the custody of a minor child to one of the
parents in a divorce proceeding, that decree, under the terms of section 138 of
the Civil Code, may at any time during the minority of the child be either
modified or entirely vacated; and unless some other disposition has been made of
the child under the provisions of section 224 of the Civil Code, no order of the
court made, based upon said section 138, can be considered either a final or an
absolute determination as to the custody of the child.

(10) Adoption--Death of Parent to Whom Custody is Awarded--Subsequent Adoption
of Minor--Absence of Notice to Surviving Parent--Invalidity of Adoption.
--Where the father of a minor child, to whom the custody of such child was
awarded in a divorce proceeding on the ground of the mother's cruelty toward the
father, died, and subsequent to the father's death the child was adopted without
notice to the mother, the decree of adoption was properly set aside, as the
natural and common-law right of the surviving parent (the mother) to the custody
of the child and to be heard as to any disposition proposed to be made of said
child immediately revived and came into active force and effect on the death of
the father.

COUNSEL: W. U. Goodman, S. M. Spurrier and Kenneth I. Jones for Appellants.

Atran & Sheets for Respondent.

JUDGES: PLUMMER, J. Hart, J., and Finch, P. J., concurred. All the Justices
concurred.

OPINION BY: PLUMMER

OPINION

     PLUMMER, J. This is an appeal from an order vacating and setting aside an
order and judgment of the superior court of Solano County, made and entered in
the matter of the adoption of Benetta DeLeon, an infant.

    The facts, as gleaned from the judgment-roll herein, are as follows: On or
about the first day of October, 1921, in the superior court of the state of
California, in and for the county of Colusa, one George DeLeon was awarded a
decree of divorce from Elizabeth DeLeon, then and theretofore his wife, on the
grounds of cruelty. In the decree, and as a part thereof, the said George DeLeon
was awarded the care, custody, and control of Benetta DeLeon, a minor child of
said parties, then an infant of the age of about six years. After the entry of
the decree of divorce, as herein mentioned, George DeLeon placed the said
Benetta DeLeon with Alma E. Blood and Horace B. Blood, the petitioners for the
adoption of said infant and the appellants in this proceeding. On the
twenty-eighth day of October, 1921, the said Elizabeth DeLeon intermarried with
one John Spurgeon. On the second day of September, 1922, George DeLeon died.
Thereafter, and upon the 12th of September, 1922, the said Alma E. Blood and
Horace B. Blood filed their petition for the adoption of the said Benetta DeLeon
and thereupon, and upon the same day, the superior court of the county of Solano
in which said petition was filed made and entered its order by the terms of
which the said Benetta DeLeon was adjudged to become then and there the adopted
child of the said Alma E. Blood and Horace B. Blood. No notice of the proceeding
leading up to the order of the court last aforesaid, pertaining to the adoption
of said infant, was given to the said Elizabeth DeLeon (Spurgeon), the surviving
mother of said infant. Thereafter,  and within the time mentioned in section 473
of the Code of Civil Procedure, Elizabeth DeLeon (Spurgeon), as the mother of
said child, filed her notice of motion in the matter of said adoption proceeding
in the superior court of the county of Solano, accompanying said notice of
motion with an affidavit setting forth, among other things, that she first
learned of the death of the father of said child, George DeLeon, on or about the
fourteenth day of September, 1922; that thereupon she endeavored to and did
ascertain the whereabouts of the child in question, and then learned for the
first time of the adoption proceedings taken and had as hereinbefore referred
to. Application was then made by the said Elizabeth DeLeon (Spurgeon) to the
superior court of the county of Colusa for a  modification of the order awarding
custody of the said Benetta DeLeon to George DeLeon, and that such modification
was made and the custody of said child purported to be given thereby to the said
Elizabeth DeLeon (Spurgeon). Other matters are set forth in the affidavit not
necessary to be mentioned herein. Thereafter, and in pursuance of said notice,
the said Elizabeth DeLeon (Spurgeon) moved the superior court of Solano County
to vacate the order of adoption theretofore made in the matter of the said
Benetta DeLeon, an infant, upon the following grounds, to wit:

   "1. That said decree of adoption was made in said above matter against the
said Elizabeth Spurgeon, through her mistake, inadvertence, surprise and
excusable neglect.

   "2. That the court is and was without jurisdiction to hear, try or determine
the matters or things set forth and contained in the petition for adoption in
the above entitled matter, or to make or enter the said decree of adoption
therein.

   "3. That said decree of adoption is contrary to and in violation of article
I, section XIII, of the Constitution of California, in that it deprives said
Elizabeth Spurgeon of her property without due process of law."

   Upon the hearing of said motion the trial court made and entered its order
setting aside and vacating the decree of adoption theretofore entered in the
matter of said minor, and set the petition of the said Horace B. Blood and Alma
E. Blood for the adoption of said minor down for further hearing. It is from
this order that the petitioners for the adoption of said minor prosecute this
appeal.

   The appellants base their appeal entirely upon subdivision 2 of section 224
of the Civil Code, relating to the adoption of infants. That section provides
that "a legitimate child cannot be adopted without the consent of its parents,
if living," and then provides that "consent is not necessary from a father or
mother adjudged guilty of adultery or cruelty and for either cause divorced." It
will be noticed that nothing is said in this subdivision of section 224 about
the consent of the person to whom the child may be awarded when the divorce is
granted upon either of the specified grounds.   Notwithstanding the fact that
the divorce may be granted against a party on the grounds of his adultery or
cruelty, the court having jurisdiction of the proceeding has both the
discretion and the jurisdiction to award the custody of a minor child to the
offending party; this in view of the fact, as has been said, "the offense is
against the other party to the marriage and not against the child."  Subdivision
2 of section 224 of the Civil Code does not, in and of itself, purport to make
any disposition or authorize any orders in relation to minor children, but,
relates simply to the question of consent, and in and of itself does not
authorize any disposition of a minor child. Such disposition is governed by
section 138 of the Civil Code. That section reads as follows: "In actions for
divorce the court may, during the pendency of the action, or at the final
hearing or at any time thereafter during the minority of any of the children of
the marriage, make such order for the custody, care, education, maintenance and
support of such minor children as may seem necessary or proper, and may at any
time modify or vacate the same."  Whatever may be the terms of the order
awarding the custody of a minor child to either of the parents in a divorce
proceeding, it is evident from the wording of this section that so long as the
child involved continues to be a minor there is no such thing as a final order
pertaining to the custody of such child. The care and custody of the child can
be inquired into at any time. This care and custody, however, can only be
inquired into while the child in question is and continues to be, in
contemplation of law, the child of the divorced parents. If, by any legal
proceeding, this relationship is extinguished, the jurisdiction and power of the
court in which the divorce proceedings were taken and had immediately terminate.
The same reasoning would lead to the conclusion that when the parent to whom the
custody of a child in a divorce proceeding is awarded dies, the order of award
becomes immediately of no force or effect, for the simple reason there is no one
upon whom it can operate or anyone in existence capable of asserting any rights
thereunder.   Again, it is within the power of the superior court in making
disposition of a minor child of divorced parents to award the care, custody, and
control thereof to persons other than either of the parents of such child as
well as to either the innocent or the offending party when the decree is
entered, based upon an act of cruelty or adultery. The literal reading of
subdivision  2, which, as aforesaid, provides that consent is not necessary from
a father or mother adjudged guilty of adultery would require the giving of
consent to adoption by the innocent party, although as absolutely divested of
the care, custody, and control of the minor child as it is within the
jurisdiction of the superior court, trying a divorce case, to adjudicate and
determine. Such literal reading would at the same time dispense with the consent
and, as a corollary, obviate the necessity of notice being given to the
offending party, although the offending party may be given the care, custody,
and control of the minor involved as absolutely and completely as lies within
the jurisdiction of the superior court in divorce proceedings. A literal reading
of the subdivision would also authorize the adoption of minors placed in the
custody of third persons without any notice being given or any modification
being made of orders provided for in said section 138.   From what we have said,
it is apparent that the language of subdivision 2 of said section 224 of the
Civil Code, cannot be given the absolute finality and conclusiveness insisted
upon by appellant, but said subdivision must be interpreted and applied to the
circumstances and conditions disclosed by the facts in each case and also read
in connection with section 138 of the same code. The award of the custody of the
child made in the instant case is in the following words: "It is hereby ordered
and decreed that the custody of the minor child of the parties, to-wit, Benetta
DeLeon, be and the same is awarded to plaintiff." There is no adjudication of
the unfitness of either party. In the application of the rules involving any
determination of the rights of the parties in adoption proceedings, whether the
attack is direct or only collateral, must be borne in mind. In 1 Cal. Jur. 446,
section 28, we find the law stated as follows:  "Neither the parties to an
adoption proceeding nor their heirs or personal representatives are entitled to
attack collaterally a judgment of adoption because of errors or irregularities
in the matter of procedure, after the order has been recognized and treated as
valid by the parties thereto." Therein citation is made of a number of instances
where a collateral attack has been held ineffectual. The first case relied upon
by the appellant herein is that of In re Williams, 102 Cal. 70 [41 Am. St. Rep.
163, 36 P.  407]. In that case a decree of divorce had been entered on the
grounds of cruelty of the father and the custody of their minor child awarded to
the mother. Thereafter said minor child was adopted by Mrs. Lewellyn Williams.
At the time of the adoption, the mother of the infant was dead; the father of
the child was still living. Notice of the adoption proceedings was not given to
him. The point was made that the adoption proceedings were invalid by reason of
the absence of notice thereof to the father. The adoption proceedings thus came
in question only collaterally. Under these circumstances the court held as
follows:

   "The remaining question to be considered is whether the validity of the order
of adoption is affected by the fact that it was made without the consent of the
father of respondent, and without notice to him. As already stated the father of
respondent had been divorced from the mother on the ground of his adultery, and
such being the case, his consent to the order of adoption was rendered
unnecessary by the express provisions of section 224 of the Civil Code then and
now in force. The fact that the decree of divorce was made before the enactment
of our Civil Code, and for an act of adultery committed in another state, did
not make that section inapplicable to the proceeding taken by the deceased for
the adoption of respondent, and to so hold is not to give any retroactive or
extraterritorial effect to the provisions of that section. The section simply
declares under what circumstances the consent of the natural parent shall not be
required in a proceeding for the adoption of a child, and it was intended to
furnish the rule in regard to that matter in all subsequent applications for
adoption under the statute. It is argued, however, by counsel for appellants
that it is not in the power of the state to deprive a parent of the natural
right to his child for such a cause, without at least affording him an
opportunity to appear and answer the charge in the proceeding which is taken for
the purpose of severing his parental relations. Whatever force there might be in
this position in a case where the natural father of an adopted child, was
asserting his right to the custody of such child, or in an action brought by him
to recover the value of its services from the adopted parent, it seems to us
that the question thus argued by counsel does not arise here. The  father of the
respondent is dead; but, if he were alive, no rights of his would be impaired by
giving force and effect to the contract of adoption, and permitting respondent
to succeed to the estate of the deceased as the adopted child of the latter."

   The right of a natural parent to be heard in the adoption proceedings was not
involved in the Williams case. The holding is, in effect, that, as the natural
parent was not asserting any right to the care, custody, and control of the
minor child involved, it did not lie within the power of anyone to assert such
rights and privileges for the purpose of attacking collaterally the right of the
minor to succeed to the estate of a deceased adoptive parent. In other words,
the right of the parent was individual and could not be asserted by any other.
In the case of Younger v. Younger, 106 Cal. 377 [39 P. 779], alleged to be
determinative in this proceeding, we find the facts to be as follows: In
February, 1891, Georgia A. Younger obtained a decree of divorce from her
husband, Edward A. Younger, on the ground of extreme cruelty, the decree having
been granted in the superior court of Santa Clara County, and was awarded the
custody of their minor child, a son, Hyatt Tisdale Younger; that immediately
after the entry of the decree of divorce in said action the mother, with her
said son, took up her residence in the county of Yolo, and, on or about the
thirty-first day of July, 1891, in a proceeding had in the superior court of the
county of Yolo, based upon the consent of the mother and the petition of D.  W.
Hyatt, filed in said court, in conformity with the provisions of the Civil Code,
an order of adoption was entered adjudging said Hyatt Tisdale Younger to be the
duly adopted child of the said D. W. Hyatt. After these proceedings were taken
and had, upon application by the natural father of said Hyatt Tisdale Younger,
the superior court of the county of Santa Clara made an order modifying the
decree of divorce theretofore entered in the said case of Younger v. Younger
relating to the custody of the minor child in question, purporting to provide
for the bringing of said minor child to Santa Clara during the month of July
each year and allowing the father to retain the custody of said child during
such period. The validity of this latter order was the question before the
supreme  court, and involved the construction of section 138 of the Civil Code
to which we have heretofore referred. The court there said: "It is obvious that
the jurisdiction and powers conferred by this section must be read and construed
with, and in view of, the rights conferred by the provisions of the code with
reference to adoption. So construed, the jurisdiction conferred by section 138
subsists so long only as the status of the child remains that a child of the
parties -- 'of the marriage.' This, as we have seen, it has ceased, in legal
contemplation to be. It would hardly be contended that the jurisdiction of the
divorce court would continue after the death of a child, or after the attainment
of its majority, or after the death of its parents. In the first two instances
jurisdiction would wholly cease; and in the last it would devolve upon the court
sitting in probate for the care of orphans. By the adoption the child is as
entirely removed from the jurisdiction as in either of the instances suggested.
The various provisions of the code are to be construed in harmony and so as to
give all their appropriate and intended effect. To give to section 138 the
effect contended for would be to abrogate or render nugatory the provisions for
adoption as to one of the very instances specially provided for by section 224."

   The adoption in this case was had at a time when the award of the custody of
the child involved, made at the time of the entry of the decree of divorce, was
in full force and effect. The decree was entered against the father on the
grounds of cruelty and gave to the mother the full power and control of
disposition of the child, and this full control and power of disposition was
subsisting, and in full force and effect, at the time she consented to the
adoption of her infant son. Until the entry of the decree of adoption no
modification of the order made under the provisions of section 138 had ever been
made or petitioned for. At the time of the adoption the mother was the living
person in whom the power of consent was vested, and having been duly and
regularly exercised, the status of the child became inexorably fixed as the
legal child of the adoptive parents and the superior court of Santa Clara County
in the divorce proceeding thereafter had no jurisdiction to make any valid order
pertaining to the custody of the child.

    In the case of Bell v. Krauss, 169 Cal. 387 [146 P. 874], a divorce was
granted to Leila F. Bell from her husband, Jesse M. Bell, on the ground of
neglect and failure to provide and two minor children of said parties were
awarded to Mrs. Bell. Thereafter Hugh I. Krauss and Birdie M. Krauss petitioned
for the adoption of the minor child herein referred to. The adoption proceedings
were had in the superior court of the county of Los Angeles and it appears that
no notice of said proceeding was given to Jesse M. Bell, the father of said
minor child, nor was any consent ever given by him to such adoption. Thereafter
an action was begun by the said Jesse M. Bell against Hugh I. Krauss and Birdie
M. Krauss, his wife, to vacate and set aside the order of adoption. Proceedings
were also noticed by motion under section 473 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The trial court sustained a demurrer to the complaint filed by Jesse M. Bell,
and also denied his motion based upon said section 473 of the Code of Civil
Procedure. The supreme court reversed the judgment based upon the demurrer
referred to, but affirmed the order based upon section 473 of the Code of Civil
Procedure for the reason that it was made after the expiration of six months. In
discussing the questions involved the court said:

   "There was no finding that the father was an unfit person to have possession
and control of the child. The placing of the infant in charge of the mother was
not such judicial deprivation of the custody of the child on account of the
neglect of the father as is contemplated in section 224 of the Civil Code.
Divorces are not granted for offenses against children and the bestowal of the
custody of a minor in a divorce action is not, unless otherwise provided by
statute, an adjudication of the fitness of the parent who is for the time denied
the right to retain possession of the child. It is nothing more than the
expression of the court's belief that under the circumstances then existing, the
welfare of the child would be best subserved by placing said child with one of
the parents rather than the other. Upon the death of a mother to whom a child
has been given by a decree of divorce, the father becomes entitled to the
custody of the child. ( Schammel v. Schammel, 105 Cal. 258 [38 P. 729]; Civ.
Code, secs. 197 and 246; Code Civ. Proc., sec. 1751.) Prima  facie a parent is
presumed competent and he is entitled to have the custody of his child unless
found by the court to be incompetent. ( In re Campbell, 130 Cal. 380 [62 P. 613]
.)"

   The case of Bell v. Krauss does not bear directly upon the interpretation of
subdivision 2 of section 224 of the Civil Code, for the reason that the grounds
of divorce in that case were different from those referred to in said
subdivision,  but the case does bear directly upon the rights of a surviving
parent and upon the situation as presented when the parent to whom the custody
of a minor child has been awarded is dead, prior to any disposition of the child
by the parent to whom its custody may have been awarded, and prior to any change
or modification in the order making the award. In the Matter of Cozza, 163 Cal.
514 [Ann. Cas. 1914A, 214, 126 P. 161], the question of notice to the guilty
party awarded the custody of the minor child where the divorce was granted upon
the ground of extreme cruelty came directly before the court for determination.
In that case the father was granted a divorce from the mother on the ground of
extreme cruelty, but the minor child of the marriage was awarded without any
limitation to the mother. The divorce was granted in the state of Washington.
Thereafter the mother came with the child involved in said action to the county
of Santa Clara, in the state of California, where it appears the child was taken
charge of by the superior court of said county, under and in accordance with the
provisions of the Juvenile Court Law (Stats. 1915, p. 1225). Thereafter such
proceedings were taken and had that the superior court made an order of adoption
whereby the child in this action was adopted. In the proceedings so taken and
had, no notice was given to the mother of said child. In making the order the
court found as to the decree of divorce, as stated above, and as alleged in the
petition for adoption and held that, as the decree of divorce in the state of
Washington was granted on the ground of cruelty toward her husband on the part
of the mother of the child, her consent to the adoption of the child, under
section 224 of the Civil Code, was unnecessary. In discussing the questions
involved upon appeal, the court expressed its views as follows:

    "The court found that, notwithstanding her primary right to her child and
its custody, she had lost all right to object to being deprived of it under the
adoption proceeding, or to insist that this could not be done by order of the
court without her consent, by virtue of the decree of divorce, and, further,
because, she had deserted and abandoned it within the meaning and intent of
section 224 of the Civil Code.

   "We are satisfied, however, that the court improperly construed the section
as to the effect on consent of the decree as the terms of that decree stand, and
that the evidence does not sustain the conclusion of the court that either the
child had been deserted or had been abandoned by its mother within the meaning
of said section 224, or deserted or abandoned at all so as to preclude the
necessity for consent to its adoption.

   "Discussing these matters separately, and, first, as to the effect of the
decree of divorce on consent under the section. The trial court, reading this
section literally, held that as the decree of the superior court in Washington
between the parents of the child was granted to the husband for cruelty on the
part of the wife, her consent to the adoption of her child was, under the
section, unnecessary, ignoring entirely the fact that, notwithstanding the
decree was in favor of the husband, the custody of the children was, by the very
terms of the decree, awarded absolutely to her; not a limited but an absolute
one as far as the custody is concerned.

   "Appellant here -- the mother -- contends that this is not the proper
construction to be given to the section, and that if it is to be so construed it
is, as far as it attempts to deprive her of the right to the custody of her
children judicially awarded her by the decree of divorce without notice or her
consent, unconstitutional, as depriving her of a vested right to her child
without due process of law.

   "There is no necessity for considering this constitutional objection, because
we do not think the section is subject to the literal construction which the
superior court placed upon it. Such a superficial interpretation is not
permissible when the spirit of our laws and the particular purpose of the
enactment of the section respecting consent and the power of courts in divorce
proceedings over the custody of the children of the marriage are considered.

    "In the latter proceeding the court has power and authority to make such
orders as it may deem necessary and proper for the custody of the children of
the marriage, without being constrained in any respect by the cause for which
the divorce is granted, and may at any time vacate or modify such order. While
section 224 provides generally that consent shall not be necessary to the
adoption of children of the marriage from the parent against whom the decree is
granted on the ground of cruelty, the section stops there. It does not assume to
interfere with the orders of the court in divorce proceedings as to the custody
of children."

   After further discussion of the case, the supreme court held that, even
though the divorce had been granted to the husband on account of the extreme
cruelty of the wife, the child having been awarded to her, notice of the
proceeding to adopt the child in question was absolutely necessary, and the
proceeding having been had without the giving of such notice and without her
consent, the order of the trial court was reversed. In the instant case there
are facts and circumstances disclosed by the record which differentiate it in
some particulars from any of the cases which we have been considering.   The
father, to whom the custody of the child was awarded by the superior court, when
the decree of divorce was granted him on the ground of the cruelty toward him of
the mother of the child, was dead. Whatever rights concerning the child
theretofore vested in him immediately ceased. Was the child thereupon ipso facto
set at large as an abandoned child or as a wanderer upon the face of the earth
to whom nobody had any legal rights? We think not. In 19 C. J. 349, the general
rule in regard to such cases is thus stated:

   "On the death of the parent to whom the custody of the child is awarded, the
other parent ordinarily succeeds to the right of custody, although where the
surviving parent is an unfit associate for the children, their custody will not
be taken from respectable relatives of the deceased parent; but, in analogy to
the rule as to the termination of alimony on the death of the husband, it has
been held that, upon the death of either parent, the right of the other to the
custody of a child under the decree ends, at least in the case of the decree
which awarded the custody 'during the joint' lives of the  parents, the rights
of the survivor in such cases thereafter being those of a surviving parent,
governed by the common law and not by the decree. Neither parent can give away
by will the custody of a child as against the survivor."

   In Schammel v. Schammel, 105 Cal. 258 [38 P. 729], it was held that, "Upon
the death of the mother the father again became entitled to the custody of the
child, and this right continued until a guardian of her person was appointed. In
the Matter of Allen, 162 Cal. 625 [124 P. 237], the court had before it the
question of the rights of a surviving parent, after the death of a parent to
whom the minor child had been awarded in divorce proceedings, and it was there
held that the award of the child to the mother did not absolutely end the
father's right to its control; it merely determined "that as between the husband
and wife, the child should be placed in the custody of the latter until some
other disposition should be made. It did not undertake to provide for the
custody of the child after the mother's death." It was further held "upon the
death of the parent to whom is awarded the custody of a minor child by the
decree divorcing the parents, the other parent becomes entitled to the custody."
The cases involving this question are there set forth in full and clearly
establish the rule which we are here stating, to wit, that a decree of divorce
which simply awards the custody of a minor child either to an offending or
unoffending parent, in legal effect, suspends and does not, in and of itself,
absolutely terminate or end the natural and common-law right of a parent of a
child, and that, upon the death of the parent to whom the child had been
awarded, the surviving parent has a natural and common-law right to be heard as
to the disposition to be made of the child after the death of the parent to whom
the child has been awarded.   We may say that, irrespective of the terms or the
wording of the decree awarding the custody of a minor child to one of the
parents in a divorce proceeding, that decree, under the terms of section 138 of
the Civil Code, may at any time during the minority of the child be either
modified or entirely vacated. Hence,  unless some other disposition has been
made of the child under the provisions of section 224 of the Civil Code, no
order of the court made, based upon said section 138, can be considered  either
a final or an absolute determination as to the custody of the child. In the case
at bar, we think that upon the death of the parent to whom the child was awarded
the decree of the court awarding custody of the child to such deceased parent
immediately terminated. In the case of Miller v. Higgins, 14 Cal. App. 156 [111
P. 403], the divorce had been granted to the mother on the grounds of extreme
cruelty of the husband and father, and thereafter an application was made to
modify the award of the custody of the child, and after notice of the
application, the mother removed the child from the county of Contra Costa to the
county of Los Angeles, where, with her consent, adoption proceedings were had.
Application was made by the father to have the order of adoption set aside. This
being granted, an appeal was taken therefrom. It was there contended that
Miller, against whom the divorce decree had been entered upon the ground of
cruelty, was not, under the terms of subdivision 2 of section 224 of the Civil
Code, entitled to notice. The court there said: "Whether or not the father was
entitled to notice of the adoption proceedings was a jurisdictional fact to be
determined by the judge from extrinsic evidence. 'Upon the appearance before the
judge of the persons seeking to adopt the child and the child, he acquires
jurisdiction to entertain a petition for adoption, but at this point it is only
jurisdictional to preliminarily investigate and determine whether the presence
at the hearing of the parents of the minor child is necessary or not. One parent
being present and consenting, it is still incumbent upon the judge to ascertain
whether the consent and presence of that parent alone is necessary to the
relinquishment of the child, and to confer full jurisdiction to proceed with the
hearing and make the order of adoption . . . . In all cases it becomes necessary
to determine this jurisdictional fact.' ( Estate of McKeag, 141 Cal. 403, 408
[99 Am. St. Rep. 80, 74 P. 1039].)"

   In the Miller case, the case of Younger v. Younger, supra, is also considered
and the fact pointed out, just as we have stated, that the status of the child
had been changed during the time that there existed a living person actually
capable of giving consent to such change, and, in that particular, differs from
the case at bar. The question of concealment  was also involved in the Miller
case, but that does not prevent that decision from being an authority upon the
question of notice.  The Miller case has been called to our attention upon the
further ground that adoption proceedings without notice may possibly be
violative of section 13 of article I of the state constitution, but, for the
reasons hereinbefore stated, we do not think it necessary to discuss any
constitutional principles involved in this action, holding, as we do, that the
natural and common-law right of the surviving parent to the custody of the child
in question and to be heard as to any disposition proposed to be made of said
child, immediately revived and came into active force and effect on the death of
the parent to whom the child had been awarded. It follows that the trial court
was correct in setting aside the decree of adoption made in this case without
notice to the surviving parent. The order appealed from is affirmed.

   Hart, J., and Finch, P. J., concurred.

   A petition by appellant to have the cause heard in the supreme court, after
judgment in the district court of appeal, was denied by the supreme court on
January 22, 1925.

   All the Justices concurred.


                              65 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          Estate of LUELLA J. SANDERS, Deceased.  PATRICIA J. RADICE,
           Appellant, v. EMORY V. SANDERS, as Administrator With Will
                              Annexed, Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 5275

            Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District

            147 Cal. App. 2d 450; 305 P.2d 655; 1957 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      2262


                                January 7, 1957

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from an order of the Superior Court of Riverside
County dismissing a petition seeking removal of an administrator with the will
annexed.  Hilton H. McCabe, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce -- Foreign Decrees -- Effect.  -- The effect of a sister state's
decree of divorce is governed by the laws of that state.

(2) Marriage -- Validity -- Law Governing.  --The appellate court should affirm
an order dismissing a petition to remove, as administrator with the will
annexed, decedent's alleged husband who was appointed as a result of the fact
that the person named executor predeceased decedent, where the basis for the
petition was alleged invalidity of the marriage between decedent and
administrator, in view of the fact that it occurred within the period during
which the state in which he was divorced from a prior wife prohibited marriage,
but where it appeared that such prohibition did not render a marriage during
such period void, and that the marriage between decedent and the administrator
in another sister state was valid.

(3) Id.--Validity--Law Governing.  --Ordinarily the law of the place of marriage
controls the question of its validity.

(4) Divorce--Extraterritorial Effect of Prohibition on Remarriage.  --Statutes
prohibiting remarriage of divorced persons within a specified time after entry
of a decree terminating the marriage relation have no extraterritorial effect.

COUNSEL: David N. M. Berk for Appellant.

Wallace P. Rouse for Respondent.

JUDGES: Coughlin, J. pro tem.  * Barnard, P. J., and Griffin, J., concurred.

*   Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: COUGHLIN

OPINION

     This is an appeal from an order dismissing a petition seeking the removal
of Emory V. Sanders, as administrator with the will annexed of the estate of
Luella J. Sanders, deceased. Letters of administration had been issued to Emory
as the surviving spouse of decedent. Luella died testate, leaving a will
executed prior to her marriage which made no provision for Emory, and named an
executor who predeceased her.  The petition for removal alleged that the
marriage of Emory and Luella was void, because of a prior existing marriage.

   At the hearing of the petition in question it was established that Emory had
been married to Clara I. Sanders; that he was divorced; "that the divorce was
entered in Portland, Oklahoma, on the 24th day of April, 1951"; that he was a
resident of California "in the month of April, 1951" and resided therein
continuously thereafter; and that he and Luella were married in Yuma, Arizona on
August 18, 1951, and lived together as husband and wife until her death on March
31, 1955.

   Appellant contends that the Oklahoma divorce did not terminate the marriage
relation between Emory and Clara until six months after the decree was entered,
and as he married Luella within six months after this divorce the later marriage
was void. This contention is based  on certain provisions of the Oklahoma
statutes which, among other things, declare that it shall be unlawful for either
party to a divorce to marry another person within six months after the decree is
entered, and require that such a decree recite that it does not become  absolute
and take effect until the expiration of six months from the time it is rendered.

     The effect of the Oklahoma decree of divorce is governed by the laws of
that state ( Means v. Means, 40 Cal.App.2d 469, 473 [104 P.2d 1066]; Estate of
Winder, 98 Cal.App.2d 78, 87 [219 P.2d 18].)

     In the case of Plummer v. Davis, 169 Okla. 374 [36 P.2d 938], the Supreme
Court of Oklahoma held that the marriage of a divorced person within six months
after the rendition of a decree of divorce, the marriage and divorce both
occurring in that state, was voidable and not void. This decision, of necessity,
was based upon the conclusion that the marriage which was the subject of the
divorce action had been terminated by the decree therein, otherwise the
subsequent marriage within the prohibited period would have been void as a
plural marriage ( Whitney v. Whitney, 192 Okla. 174 [134 P.2d 357]). In its
opinion the court places particular emphasis upon the decision in the case of
Conn v. Conn, 2 Kan.App.419 [42 P. 1006], which interpreted the effect of a
Kansas statute substantially identical with the Oklahoma statute wherein it was
said: ". . . our statute simply declares that it shall be unlawful for either
party to marry within six months after the decree is entered.  It does not in
terms pronounce them incapable of entering into the marriage relation within
that period, nor does it declare void a marriage solemnized in violation of the
prohibition of the statute." With respect to the requirement that the decree of
divorce should recite certain restrictions upon its effectiveness, the Oklahoma
court said: "In Brown v. Capps et al., 164 Okla. 91 [22 P.2d 1008] this court
held in Section 2 of the syllabus 'Section 676, O.S. 1931 (512 C.O.S. 1921),
which provides that "every decree of divorce shall recite the day and date when
the judgment was rendered in the cause, and that the decree does not become
absolute and take effect until the expiration of six months from said date,"
must be considered to apply only to that portion of section 674, O.S. 1931,
which relates to appeals and remarrying within six months following the date
upon which the divorce is granted.'"

   In two prior Oklahoma decisions the sole issue for determination was the
effect of the decree of divorce upon the existing marriage. No subsequent
marriage was involved.  In each instance the court held that the granting of a
decree of divorce dissolved the marriage (n re Smith, 2 Okla. 153 [37 P. 1099];
Yeats v. State, 30 Okla. Crim. 320 [236 P. 62]).

    A third prior decision, Harvey v. State, 31 Okla. Crim. 299 [238 P. 862,
863, 51 A.L.R. 321], considers the effect of the Oklahoma divorce laws and
states: "Under this statute the decree of divorce is sufficient to dissolve the
marriage tie at the time it is rendered, but there is an inhibition in the
nature of a penalty on a marriage by the parties with any third person within 6
months from the date of the decree."

   In two other prior decisions, the Oklahoma court considered the effect of the
statutes of that state on the marriage of a person divorced in that state, which
occurred within six months after the rendition of the divorce decree. ( Niece v.
Territory, 9 Okla. 535 [60 P. 300]; Atkeson v. Sovereign Camp, W.O.W., 90 Okla.
154 [216 P. 467, 32 A.L.R. 1108].) At the time the divorces in these cases were
granted, the statutes provided that any divorced person marrying within the six
months' period "shall be deemed guilty of bigamy, and such marriage be
absolutely void." (Italics ours.) This provision was stricken from the statutes
in 1925.  In Niece v. Territory, supra, the appellant had been charged with
bigamy; the remarriage occurred in the state of Oklahoma; and the court held
that under "the provisions of Section  4551 of the Statutes of 1893, it is
unlawful for either party to a divorce suit to marry any other person within six
months from the date of the decree of divorcement, and every person marrying
contrary to this section is guilty of bigamy." In Atkeson v. Sovereign Camp,
W.O.W., supra, the plaintiff sued for insurance benefits as the wife of a
deceased member of the defendant association; she and her husband, who was
divorced in Oklahoma where both of them were domiciled, were married in Texas
within six months after rendition of the divorce decree; and the court held that
"the attempted marriage of Lee B. Atkeson to Mattie Atkeson, while the former
was under the restrictions imposed by the laws of this state, by making a
temporary visit to the state of Texas, was void, and that the said Mattie
Atkeson can derive no rights nor base any claim therein in the courts of this
state." (Italics ours.) In referring to these two decisions the court in Yeats
v. State, 30 Okla. Crim. 320 [236 P. 62, 64], makes this pertinent observation:
"In a few cases the courts say, or by loose language intimate, that the marriage
relation between the parties does not actually terminate until the end of that
period (the six month period).  This discrepancy also appears in some of the
Oklahoma decisions." The opinion in Yeats v. State, supra, recognizes the
distinction between cases involving an  application of the Oklahoma divorce laws
to a second marriage, and those considering the effect of an Oklahoma divorce
decree on the marital status of the parties named therein, and says: "It must,
of course, be conceded that the defendant could not consummate a legal second
marriage in this state within the 6-month period, but many of our sister states
have held that one might do so in another state where the marriage and divorce
laws of the latter contain no such prohibition.  They so hold upon the theory
that in effect within this state the marital relation is dissolved the moment
the decree of divorce is rendered, and that the prohibition against remarriage
is in the nature of a penalty which a sister state having a different policy
will not enforce, so that within such a sister state a second marriage may be
consummated within the 6-month period, valid in that state." It is noteworthy
that in 1925 the Oklahoma statutes were amended to specifically provide that a
marriage outside of the state during the prohibited period was unlawful and
"deemed" bigamous. There would have been no need for the amendment if a decree
of divorce had not dissolved the marriage forthwith as a subsequent marriage in
any state, during the existence of the prior undissolved marriage, would have
been unlawful and bigamous.

   The courts of other states, in construing the Oklahoma statutes or others
similar thereto, have held that a marriage which is the subject of a divorce
action under those statutes, terminates upon the rendition of the decree of
divorce, even though it is unlawful for either party to the action to marry any
other person within six months.  ( Green v. McDowell, 210 Mo.App. 517 [242 S.W.
168]; Bauer v. Abrahams, 73 Colo. 509 [216 P. 259]; Durland v. Durland, 67 Kan.
734 [74 P. 274, 276, 63 L.R.A. 959]; In re Troemper's Estate, 160 Kan. 464 [163
P.2d 379, 382].)

   It is our opinion that the marriage between Emory V. Sanders and Clara I.
Sanders was dissolved upon the rendition of the divorce decree by the Oklahoma
court on April 24, 1951.

   The only remaining question for decision is whether the Arizona marriage of
Emory and Luella was valid in California.   "Ordinarily, the law of the place of
marriage controls the question of its validity." ( Colbert v. Colbert, 28 Cal.2d
276, 280 [169 P.2d 633].)  The courts of Arizona have followed the rule holding
that statutes which prohibit the remarriage of divorced persons within a
specified time after the entry of a decree which terminates the marriage
relation  have no extraterritorial effect.  ( Horton v. Horton, 22 Ariz. 490
[198 P. 1105].) This, also, is  the law in California.  ( Estate of Wood, 137
Cal. 129 [69 P. 900]; People v. Woodley, 22 Cal.App. 674, 681 [136 P. 312].)
Under these rules the marriage of Emory and Clara was valid.

   In her reply brief appellant states that she "is leaning heavily upon the
case of Means v. Means, 40 Cal.App.2d 469 [104 P.2d 1066]" which considered the
effect of a decree of divorce obtained in Wisconsin.  The ground for appellant's
reliance on the cited case is the similarity between certain provisions of the
Wisconsin divorce statutes and those of the Oklahoma statutes.  The courts of
Wisconsin have held that under the statutes of that state a divorce decree is
not effective until the expiration of one year from the granting of such decree.
However, the laws of Oklahoma and not the laws of Wisconsin govern the decision
in the instant case.

   The order appealed from is affirmed.


                              66 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             PAUL VERDIER, Plaintiff and Appellant, v. ALEXANDRINE
               VERDIER, Defendant and Respondent.  PAUL VERDIER,
           Petitioner, v. THE SUPERIOR COURT OF SANTA CLARA COUNTY et
              al., Respondents; ALEXANDRINE VERDIER, Real Party in
                                    Interest

                             Civ. Nos. 19639, 19941

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                  Division One

          203 Cal. App. 2d 724; 22 Cal. Rptr. 93; 1962 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      2418


                                  May 21, 1962

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied June 18, 1962, and
Respondent's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court was Denied July 18,
1962.  Tobriner, J., did not Participate Therein.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from orders of the Superior Court of Santa Clara County
for entry of judgment denying divorce, correcting record, refusing to vacate and
set aside dismissal and judgment, and from orders for preliminary injunction and
refusing to vacate order for preliminary injunction; and proceeding in
certiorari to review an order adjudging petitioner to be in contempt.  W. W.
Jacka, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1a) (1b) Divorce--Appeal--Decisions Appealable.  -- Appeals from orders
relating to a judgment denying a divorce to plaintiff are premature and should
be dismissed where no decision has been made by the trial court as to
defendant's cross-complaint seeking certain affirmative relief with respect to
the parties' community property.

(2) Appeal -- Decisions Appealable -- Final Judgment.  -- A final judgment, from
which an appeal may be taken, may not be entered until the issues raised by a
cross-complaint and the answer thereto have been determined.

(3) Id.--Notice of Appeal--Time to File.  --Although Rules on Appeal, rule 3,
subd. (b), extending the time for the filing of a notice of appeal, refers only
to "motions to vacate a judgment," such rule nevertheless applies to the filing
of a notice of appeal from an order issuing an injunction, since Rules on
Appeal, rule 40, subd. (g), provides that the word "judgment," as used in the
rules, includes any ". . . order . . . from which an appeal lies."

(4a) (4b) Injunctions--Grounds for Relief--Multiplicity of Suits.  --Defendant
in divorce actions brought in California and in France was not entitled, in the
California action, to an injunction, based on multiplicity of suits, restraining
plaintiff from prosecuting his French divorce action which was pending at the
commencement of the California action, where, though an order for judgment of
dismissal had been rendered in the California action, that judgment was not a
final adjudication of the issues in the French action, since it did not emanate
from a trial on the issues or follow plaintiff's presentation of his case, but
stemmed from his attempted withdrawal of his case from the jurisdiction in order
to allow himself to prosecute his French action, and where plaintiff's appeal
from such judgment had not been determined.

(5) Id.--Grounds for Relief--Multiplicity of Suits.  --There are two general
classes of cases in which injunctions are issued to prevent a multiplicity of
actions: those in which many unadjudicated claims are brought into equity to be
made the subject of a single trial and decree, and those that are enjoined
because they are shown to be vexatious suits on causes of action that have been
settled by former adjudication.

(6) Id.--Grounds for Relief--Multiplicity of Suits.  --Defendant in divorce
actions brought in California and in France was not entitled, in the California
action, to an injunction restraining plaintiff from prosecuting his pending
French action, even assuming that the California action had been finally
adjudicated, where the French divorce action was based on adultery and the
California action on extreme cruelty, since the causes of action did not lie in
the relief sought (divorce in each action), but in the facts composing the
violation of plaintiff's primary right, which, in France, was the right not to
have his wife engage in adulterous conduct, while, in California, it was his
right not to be subjected to extreme cruelty.

COUNSEL: Campbell, Custer, Warburton & Britton, Frank L. Custer, Eisner &
Titchell and Haskell Titchell for Plaintiff and Appellant, and Petitioner.

Rankin, Oneal, Luckhardt & Center, Heller, Ehrmann, White & McAuliffe, F.
Whitney Tenny, John D. Martin and Edward J. Niland for Defendant and Respondent,
and Real Party in Interest.

No appearance for Respondents in Civ. No. 19941.

JUDGES: Tobriner, J.  Bray, P. J., and Sullivan, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: TOBRINER

OPINION

     This case presents the procedural issue of the appealability of six orders
as well as  the substantive issue of the validity of the issuance of a temporary
injunction. We shall set forth the reasons for our conclusion that the orders
relating to a judgment denying divorce cannot properly be appealed because such
appeals are premature; on the other hand, the orders relating to the issuance of
the injunction are appealable.  We do not think, however, that the injunction
may be sustained upon the asserted ground that it prevented the pursuit of a
multiplicity of actions.  It prohibited appellant from prosecuting his pending
action, filed in France, based upon a cause of action for divorce for adultery,
in the face of the judgment denying divorce rendered in appellant's California
action, premised upon a cause of action for divorce for cruelty. As we shall
develop, we do not believe the doctrine of multiplicity of actions applicable
since, first, the California action had not been settled or adjudicated, and
second, even if it had been, it pertained to a different cause of action than
that involved in the French action.  We cannot believe appellant's attempt to
adjudicate his case in two jurisdictions should in some strange manner deprive
him of both.

   The appellant husband appealed from six orders 1 of the trial court entered
in a proceeding for divorce which appellant,  on September 13, 1956, instituted
against his respondent wife.  Appellant has also filed a petition for a writ of
certiorari to review the holding of the court that appellant was in contempt
because of his continued prosecution of the French action in violation of the
restraining order and temporary injunction.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   The six
orders are:

   1. "Order for Entry of Judgment Denying Divorce," dated June 4, 1959.

   2. "Order Correcting Record," dated June 4, 1959.

   3. "Order Denying Motions to Vacate and Set Aside Dismissal and to Vacate and
Set Aside the Judgment Entered Thereon," dated August 11, 1959.

   4. "Order Denying Motion to Vacate and Set Aside Judgment," dated August 11,
1959.

   5. "Order for Preliminary Injunction," dated June 3, 1959.

   6. "Order Denying Motions to Vacate Order for Preliminary Injunction or
Alternatively to Strike Portions Thereof," dated August 11, 1959.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The appealed orders fall into two categories.  The first group consists of
four orders which relate to entry by the court of a judgment denying divorce.
Appellant admits that one of these orders, an "Order Correcting Record," is
nonappealable; the appeals from the other three orders, as we shall see infra,
are premature.

   The second category, comprising the remaining two orders, includes an order
for preliminary injunction restraining appellant from instituting or pursuing
any divorce proceeding in any other state or country, and an order denying
appellant's motion to vacate the injunction. As we shall show, we believe the
order for preliminary injunction was appealable but that the trial court erred
in granting the injunction. For the same reasons the temporary restraining
order, entered March 12, 1958, cannot support a contempt order. As a
consequence, the court's denial of appellant's motion to vacate the preliminary
injunction does not call for our consideration.  Finally, the contempt order,
which resulted from appellant's failure to comply with the preliminary
injunction and the restraining order must likewise fail.

   The controversy here develops from the legal entanglements of two divorce
actions, one brought in the courts of France and the other in the courts of
California.  The parties themselves have also frequented both jurisdictions.
They were married in Paris, France, in 1918, and later they moved to California.
In 1941 they separated.  During the intervening period they each on numerous
occasions visited Paris.

   In 1952 appellant brought the first action for divorce, based upon a cause of
action for adultery, which he filed in Paris, France.  Approximately four years
later, on August 29, 1956, appellant "disturbed by the lack of progress in the
French proceeding," attempted to dismiss it.  He then, on  September 13, 1956,
brought his second action, in California, premised upon extreme cruelty.
Originally filed in the City and County of San Francisco, the suit was
transferred to Santa Clara County as the place of proper venue.

   Appellant's attempt to dismiss the French action engendered a whole series of
legal maneuvers but his effort apparently  did not accomplish its purpose.  To
oppose his move respondent filed an affidavit dated November 15, 1956, setting
out her "Refusal of Desistment" in the French action.  The record shows that the
French courts nevertheless proceeded with the action; we set out in more detail
in a separate section infra the steps in that litigation.

   Meanwhile, during the course of the French proceedings, respondent manifested
her own demands in the California action.  On March 18, 1957, respondent filed
her answer and cross-complaint for separate maintenance on the grounds of
cruelty, failure to support, and desertion, seeking the following relief: (1)
that all of the community property be awarded to respondent; (2) that the court
enjoin appellant and certain cross-defendants from disposing of or encumbering
the community property and that a trust be imposed as to the community property
to the extent of the value of funds misappropriated by appellant and that a lien
in such amount be imposed upon his separate property; (3) that a receiver be
appointed to take control and custody of all of the community property; (4) that
appellant be required to pay support, maintenance and litigation expenses,
including counsel fees, to respondent.

   A few days prior to the filing of the answer and cross-complaint, the court,
on March 14, 1957, ordered appellant to pay to his wife monthly support and
maintenance pendente lite and specific sums on account of her counsel fees and
costs.  The court issued two orders to show cause why appellant should not be
held in contempt for violation of this support order, the first such order
having been rendered on November 29, 1957, the second, on March 12, 1958.  The
latter also required appellant to show cause why he should not be enjoined from
further prosecution of the French proceedings; the court, on the same day,
temporarily restrained appellant from so doing.

   From March 12, 1958, to February 18, 1959, the litigants engaged in more than
20 hearings concerning the orders to show cause and various motions urged in the
course of them.  During this time the court continued in force the temporary
restraining order.

   The procedural parrying of the parties entered into a final phase, so far as
we are concerned, when appellant moved the court for an order dismissing the
case without prejudice.  Respondent opposed the motion upon the ground that
section 581 of the Code of Civil Procedure prevented such dismissal,  but before
the court had an opportunity to rule upon the matter, appellant, on January 28,
1959, filed a "Dismissal With Prejudice." This document stated that appellant
"hereby dismisses with prejudice the specific cause of action for divorce set
forth in his complaint on file herein, but expressly reserves to himself the
right to prosecute any and all other causes of action for divorce he may have
against defendant, Alexandrine Verdier, including, but not limited to those
causes of action for divorce set forth in the action now pending before the
Third Chamber of the Civil Court of the Seine, Paris, France."

   Striking appellant's stated qualification of the dismissal among other
matters, the trial court rendered the following orders: First, an "Order
Correcting Record," in which the court struck appellant's attempted limitation
of the dismissal, so that the dismissal, as amended, reads, "'Paul Verdier, the
plaintiff above named, hereby dismisses with prejudice the cause of action for
divorce.'" The court entered the order nunc pro tunc as of January 28, 1959, the
date of the filing of the dismissal.  Second, an "Order for Entry of Judgment
Denying Divorce," which is, in substance, a judgment.  In the judgment the court
stated, "as of the 28th day of January, 1959, and at all times   prior thereto,
no fact, matter or cause exists, or has existed, which constituted any ground or
grounds for divorce in favor of plaintiff . . . against defendant.  . . ."
Third, an order for issuance of a preliminary injunction, dated June 3, 1959,
enjoining appellant and other persons from taking any part in any other divorce
proceeding against respondent, in France or elsewhere, including taking any
further step in any appeal.

   The order for preliminary injunction rested upon the recitations that after
the order of the court to pay alimony appellant "undertook to reestablish a
proceeding in the nature of an action for divorce against his said wife in the
courts of the Republic of France, which proceeding is now pending before the
Third Chamber of the Civil Court Of The Seine at Paris, in the Republic of
France"; that despite the order of the court of March 15, 1958, restraining
appellant from prosecuting the French action, appellant "continued to maintain
and prosecute said action" in the courts of France; "that no court in the
Republic of France or in any other jurisdiction but the State of California has
jurisdiction to adjudicate the marital status" of the parties; that appellant
had filed his "'Dismissal with Prejudice'" and  "that no cause of action for
divorce" in favor of appellant "existed on the 28th day of January, 1959, or at
any time prior thereto" and that respondent was entitled to an injunction since
the prosecution of other actions would tend "to render the judgment of this
Court ineffectual, and . . . result in a multiplicity of judicial proceedings.
. . ."

   Appellant then sought to induce the court to rescind these adverse orders.
On July 27, 1959, appellant moved to vacate and set aside the judgment pursuant
to the provisions of section 663 of the Code of Civil Procedure. On July 27,
1959, appellant also moved, pursuant to section 473 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, to vacate the dismissal and the judgment entered thereon on the
grounds of mistake, inadvertence and surprise of appellant.  Finally appellant
moved to vacate the order for preliminary injunction. The trial court denied the
three motions on August 11, 1959.  Appellant appeals from all six of the above
orders.

   Appellant presents another matter for this court's determination.  On April
21, 1961, the superior court adjudged appellant in contempt upon the ground that
in prosecuting the French action he had violated its restraining order of March
12, 1958, and its preliminary injunction of June 3, 1959.  The superior court
held appellant's contempt to be of a continuing nature, decreeing that appellant
remain in contempt until "the decree of divorce which is obtained in the Courts
of France has been set aside; . . ." The court fined appellant $ 500, observing
that it "would also adjudge an imprisonment were it not for his [appellant's]
advanced age and state of health." We granted appellant's petition for a writ of
certiorari to review the order of contempt, and the writ has been set for
determination with this appeal.

   We must decide three basic issues: First, the appealability of the orders
relating to the judgment of divorce and of the order for preliminary injunction;
second, the validity of the order granting the preliminary injunction, and,
third, the validity of the trial court's ruling that the dismissal barred any
further prosecution of an action for divorce by appellant.

     We believe the appeals relating to the judgment denying divorce are
premature. Respondent, by way of cross-complaint, seeks certain affirmative
relief with respect to the community property which the trial court has yet to
decide.  As Mr. Justice pro tempore Warne states in Crocker-Anglo Nat. Bank v.
Kuchman (1961) 194 Cal.App.2d 589, 591 [15 Cal.Rptr. 230], in passing upon a
situation in which  the trial court dismissed plaintiffs' second cause of action
and entered a nonsuit, leaving as still pending defendants' cross-complaint and
plaintiffs' answer to the cross-complaint "We have concluded that this appeal is
premature because the cross-complaint and the answer thereto are still pending
and a final  judgment has not been entered in the cause." The court explains the
basis of its ruling: "Under the California procedure there is ordinarily only
one final judgment, and in an action like the present one where the
cross-complaint has been filed and the matter stated therein put in issue there
is nothing that permits the rendition of two separate judgments where the
parties to the complaint and the cross-complaint and the transaction out of
which the action arose are identical.  A cross-complaint is not sufficiently
independent to allow a final judgment, unless the judgment may be considered
final as to some of the parties.  [Citations.]" (Pp. 591-592.)  The court
concludes: "A final judgment may not be entered until the issues raised by the
cross-complaint and the answer thereto have been determined." (P. 592.) (See
also: Nicholson v. Henderson (1944) 25 Cal.2d 375, 381 [153 P.2d 945] (appeal
from order of nonsuit as to cross-complaint); Merchants Nat. Bank v.
Clark-Parker Co. (1929) 97 Cal.App. 757 [276 P. 387] (appeal from order striking
counterclaim); Krug v. Meehan (1951) 106 Cal.App.2d 554 [235 P.2d 410] (appeal
from order dismissing complaint, after demurrer sustained, while cross-complaint
still pending).)   The appeals from the orders relating to the judgment denying
divorce must be dismissed as premature.

   We turn next to the appeal from the preliminary injunction. No question
arises as to the appealability of the order itself ( Code Civ. Proc., § 963,
subd. 2; Brydon v. City of Hermosa Beach (1928) 93 Cal.App. 615, 620 [270 P.
255]), but respondent urges that appellant's notice of appeal from the order was
not timely filed.  We shall explain why we have concluded that respondent's
contention arises from a misinterpretation of the Rules on Appeal.

    Rule 2(a) requires that notice of appeal must be filed within 60 days of
entry of judgment, "unless the time is extended as provided in Rule 3." Rule
3(b) provides, "When a motion to vacate a judgment . . . is made by any party on
any ground within 60 days after entry of judgment, (1) if the motion is denied .
. . within 120 days after entry of the judgment, the time for filing the notice
of appeal from the  judgment is extended for all parties until 30 days after
entry of the order denying the motion to vacate. . . ." (Emphasis added.)

     Respondent contends that, since rule 3(b) refers only to "[motions] to
vacate a judgment," (emphasis added) the rule does not extend the time within
which appellant may file notice of appeal from an order.  Rule 40 (Definitions),
however, provides: "In these rules, unless the context or subject matter
otherwise requires: . . .  (g) 'Judgment' includes any judgment, order or decree
from which an appeal lies." (Emphasis added.) As a consequence rule 3(b), which
extends time for the filing of notice of appeal, applies to the filing of notice
of appeal from an order issuing an injunction.

   Appellant met the requirements as to the time for filing.  The court entered
the order for preliminary injunction on June 3, 1959.  The court's order, dated
August 11, 1959, denying the motion, states that the motion was argued on July
27, 1959, within the 60-day time limit.  Appellant filed notice of appeal from
the order issuing the preliminary injunction on September 1, 1959, within 30
days of denial of the motion, as required under rule 3(b).

     Our task leads us next to an examination of the legality of the preliminary
injunction; we must determine the validity of the trial court's position that
since appellant entered a dismissal with prejudice, appellant could not
prosecute any cause of action which arose prior to the date of the court's
order; that the pursuit of the foreign action produced a multiplicity of actions
and rendered the order ineffectual.  We must decide if the injunction escapes
the prohibition of section 526 of the Code of Civil Procedure against enjoining
an action pending at the commencement of the action in  which the injunction is
sought except to prevent a multiplicity of proceedings.

   As to this last issue we shall point out that the French action was pending
at the commencement of the instant action; that in order to invoke the doctrine
of multiplicity of actions the California action must have been settled and
finally adjudicated. We shall explain why we have concluded that the instant
case does not meet this test: first, the action was not settled and finally
adjudicated; second, even assuming such settlement and adjudication of the
California cause, such cause was not the same as that presented in the pending
French action.

    The record sufficiently shows that the French action was pending at the
commencement of the present action.  The French action long predated the
California suit: the French action was filed on March 14, 1952, and the
California complaint filed on September 13, 1956.  Consequently the French
action must have been pending as of the date of the commencement of the
California action unless it had been dismissed.

   While appellant apparently filed a request for dismissal on August 29, 1956,
the French law does not permit dismissal of an action without the consent of the
defendant.  Respondent (defendant) filed her "Refusal of Desistment" dated
November 15, 1956.  In that document she said that she had "the greatest
interest in having French courts adjudicate the divorce case such as it has been
introduced before them" and that appellant who had maintained "that French
courts are the only ones which are competent to try the divorce case introduced
by him . . . comes now to desist himself of a case which is actually submitted
to the Court of Cassation in order to introduce the same action before American
Courts, a case which may presently have already been introduced." The document
shows upon its face that the French action still existed; that the matter was
pending in France, and that respondent objected to any possible dismissal.

   Indeed, on July 10, 1957, the Court of Cassation rejected respondent's appeal
filed against the decree rendered in favor of appellant on March 12, 1956, by
the Court of Appeals of Paris.  Finally the Appellate Court of the Department of
the Seine, sitting in session at the Palace of Justice in Paris, France,
"rendered judgment," the transcript of which judgment was "filed in Paris (2d
Civil Department) the 19th of June, 1959." The document states: "[In] view of
the decree of the 30th of October, 1952 2 . . .  In view of the judgment of the
11th of February, 1954 3 . . .  In view of the decree of the 12th of March,
1956, 4 and . . .  In view of the decree of the Supreme Court (Court de
Cassation) of the 10th of July, 1957," the court "Rejects as unfounded the
objection of pendency in another Court, raised by Mrs. Zins Verdier"  and
"Pronounces the divorce between the spouses Verdier Zins at the request and in
favor of the husband, for adultery, with all legal consequences."

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   The
decree of October 30, 1952, as described in the decision of the Court of
Cassation of July 10, 1957, upheld the competency of the tribunal as to the
residence of the spouses.
3   The judgment of the French court dated February 11, 1954, held that
respondent was residing both in Paris and in San Francisco.
4   The decision of the Court of Appeals of Paris dated March 12, 1956, found
that respondent maintained a French residence.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   This history of the French proceedings records the continuity of an action
filed in 1952 to its ultimate outcome in 1959.  We cannot accept respondent's
intimation that the action had been dismissed and was reestablished in the
absence of any showing to that effect and particularly in view of the fact that
the burden lay upon respondent to make such a showing.  (27A C.J.S. § 174(3),
pp. 734, 736.) While respondent contends that her signature to the refusal of
desistment occurred when her attorney was not present, and  that she did not
understand it, we cannot now disregard it upon these vague grounds, particularly
since the French courts have obviously accepted jurisdiction throughout this
period.  Indeed, respondent's participation in the French action is presently
incompatible with her contention that the French court lacked jurisdiction.
Finally, respondent's allegation in her answer and cross-complaint of March 18,
1957, that the "prior action filed in France by plaintiff . . . has ever since
been, and now still is pending and entirely undisposed of" is inconsistent with
the position that the French action was not pending at the commencement of the
California litigation.

   Nor can we accept the position of the trial court that the French courts did
not "have the required jurisdiction of the parties to determine their marital
status"  and that consequently the foreign action could not be pending at the
commencement of the California suit.  Preliminarily, we doubt that an asserted
lack of jurisdiction would necessarily destroy the actual pendency of the
foreign action.  But more fundamentally the trial court posits its conclusion
upon the fact that "[the] maintaining of an action for divorce in California
requires residence in California for a period of at least one year immediately
preceding the filing of the action" and that we must presume "the laws of France
are the same." Yet as Justice Traynor states in a concurring opinion in Scott v.
Scott (1958) 51 Cal.2d 249, 255 [331 P.2d 641]: "This court has never expressly
ruled on the question whether a finding of domicile is prerequisite to the
recognition in this state of a divorce decree rendered abroad." (Footnote
omitted.) As Justice Traynor explains, in the absence of a showing that the
"recognition of the foreign decree would violate due process limitations or
established local policy," the California courts uphold "a decree of divorce
that is valid according to the  laws of the foreign country.  . . ." (P. 256.)
He concludes: "There is no reason to read any requirement of domicile or bona
fide residence into the statute.  . . .  The valid judgments of courts of other
countries should therefore be respected unless they run counter to local
policy." (P. 256.)

   We find no showing which would sustain a ruling that the French action was
not pending at the date of the commencement of the California action.

   As we have stated supra, we do not believe that the California action meets
the requirement implicit in the doctrine against multiplicity of actions that
the proceedings in which the injunction issues must have been settled.  5  The
rule is stated by Bartholomew v. Bartholomew (1942) 56 Cal.App.2d 216, 225 [132
P.2d 297]: "There are two general classes of cases in which injunctions are
issued to prevent a multiplicity of actions, namely, those in which many claims
which have not been adjudicated are brought into equity to be made the subject
of a single trial and decree, as was done in Southern Pacific Co. v. Robinson
(1901) 132 Cal. 408 [64 P. 572, 12 L.R.A. N.S. 497], and Atchison etc. Ry. Co.
v. Smith (1919) 42 Cal.App. 555 [183 P. 824], and those that are enjoined
because   they are shown to be vexatious suits upon causes of action that have
been settled by former adjudication." (Emphasis added.)  Our case does not fall
within the first class; it must meet the requisite of the second class that
there be a former adjudication.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   While
courts of equity possess the inherent power to restrain persons from prosecuting
a foreign divorce action (see 54 A.L.R.2d 1240; 128 A.L.R. 1467), the codes
regulate the exercise of such power.  As the court in Spreckels v. Hawaiian
Commercial etc. Co. (1897) 117 Cal. 377, 378 [49 P. 353], states: "The courts of
this state have the same power to restrain persons within the state from
prosecuting actions in either domestic or foreign jurisdictions which courts of
equity have elsewhere.  The code, however, has regulated the exercise of the
power, and prescribed the conditions which entitle litigants to the preventive
writ." (Emphasis added.) (See also: Wright v. Superior Court (1903) 139 Cal.
469, 473 [73 P. 145].) We must therefore look to the codes for a definition of
the conditions which entitle appellant to his sought relief.  Section 3423 of
the Civil Code states that "An injunction cannot be granted: First -- To stay a
judicial proceeding pending at the commencement of the action in which the
injunction is demanded, unless such restraint is necessary to prevent a
multiplicity of such proceedings." (See also: Code Civ. Proc., § 526.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    We cannot isolate the judgment of dismissal with prejudice from its origin;
to hold the judgment a final adjudication and to ignore the circumstances of its
genesis would be forced and artificial.  The judgment did not emanate from a
trial upon the issues.  It did not follow appellant's presentation of  his case.
On the contrary, as we shall set forth, it stemmed from appellant's attempted
withdrawal of his case from the jurisdiction in order that appellant could
proceed to prosecute his litigation in France.  Further, the California
adjudication was not final; appellant has appealed the judgment, and the appeal
has not been determined.

   Appellant attempted to dismiss with prejudice "the specific cause of action
for divorce set forth in his complaint" but to reserve "those causes of action"
pending in the foreign action.  On the one hand, if the court erred in giving
appellant's limited dismissal the sweep of a full dismissal with prejudice of
all causes and in striking its declared purpose to preserve the foreign cause,
and if the dismissal should have been limited to appellant's design, it would
not have served as a final adjudication. A dismissal which by its terms
negatives a decision of the case on its merits does not meet the requirement for
the application of res judicata to a divorce proceeding that the decision be on
the merits.  ( Mahaffa v. Mahaffa (1941) 230 Iowa 679 [298 N.W. 916]; La Vigne
v. La Vigne (1957) 336 Mass. 377 [145 N.E.2d 687]; 27A C.J.S., § 174(4), pp.
739, 740.)

   On the other hand, if the court correctly held appellant's dismissal to be
"equivalent to a judgment on the merits," we must observe that, pursuant to
section 473 of the Code of Civil Procedure, appellant asked to be relieved from
the ruling; appellant claimed that if the dismissal legally withdrew all causes,
he had mistaken the law and sought relief from such an error.  The court denied
such relief; appellant has appealed from the order of denial; the appeal, while
premature at the present instance, can be filed upon the conclusion of the case
and must then be determined.  We cannot say, at this preliminary stage,
especially in light of the decision in Security Truck Line v. City of Monterey
(1953) 117 Cal.App.2d 441, 445 [256 P.2d 366, 257 P.2d 755], that appellant's
request was properly denied.

   As we have previously set out,  appellant has appealed four orders relating
to the denial of the divorce. We have held one order to be nonappealable and the
remaining three appeals to be premature because the issues raised by
respondent's cross-complaint are still pending.  While we do not, of course,
pass on the merits of these appeals, appellant may file such appeals upon the
rendition of judgment on the cross-complaint. In view of this record any ruling
that the case had been finally adjudicated would at best be unrealistic.  If we
may borrow the terms of the New York Supreme Court in passing upon somewhat
different but possibly comparable facts, "It would be anomalous" to apply the
rule of res judicata "and in due course have an appellate determination which
reversed the judgment.  . . ." ( Koff v. Koff (1956) 150 N.Y.S. 2d 302, 304.)

   The "Order for Preliminary Injunction" itself recites that respondent "is
entitled to an injunction pendente lite"; that the acts of appellant "during the
pendency of this action would produce irreparable damage"; the injunction
restrains appellant "during the pendency of this action, or until the final
determination thereof.  . . ." Is this order compatible with a final
adjudication and determination of the matter?  The very terms of the order
disclose that no judgment has been rendered which concludes this case.

   In brief we are confronted with a ruling that appellant's efforts to present
his case in France have by some legal alchemy solidified into a judgment that he
cannot pursue  his case in California and into an injunction that he cannot
pursue his case in France.  The injunction may, indeed, forever preclude his
prosecution of the French cause, because, if the California case is ultimately
reversed, at that point appellant may be precluded from prosecuting the pending
French action or any other foreign cause.  We must conclude that the substance
of the alleged California adjudication dissolves into its diverse and unfinished
ingredients; we have no fixed settlement of issues here but fluid, undetermined
litigation.  Thus we do not pass upon the question whether a judgment is final
in a case in which, after a hearing, a judgment has been issued and an appeal
taken.  We pass upon an extraordinary record, which presents no final
adjudication and leaves untied the strings of many unresolved questions.

     We believe that the injunction fails, not only because the California case
has not been adjudicated, but also for the separate and independent reason that,
even assuming such adjudication, the California case presented a different cause
of action than the French suit.  The California case rested upon extreme
cruelty; the foreign action was founded upon various acts of adultery, dating
back to 1919, which predate the California action by a period greater than the
statute of limitations.  We shall point out that respondent's position that the
French action must have been adjudicated by the California action, because
appellant could bring only one  action for divorce, cannot stand.  This concept
confuses the sought relief with the primary right which constitutes the cause of
action.

   The determination of this question inherently turns upon the nature of a
cause of action. As Witkin points out (2 Witkin, Cal. Procedure, p. 982 et
seq.), a cause of action in California involves the invasion of a primary right
of the plaintiff; more exactly, the cause of action congeals in the facts which
represent the invasion of plaintiff's primary right and defendant's
corresponding breach of duty.  The cause of action lies neither in the relief or
remedy sought nor in the particular legal theory urged in support of the
wrongfulness of the act.  The right is not the right to procure a divorce, which
pertains merely to the remedy; other remedies, such as the right to separation,
to maintenance, etc., may accrue from the same misconduct.  The primary right
consists of the right not to be subjected to extreme cruelty, not to be deserted
by one's spouse, not to have one's spouse engage in adulterous conduct, and the
like.  Presumably facts involving a violation of each of these rights may form a
separate cause of action.

   Section 74d of the Restatement of the Law of Judgments specifically applies
the principle to divorce actions, saying that, "where the plaintiff is
unsuccessful in obtaining a divorce on a specified ground, the judgment does not
preclude him from maintaining another action for divorce on other grounds, even
though they existed and were known to him prior to the beginning of the first
action.  The judgment will, however, bar him from maintaining a subsequent
action on the ground specified in the first action." 6 Naturally, if the grounds
for the second action involve facts which could have been urged to support the
first action, then such facts may not be relitigated; such second action would
be barred either on  the ground that it is res judicata or on the basis that
plaintiff seeks to split a cause of action.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   27A
C.J.S. § 174(2), pp. 729, 730, states: "Ordinarily, when a judgment on merits is
rendered in favor of a defendant, plaintiff is prevented by principle of res
judicata from subsequently bringing suit on same cause of action although he
presents a ground for relief asked additional to those stated in original
action, but this rule does not apply to an action for divorce, with the result
that where plaintiff is unsuccessful in obtaining a divorce on a specified
ground, judgment does not preclude him from maintaining another action for
divorce on other grounds, even though they existed and were known to him prior
to bringing of first action." As the Florida Supreme Court stated in Prall v.
Prall (1909) 58 Fla. 496 [50 So. 867, 871, 26 L.R.A. N.S. 577], "While the
welfare of society demands exemption from unnecessary and vexatious divorce
litigation, the principles of res judicata should not be so applied as to
prevent one determination of every distinct cause of action under the statutes
authorizing divorces for specific and separate species of misconduct."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The California case of Jordan v. Jordan (1954) 129 Cal.App.2d 309 [276 P.2d
818], recognizes the separateness of adjudication as to different causes of
action. Although in that case the second cause rested "upon a different cause of
action which had not accrued as a ground for a divorce when the prior divorce
action was tried" (p. 311), the court states the rule in its full breadth,
saying: "The doctrine of res judicata has a double aspect.  'A former judgment
operates as a bar against a second action upon the same cause, but in a later
action upon a different claim or cause of action, it operates as an estoppel or
conclusive adjudication as to such issues in the second action as were actually
litigated and determined in the first action.' (Emphasis added.)" (P. 310.) The
court likewise alludes to and relies upon a Connecticut case, Morris v. Morris
(1945) 132 Conn. 188 [43 A.2d 463], in which the second cause depended upon
facts which must have been in existence as of the date of the first cause.  The
court states: "There both parties sought a divorce on the ground of cruelty.
Each was denied a decree. Less than a month thereafter the wife brought an
action for support on the theory of desertion. She was permitted to maintain it
notwithstanding the prior divorce decree for the reason that the issues were not
the same in the two cases." (P. 312.)

   Other California cases have recognized the principle of the separability of
causes of action for divorce. Thus in Haskell v. Haskell (1880) 54 Cal. 262, 263
, the court states "That adultery or habitual intemperance would in a popular
sense constitute extreme cruelty, we do not question.  And so would willful
desertion or willful neglect.  But, in a legal sense, extreme cruelty is
something different from any of the other causes of divorce, and constitutes a
separate and distinct cause of action."

   In Krzepicki v. Krzepicki (1914) 167 Cal. 449 [140 P. 13] a plaintiff who was
denied a limited divorce in New York in April 1910 later instituted an action in
California alleging her husband's desertion of her in Poland in 1898.  The
defendant husband's plea of the New York action as a bar won the approval of the
trial court.  In affirming the trial court, the Supreme Court did not readily
dispose of the case upon the a priori proposition that the New York judgment was
res judicata on all issues, but carefully examined the record to determine
whether or not plaintiff had actually alleged both  desertion and neglect in the
New York action and that the New York court had indeed tried the issue of
willful neglect.  The court held that the New York suit constituted a bar
because "a cause of action between parties can be litigated to judgment but
once, and when a subsequent suit is brought for identically or substantially the
same cause of action that was set up and litigated in the former suit such
former judgment is a bar." (P. 453.) According to the Supreme Court the issue
turned not on the difference in relief sought in the actions but upon whether
the "same matter" was put in issue between the parties.  (P. 454.) The court
concludes: "As, however, this very same matter of willful neglect was the
subject of judicial controversy in the former action and judicially determined
against plaintiff she will not be permitted to relitigate it, and within the
rule announced such former judgment constitutes a bar and the trial court
properly so held." (P. 454.)

    Wulfjen v. Dolton (1944) 24 Cal.2d 891 [151 P.2d 846] holds that "The
violation of  one primary right constitutes a single cause of action, though it
may entitle the injured party to many forms of relief, and the relief is not to
be confounded with the cause of action, one not being determinative of the
other." (Pp. 895-896.)  While one cause of action may give rise to more than one
form of relief, as in the cited case, so also, several different causes of
action may give rise to identical relief, as in the instant case.  As the court
points out, if a party fails to prove a claim under one theory, he may not later
urge the same facts as authorizing recovery under another legal theory in a
subsequent action.  Here we see, dramatically, rejection by the Supreme Court of
two criteria for identifying a cause of action. The court does not look to the
legal theory of the wrong (see Panos v. Great Western Packing Co. (1943) 21
Cal.2d 636, 638-639 [134 P.2d 242]) nor does it look to the relief sought;
instead, it relies upon the primary right of the plaintiff which defendant has
invaded.

   The Wulfjen decision implies that in the area of divorce, as in other fields
of law, the cause of action lies not in relief sought, but in the facts
composing the violation of the plaintiff's primary right. Since the facts giving
rise to the instant action do not necessarily coincide with those giving rise to
the action prosecuted in France, no multiplicity of proceedings within the
meaning of Civil Code section 3423 resulted; the court lacked the power to issue
the instant injunction.

   Respondent contends, however, that Babcock v. Babcock  (1944) 63 Cal.App.2d
94 [146 P.2d 279] stands for the proposition that "a judgment against the
plaintiff in a divorce action bars any cause of action for divorce existing when
the first action was brought" and that the California Annotations to the
Restatement of the Law of Judgments so holds.  It is true that the District
Court of Appeal in that case did say, "The former judgment is a bar, not a
collateral estoppel." (P. 100.) But the record actually discloses a collateral
estoppel. The issue arose as to a second and third suit for divorce, the second
action, brought in 1930, being based upon cruelty, and the third action,
instituted in 1941, resting upon desertion. The court held that since the
"ground upon which a divorce is now sought was in existence at the time [of] the
second action," the former judgment barred the action.  (P. 100.) Yet the ground
for the divorce in the third action, desertion, was litigated in the second
action.  As the court said, "In the second suit for divorce the complaint
alleged, 'For statistical purposes': '2. Date of separation -- Approximately the
middle of July, 1928.' This allegation was denied, but found to be true." (P.
100; emphasis added.) In the second suit the court thus found the facts of
desertion. Thus the judgment in Babcock may accordingly be sustained upon the
basis that the issue of desertion was "actually litigated" in the second action
and hence supported a collateral estoppel against relitigation in the third
suit.

   The above analysis of Babcock sustains the judgment in that case but avoids
the language of the court that "[the] former judgment is a bar" (p. 100), a
holding which conflicts with the Restatement of the Law of Judgments and the
distinctions applied in the cases.  7 In any event  the facts of the  present
case do not parallel those of Babcock.  8 Here the trial court stated that no
other cause of action for divorce existed at the time of the judgment; the court
did not find that the facts of the instant case had been previously litigated,
either in the California or in the French actions.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   Pacific
Mut. Life Ins. Co. v. McConnell (1955) 44 Cal.2d 715, 724-725 [285 P.2d 636],
establishes the difference between the effect of a judgment as a complete bar to
a subsequent action and its effect as a collateral estoppel as to issues
actually raised.  (See also: Estate of Williams (1950) 36 Cal.2d 289, 292 [223
P.2d 248, 22 A.L.R.2d 716]; Rest., Judgments, § 68, com. (d), pp. 293, 300.) A
judgment may act as a complete bar only in the event the two actions involve the
same cause of action. It serves as a collateral estoppel to issues actually
litigated in a case involving the identical parties but different causes of
action. Respondent and the court in Babcock v. Babcock (1944) 63 Cal.App.2d 94
[146 P.2d 279], rely upon Helpling v. Helpling (1920) 50 Cal.App. 676, 681 [195
P. 715], and Cardinale v. Cardinale (1937) 8 Cal.2d 762, 767 [68 P.2d 351]; yet
the issues in those cases did not turn upon whether the factual situations
involved separate causes of action but whether the factual situations were the
grounds of relitigation of divorce or separate maintenance in separate actions.
Although, in Panos v. Great Western Packing Co. (1943) 21 Cal.2d 636 [134 P.2d
242], cited in Babcock, the court recognized that a cause of action is not
determined by the theory of the legal wrong, but by the invasion of a primary
right, the court in Babcock did not apply that principle.
8   We note another California case, Titensor v. Titensor (1946) 75 Cal.App.2d
206 [170 P.2d 479], which seemingly held that a matter litigated in a prior
divorce action could not be relitigated in a subsequent one.  The court
declared: "[After] a divorce suit has terminated in favor of either the
plaintiff or the defendant, no second suit can be brought to try anew anything
within the scope of the first one, whether in fact it was considered therein or
not." (P. 209.) The acts of cruelty relied upon in the second suit, however,
composed the basis for the first.  Taliaferro v. Taliaferro (1959) 171
Cal.App.2d 1, 5 [339 P.2d 594], points out the limited nature of the ruling: ".
. .  Titensor v. Titensor . . . held only that allegations of the same acts in
support of a second divorce" as those supporting a previous decree "would be
barred as res judicata."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   We therefore conclude that the trial court had no power to issue the instant
injunction. There was no multiplicity of judicial proceedings because the issues
in the two actions were not the same, and there was no former adjudication as
required by Civil Code section 3423.  We need not consider the compelling
reasons which suggest that even if it had the power the trial court should not
have issued the injunction. We do note, however, that respondent is in no
position to complain of the continuance of an action which would no longer be
pending had she not prevented its dismissal.

   The contempt order must fall with the injunction. We therefore need not
consider other questions raised in appellant's petition.  Likewise we need not
consider the order denying appellant's motion to vacate the preliminary
injunction.

   By an unusual concatenation of procedures a party should not find himself
barred from a forum for an adjudication of his rights.  Appellant brought the
French action; he later attempted to withdraw it but respondent successfully
resisted his effort to do so; appellant brought a second action in California,
which he thereafter sought to dismiss.  The California court cut through the
ambiguous dismissal, gave it a full, if unanticipated scope, entered a judgment
denying divorce, and enjoined the prosecution of the French action.  Thus
appellant's efforts to present his case in two jurisdictions has strangely
ousted him from both.  Such a court-made bilateral  bar should not operate to
prevent appellant from presenting his case anywhere or at all.

   These extended proceedings have stretched to the breaking point the system of
settling disputes by the judicial process; instead of resolution, here, we
witness the spawning of subsidiary legal controversy which has become
self-propagating.  Appellant is nevertheless entitled to a hearing of his case.
It would be a sad thing, and a failure of the administration of justice, if a
complex of legal procedures, such as these, could cost a litigant his forum.  We
do not believe that they compel such an unsavory result.

   We annul the contempt order as to which petitioner sought review by
certiorari.  We reverse the order issuing the injunction; we dismiss as moot the
appeal from the order denying the motion to vacate the injunction. We dismiss
the remaining appeals.  Costs on appeal are to be borne equally by the parties.


                              67 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             SARA JANE TALBOT DIMON, Respondent, v. CHARLES GRAYSON
                                DIMON, Appellant

                            S. F. Nos. 18118, 18359

                          Supreme Court of California

               40 Cal. 2d 516; 254 P.2d 528; 1953 Cal. LEXIS 215


                                 March 17, 1953

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of the City and
County of San Francisco and from an order awarding counsel fees, costs and
support for minor child during pendency of appeal.  I. L. Harris, Judge.

   Action by former wife for maintenance and support of herself and children, in
which husband filed a cross-complaint to establish a trust.

COUNSEL: Johnson, Harmon & Henderson and Robert H. Johnson for Appellant.

Samuel L. Fendel and Gerald D. Marcus for Respondent.

JUDGES: In Bank. Shenk, J.  Edmonds, J., Carter, J., and Spence, J., concurred.
Traynor, J., concurring and dissenting.  Schauer, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: SHENK

OPINION

     This is an action by a former wife against her former husband to obtain
past and future alimony for herself and past and future support for the children
of the marriage previously terminated by a divorce in Connecticut.  The
defendant interposed a cross-complaint alleging that certain real and personal
property is held by the plaintiff in trust for the defendant.

      The trial court by judgment entered on the 25th of November, 1949, awarded
the plaintiff $ 1,950 for "alimony and support" for herself from the date of the
Connecticut decree until her remarriage on August 31, 1948; also $ 1,850 for the
"support, care and maintenance" of the two minor children from date of that
decree until the commencement of this action on August 4, 1947; also the sum of
$ 37.50 per month for the support of each child from the commencement of this
action until majority.  The judgment included an award of $ 500 counsel fees and
$ 48.15 costs.  On the cross-complaint the judgment was that the defendant take
nothing.  The defendant appealed from the judgment and the whole thereof.  After
the appeal was taken the court on the plaintiff's motion made an award of $ 750
counsel fees, $ 250 costs and $ 37.50 per month for the support of the child who
was still a minor during the pendency of the appeal.  There is also an appeal
from that order.

   The parties were married in Oregon in 1926.  In 1945 they separated.  In
March, 1946, the plaintiff wife obtained a divorce in Connecticut based on
constructive service only.  That decree awarded the custody of the two children
to the plaintiff and purported to award alimony and child support to the
plaintiff.

   Both parties are nonresidents of this state.  The plaintiff and the children
live in Oregon, and the defendant in Nevada.  The suit was brought by the
plaintiff suing in her own name and right to recover money she had paid out for
past support of the children and herself, and for future alimony and support of
the children.  The children are not parties to the action.  The plaintiff
concedes that the "in personam" provisions of the Connecticut decree cannot be
enforced, and the present action is not based on those provisions.

   The primary question concerns the jurisdiction of California courts to
enforce a support obligation of a nonresident former husband under the foregoing
circumstances.

     An examination of the law on the subject indicates merit in the defendant's
contention that in this state a wife's right to recover alimony or support for
herself is limited to the period when the parties are husband and wife.

     Section 136 of the Civil Code provides: "Though judgment of divorce is
denied, the court may, in an action for divorce, provide for the maintenance by
the husband, of the wife and children. . . ."

    Section 137, as it existed at the time this action was commenced provided
that, "When an action for divorce is pending" the court may require the payment
of alimony or support.  It also provided that "During the pendency of any such
action" the court may require payments for alimony, costs, attorney's fees and
support and maintenance.

   Section 139 as it existed at the time of the commencement of this action
provided that "Where a divorce is granted for an offense of the husband, the
court may compel him to . . . make such suitable allowance to the wife for her
support . . . as the court may deem just. . . ."

     The language of these sections shows a consistent legislative purpose to
confine the powers of the court to decree support in any form to the period when
actions for divorce, annulment and separate maintenance are pending, including
time on appeal and such further time as may be within the scope of the decree in
the particular action.  The amendments to sections 137, 138 and 139 since this
action was commenced (Stats. 1951, vol. 2, p. 3910) do not change the provisions
of these sections in matters here relevant.  Primarily, the amendments broaden
the provisions for separate maintenance where the marriage still exists.  The
language employed indicates a continued legislative purpose to limit the time
during which application for alimony and support may be made.  Our courts have
consistently recognized that the existence of the marital status is a
prerequisite to the granting of alimony ( Colbert v. Colbert, 28 Cal.2d 276, 279
[169 P.2d 633]; Carbone v. Superior Court, 18 Cal.2d 768, 771 [117 P.2d 872, 136
A.L.R. 1260]; Talbot v. Talbot, 218 Cal. 1, 2 [21 P.2d 110]).  The application
for alimony has been held to be a  collateral proceeding or episode within the
action for divorce, authorized for a particular purpose, but dependent for its
maintenance upon the existence of the action.  ( Kellett v. Marvel, 9 Cal.App.2d
629, 630-631 [51 P.2d 185]; see, also, Dunphy v. Dunphy, 161 Cal. 87, 91 [118 P.
445]; Hite v. Hite, 124 Cal. 389, 393 [57 P. 227, 71 Am.St.Rep. 82, 45 L.R.A.
793]; Sharon v. Sharon, 67 Cal. 185, 197 [7 P. 456, 635, 8 P. 709].)   In Howell
v. Howell, 104 Cal. 45 [37 P. 770, 43 Am.St.Rep. 70], it was held that the court
had no jurisdiction to make an award for alimony to a wife who previously had
obtained a final decree of divorce based on constructive service only.  The
court relied upon the provisions of the Civil Code referred to above to the
effect that alimony could be decreed  only "when an action for divorce is
pending" ( Civ. Code, § 137).  The case at bar is a close parallel to the Howell
case, with the exception that in the present case the plaintiff's prior divorce
decree was not issued by a court of this state and she seeks relief in a new and
independent action. To permit her to prevail in this action would afford greater
relief than would be available to her had she been a resident of this state and
brought her original action here.  The Howell decision has been followed in
numerous cases, including McClure v. McClure, 4 Cal.2d 356, 359 [49 P.2d 584,
100 A.L.R. 1257]; Tolle v. Superior Court, 10 Cal.2d 95, 97 [73 P.2d 607];
Puckett v. Puckett, 21 Cal.2d 833, 841 [136 P.2d 1]; Calhoun v. Calhoun, 70
Cal.App.2d 233, 237 [160 P.2d 923]; Patterson v. Patterson, 82 Cal.App.2d 838,
842 [187 P.2d 113]; Hinson v. Hinson, 100 Cal.App.2d 745, 746 [224 P.2d 405].

   The plaintiff seeks to distinguish the Howell case on the ground that the
action there was brought upon the prior divorce decree, whereas in the present
case the action is one in equity, so called, and not dependent upon the
provisions of the codes.  It is claimed that the superior courts of this state
have the same jurisdiction in equity possessed by the English courts of chancery
unless prohibited by statute ( Tulare Irr. Dist. v. Superior Court, 197 Cal.
649, 660 [242 P. 725]); that although the code sections provide no authority for
the cause of action she has attempted to state, they do not prohibit such an
action; that "for every wrong there is a remedy" ( Civ. Code, § 3523); that the
powers of a court of equity should not be "confined by rigid rules of law," and
that "its powers should be so broad as to be capable of dealing with novel
conditions." (Citing Bechtel v. Wier, 152 Cal. 443, 446 [93 P. 75, 15 L.R.A.N.S.
549].)

   If the plaintiff's arguments are to prevail the provisions of the Civil Code
which have been held to prohibit remedies similar to that which she seeks must
be disregarded.  However it is urged that the long continued application of the
code sections has placed California out of harmony with other states of the
Union; that it permits the husband to desert his family and flee the matrimonial
domicile to the haven which the laws of this state afford him; that the wife is
put to the election either of never divorcing him in a jurisdiction where she
cannot get personal service on him, or of sacrificing the right to alimony
however necessitous her circumstances might be.  The answer would seem to be
that  where she is, as here, the actor in the case she is put to the election of
seeking a divorce in a jurisdiction where personal service on her husband may be
obtained or of proceeding in a jurisdiction where subsequent awards of alimony
are authorized, such as Massachusetts (Annotated Laws of Massachusetts [1951],
vol. 6, p. 484) and New Jersey ( New Jersey Rev.Stats. [1937], vol 1, tit. 2, p.
269).  There are states wherein the courts have recognized that when a husband
is the actor and has secured a divorce from an absent wife, the latter is
permitted to claim alimony in a later suit.  ( Turner v. Turner, 44 Ala. 437;
Davis v. Davis, 70 Colo. 37; Thurston  v. Thurston, 58 Minn. 279 [59 N.W. 1017];
Crawford v. Crawford, 158 Miss. 382 [130 So. 688]; Cox v. Cox, 19 Ohio St. 502
[2 Am.Rep. 415]; Toncray v. Toncray, 123 Tenn. 476 [131 S.W. 977, Ann.Cas. 1912C
284, 34 L.R.A.N.S. 1106].) In Hutton v. Dodge, 58 Utah 228 [198 P. 165], the
court allowed a wife to bring a subsequent action for alimony where, in the
prior divorce action  on constructive service by the wife in that state, the
decree specifically provided that it was subject to modification, as to alimony,
at any time upon notice of motion by the plaintiff served upon the defendant
within the state.  Here the plaintiff would distinguish many of the cases (see
McFarlane v. McFarlane, 43 Ore. 477 [73 P. 203, 75 P. 139]; Hall v. Hall, 141
Ga. 361 [80 S.E. 992]; Darby v. Darby, 152 Tenn. 287 [277 S.W. 894, 42 A.L.R.
1379]; Kelley v. Kelley, 317 Ill. 104 [147 N.E. 659]; Doeksen v. Doeksen, 202
Iowa 489 [201 N.W. 545], Staub v. Staub, 170 Md. 202 [183 A. 605]) which take a
view contrary to her theory of relief on the same basis that she would
distinguish Howell v.  Howell, supra, 104 Cal. 45, namely, that the wife in
those cases attempted to reopen the divorce suit and modify that decree to
provide for support rather than bring a new and independent action. However, the
court in the Howell case stated that "after the judgment granting the divorce
the plaintiff was no longer the wife of the defendant; and he owed her no longer
any marital duty. From that time on she could enforce against him no obligation
not imposed by the court at the time of the judgment." This statement in effect
has been repeated many times by the courts of this state.

     It is concluded that at the time this action was brought there was no
authority in this state supporting the plaintiff's right to pursue her claim for
alimony, either past  or future; and that appears to be our law at the present
time.  It may be of interest to note that in 1951 the Legislature enacted the
Reciprocal Enforcement of Support Law (Stats. 1951, vol. 1, p. 1906; Code Civ.
Proc., § 1650 et seq.).  The purposes of that law are "to improve and extend by
reciprocal legislation the enforcement of duties of support and to make uniform
the law with respect thereto." ( Code Civ. Proc.,  § 1651.) Briefly the act
provides that a party entitled to support may file a complaint in the court of
the county of her residence, naming as defendant the alleged obligor and giving
his address in the state having reciprocal legislation.  A certificate is
transferred to a court in that state which may obtain jurisdiction over the
person of the defendant and conduct a hearing.  Such a court may then enter an
appropriate order commanding the defendant to pay into court the award in favor
of the plaintiff.  This act did not become effective until after the present
action was commenced and it is not claimed that it comes within the provisions
of the act.  Any further extension of the duties of support is a legislative
function.  It was so recognized by the 1951 Legislature when it enlarged to some
extent the relief theretofore not available under our existing statutes.

   There is a further question which involves the distinction between the
plaintiff's alleged claim for support for herself, and support for her minor
children.   It is the law of this state that a divorced wife who has the custody
of minor children may bring an action against the father for their support (
Dixon v.  Dixon, 216 Cal. 440 [14 P.2d 497]; Davies v. Fisher, 34 Cal.App. 137
[166 P. 833]).  Penal Code, section 270, provides for criminal liability of a
father who fails to provide for his minor child; and he is not relieved from
that liability "merely because the mother of such child is legally entitled to
the custody of such child.  . . ."  Since it applies to a "father of either a
legitimate or illegitimate minor child," the existence of the marital status is
not a prerequisite to liability.   Civil Code, section 138, as it existed at the
time this action was brought, provided that "In actions for divorce the court
may, during the pendency of the action, or at the final hearing or at any time
thereafter during the minority of any of the children of the marriage, make such
order for the custody, care, education, maintenance and support of such minor
children as may seem necessary or proper.  . . ." Unlike the construction given
to those sections of the Civil Code setting forth the rights of the wife to
alimony  and support ( Civ. Code, §§ 136, 137 and 139) this section has long
been held to authorize an action for the support and maintenance of the minor
children of a marriage although the marriage has been terminated by a divorce
decree. ( McKay v. McKay,  125 Cal. 65 [57 P. 677].)  Civil Code, section 137.1,
enacted in 1951 after the complaint herein was filed, provides: "When a father
or mother has the duty to provide for the support, maintenance and education of
the children of the father and mother and wilfully fails to provide for such
support . . ., the father or mother, as the case may be . . . may maintain an
action in the superior court against the mother or father . . . as the case may
be, for the support, maintenance and education of said children." The effect of
this provision does not appear to have been judicially declared.  However, it is
a legislative enactment of the case law as it existed at the time this action
was commenced.

     While the plaintiff in this case may maintain an action for the support of
the minor children of the marriage, no case has been referred to where an award
for other than future support has been made.  In McKay v. McKay, supra, 125 Cal.
65, the court decreed an award against the father for the maintenance and
support of the minor children of a marriage previously terminated by divorce,
but denied the wife's claim for reimbursement for money she had paid out in
support of the children prior to any order of the court directing the father to
maintain and support the children.  The court stated at page 791: "The question
of the father's liability for the care and support of his children after a
decree of divorce, in which their custody has been awarded to the mother, has
been frequently presented in actions brought therefor by strangers, or by the
mother, and the courts have almost invariably held that an action against him to
enforce such liability could not be maintained.  . . .  [Citations.] The
jurisdiction which the court retains in the original case, either by express
reservation in its decree, or which it has by authority of statute, to modify
its judgment with reference to the custody and education of the children, or to
make a new order in reference thereto, is not for the purpose of reimbursing her
for any expenditures she may have voluntarily made in that behalf, but to
provide for such expenses as may be subsequently incurred by reason of the
direction that may be given regarding such care and education."

     An action for the future support of minor children is a personal one.
Being personal it is transitory.  A transitory action may be brought in any
state where the defendant can be found.  (7 Cal.Jur. 596, and cases cited.)
There is therefore no good reason for denying jurisdiction to entertain this
action insofar as it relates to the future support of the minor children. The
trial court has that jurisdiction.  The question then is whether it has been
properly exercised.

   The court found that at the times involved the defendant was a strong,
healthy and able-bodied man; that "without justification or legitimate excuse,"
he has wilfully and deliberately abstained from reasonable efforts to obtain
gainful employment, and that he has earned, and is capable of earning, from five
hundred dollars to one thousand dollars per month.

     It is the defendant's contention that the foregoing findings are not
supported by any substantial evidence in the record.  With this contention we
must agree.  The undisputed evidence is that the defendant has no income and no
assets; that he is and has been since the divorce in ill health and dependent on
an aunt for support; that the only business in which he has been gainfully
employed and experienced is the shipping business; that his employment in that
business was lost to him without his fault, and that he has since sought
employment without success.  There is no evidence to contradict the defendant's
statement that he has been and is in ill health, is dependent on an aunt for
support, and is incapable of making a living.  The finding is without sufficient
evidentiary support.

   The defendant sought by cross-complaint to have it adjudged that certain real
and personal property held in the plaintiff's name was possessed by her in trust
for the defendant.  In the main this property consisted of a country estate in
Connecticut of approximately 156 acres,  including a 13-room home, an 8-room
guest house, cabana house, three car garage, 10 other garages, kennels, barns, a
silo, shops, and other appurtenances and equipment.  The property was alleged to
have a value in excess of $ 75,000.  Admittedly all of it was purchased with
money belonging to the defendant.  After the parties separated the plaintiff
continued to live at the family home and eventually disposed of all of the
property.  At the time of the trial she still had $ 12,000 of the proceeds of
the sale of the property.   It is the plaintiff's contention that she acquired
the major portion of the property by gift  from the defendant, and the remainder
was necessarily sold to meet the defendant's obligations.  It is the defendant's
position that the parties never intended that transfers of the property to the
plaintiff were to be absolute.  On sharply conflicting but substantial evidence
the trial court made findings in accordance with the plaintiff's contentions
with respect to the question of the execution and finality of the gifts and the
disposition of the other property involved.  Upon these findings the trial court
properly concluded that the defendant take nothing by his cross-complaint.

   The judgment for the plaintiff on the cross-complaint is affirmed.  In all
other respects the judgment and the order are reversed; neither party to recover
costs on appeal.

CONCUR BY: TRAYNOR (In Part); SCHAUER

CONCUR

    [EDITOR'S NOTE: The page numbers of this document may appear to be out of
sequence; however,  this pagination accurately reflects the pagination of the
original published documents.]  SCHAUER, J., Concurring.  I concur in the
judgment and also in the majority opinion except insofar as some expressions in
the latter (unnecessary to the conclusion) may be deemed to indicate a view
inconsistent with that expressed by me in a concurring opinion in DeYoung v.
DeYoung (1946), 27 Cal.2d 521, 527 [165 P.2d 457].

   In the DeYoung case I said: "In a divorce action in a foreign state upon
constructive service the court there has authority to adjudicate status (in rem)
of a person residing in that state but has not jurisdiction to adjudicate away
(in personam) any of the then vested property rights of the absent spouse who
does not reside in such state, who is not personally served with process in that
state and who does not appear in the action.  The personal rights of the spouses
in property not within the jurisdiction of the acting court remain subject to
litigation in the proper forum.  It  seems to me that the right of a wife, or in
a proper case the husband, to support from the other spouse as of the date of
the divorce is a property right which can be adjudicated only by a court having
jurisdiction in personam.

   "The above stated view does not necessarily conflict with the well
established proposition that a court having jurisdiction over a domiciliary may
adjudicate his marital status in rem and that (assuming due process) as an
incident of the change of status any rights to future accruing support dependent
upon a continuing marital status no longer accrue because the status no longer
exists."

   It is obvious from the quoted language that it has no application to a case
such as the instant one in which it was the plaintiff herself who upon
substituted service in Connecticut sought and procured the decree changing her
status.  She chose the forum and must be charged with knowledge of the
limitations upon what relief she might get and also with knowledge of the
character and extent of the rights which she would, or might, lose by bringing
her action in that forum.  In bringing that action she submitted herself to the
jurisdiction of the Connecticut court for all purposes related to  the
litigation she instituted.  Her in personam rights growing out of or dependent
on the marital status are not in that case terminated by any act of the husband
or without her having her day in court but, rather, are ended by her own act in
bringing and prosecuting the suit to terminate the marriage, and procuring and
accepting the judgment which does dissolve it.

   If the plaintiff here had wished to bring in California a personal action
against her husband in respect to property rights growing out of or dependent
upon the marital status, including the right of support, she could have brought
such an action during the marriage regardless of her lack of residence in
California.  The fact that California, like most other states, has enacted
legislation requiring a specified minimum period of residence before an action
for divorce, as distinguished from an action for support, may be maintained
should not be regarded as an excuse for permitting a plaintiff voluntarily and
unnecessarily to split a cause of action and try the sections piecemeal in as
many states as fancy dictates.  If there is to be a divorce at all it is the
better public policy that the decree of divorce shall settle for all time all
the rights and obligations of the parties to the dissolved marriage to the end
that litigation arising from such marriage shall end and be known to have ended,
and that the parties may have an opportunity to build to a future, free from,
and perhaps the better for, the past, rather than to be wrecked by recurring
litigation.  Except, then, where there is a complete jurisdictional failure, as
was the situation mentioned in the DeYoung case in respect to the personal
property rights of the absent spouse, the courts and legislatures should look
with disfavor on delayed litigation between former spouses seeking to assert
rights growing out of the status which has long since been dissolved.

DISSENT BY: TRAYNOR (In Part)

DISSENT

    [EDITOR'S NOTE: The page numbers of this document may appear to be out of
sequence; however,  this pagination accurately reflects the pagination of the
original published documents.]  TRAYNOR, J., Concurring and Dissenting.  These
appeals from the judgment of November 25, 1949, and the order of September 15,
1950, bring into question six decisions of the trial court in favor of
plaintiff: (1) judgment for $ 1,950 as reimbursement for amounts spent for her
own support after the Connecticut decree and before her remarriage; (2) judgment
for $ 1,850 as reimbursement for amounts spent for the support of the two minor
children after the divorce decree and before commencement of this action; (3)
judgment for $ 37.50 per month for the support of each child from the
commencement of the action until the child reaches majority; (4) judgment for $
500 counsel fees and $ 48.15 costs incurred in the trial of the action; (5)
judgment in favor of plaintiff on the cross-complaint; (6) order awarding
plaintiff $ 750 counsel fees, $ 250 costs, and $ 37.50 per month for child
support, to enable her to defend the appeal and to support the child who was
still a minor.  The majority opinion affirms (5); the rest of the judgment and
the order are reversed.  One ground for reversal is that there is no evidence
that defendant is able to make the payments ordered by the trial court.  In
addition, (1) is reversed on the ground that after dissolution of a marriage
California does not allow a former wife an action for her support, past or
future, and (2) is reversed on the ground that an action for reimbursement of
past expenditures for child support will not lie.

   In my opinion, the trial judge did not abuse his discretion in determining
that defendant had the ability to pay the amounts awarded for suit money and
child support. Under  the circumstances of this case defendant can be required
to reimburse his former wife for debts incurred on behalf of their children.  I
do not agree that dissolution of a marriage by an ex parte decree necessarily
bars a subsequent action for support, but I agree that the record does not
sustain the allowance for plaintiff's past expenditures for her own support.  I
agree that the judgment in favor of plaintiff on the cross-complaint should be
affirmed.  I would affirm the judgment and order except for that part of the
judgment awarding plaintiff $ 1,950 for her past support.

Defendant's Ability to Pay

   The granting or denying of awards for suit money and child support rests
largely in the discretion of the trial court; its decision will not be disturbed
on appeal without a clear showing of an abuse of that discretion.  (Baldwin v.
Baldwin, 28 Cal.2d 406, 413 [170 P.2d 670]; Dickens v. Dickens, 82 Cal.App.2d
717, 722 [187 P.2d 91].) In the present case plaintiff's need, the children's
need, and the reasonableness of the amounts  awarded, were established by
substantial evidence.  An abuse of discretion is shown only if it is established
as a matter of law that the trial judge could not reasonably conclude that
defendant had the ability to meet the payments.

   In determining the amount of the allowance under sections 137, 137.5, 138,
and 139 of the Civil Code, the trial judge must take into account the
defendant's ability to pay. ( Sweeley v. Sweeley, 28 Cal.2d 389, 394 [170 P.2d
469]; Arnold v. Arnold, 215 Cal. 613, 615 [12 P.2d 435].) The orders, however,
need not be based upon the actual income of the husband.  They may be based
solely upon his ability to earn money by the use of reasonable effort.  ( Webber
v. Webber, 33 Cal.2d 153, 160 [199 P.2d 934]; Eidenmuller v. Eidenmuller, 37
Cal. 364, 366; McGann v. McGann, 82 Cal.App.2d 382, 389-390 [186 P.2d 424].)
Thus, in Tompkins v. Tompkins, 83 Cal.App.2d 71 [187 P.2d 840], the court upheld
an allowance of support against a husband who had not worked for many months,
accepting the wife's contention that "a guilty party cannot avoid the
responsibility for payment of alimony by the simple expedient of avoiding
employment." (83 Cal.App.2d at p. 79.)

   The record establishes that defendant had been employed as a steamship
company executive for many years, earning from $ 500 to $ 1,000 per month.
Since the divorce he has lived with his wealthy aunt in Nevada.  He testified
that he  had no money or property and that his aunt paid all his bills and gave
him pocket money.  Defendant was 47 years old at the time of trial.  When asked
if he had made any efforts to get a job, he replied: "I had tried several times
in New York.  It is no easy thing to go in and get a job as president, the job
that I had done; most companies have their own presidents." Defendant testified
that he had high blood pressure and that his doctor had advised him not to work.
The doctor was not called as a witness and defendant's testimony regarding his
health was not corroborated.  Plaintiff testified that defendant's health had
been good during their marriage. Defendant had an interest in the outcome of the
case, and it was to his advantage to claim that he was unable to work.  The
trier of fact was entitled to disbelieve his testimony that he was in poor
health.  ( Huth v. Katz, 30 Cal.2d 605, 609 [184 P.2d 521]; Blank v. Coffin, 20
Cal.2d 457, 462 [126 P.2d 868].) In an apposite case, a reduction of alimony was
upheld on the ground that the trial court "could judge from the appearance of
the [wife] as to whether she was or was not physically able to earn any part of
the money necessary for her own support.  The replies of the [wife] . . . upon
the cold record indicate at least a lack of any real disposition on the part of
the [wife] to earn any part of her own living." ( Lamborn v. Lamborn, 80
Cal.App. 494, 498 [251 P. 943].) Similarly, in the present case the trier of
fact could conclude that it was defendant's distaste for physical exertion that
precluded his obtaining employment.

   In this proceeding we are not concerned with problems that might arise if
defendant should refuse to pay the amounts ordered by the trial court.  Under an
early decision of this court a deliberate refusal to work could not be punished
by contempt ( Ex parte Todd, 119 Cal. 57, 58 [50 P. 1071]), but ordinary
judgment remedies would be available and the judgment could be satisfied if
defendant should inherit or otherwise obtain property.  Moreover, the threat of
execution upon any subsequently acquired property (cf.  Di Corpo v. Di Corpo, 33
Cal.2d 195, 201 [200 P.2d 529]) might be sufficient to induce defendant to work.

   I am therefore of the opinion that the orders for suit money * and for future
support of the children should be affirmed.   Since the awards for past support
for the children and the wife are reversed on additional grounds these also must
be considered.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*   Reversal
of the judgment for support on the merits would not necessitate reversal of the
order awarding suit money, if the defendant's ability to pay were established.
( Weil v. Weil, 37 Cal.2d 770, 790 [236 P.2d 159]; Gay v. Gay, 146 Cal. 237, 240
[79 P. 885].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Child Support

    The majority opinion recognizes that a former wife having custody of minor
children may bring an action for their future support.  ( Dixon v. Dixon, 216
Cal. 440, 442 [14 P.2d 497].) In my opinion, the judgment partially reimbursing
the wife for debts incurred on behalf of the children for past support may also
be sustained.

   Plaintiff testified that she did not own any money or property at the time of
trial, except for some stocks and bonds that had been pledged as security for
her debts.  Since the divorce she has partially supported the children from her
own funds.  Moreover, she was compelled to borrow $ 7,100 for support of the
children, $ 3,900 from her father and $ 3,200 from her second husband.  The
trial court ordered defendant to pay $ 1,850 toward meeting the past
expenditures by plaintiff.

    Section 137 of the Civil Code provides that when "a father wilfully fails to
provide for his children, the mother of the children may, without applying for a
divorce or maintenance for herself, maintain in the superior court an action
against him solely for the support and maintenance of the children." + Nothing
in the statute shows that it is limited to actions for future support.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -+   After
this action arose, section 137 was amended.  Provisions for child support are
now found in section 137.1.  (Stats. 1951, ch. 1700, § 2.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   It is contended, however, that section 138 of the Civil Code, as construed in
McKay v. McKay, 125 Cal. 65 [57 P. 677], bars the award in the present case.
Section 138 is inapplicable here, since that statute applies to awards for child
support in divorce proceedings brought in California courts.  The controlling
statute is not section 138 but section 137, providing for actions for support of
children independent of divorce actions.  ( Dixon v. Dixon, 216 Cal. 440, 443
[14 P.2d 497]; see, also, Foy v. Foy, 23 Cal.App.2d 543, 546 [73 P.2d 618].) In
any event, the decisions construing section 138 do not support defendant's
position, even by analogy.

   The first case to set forth the problem of reimbursement for past
expenditures is Wilson v. Wilson (1873), 45 Cal. 399. The divorce decree had not
provided for the support  of the child.  Two years after the decree the former
wife sought an order for reimbursement of expenditures already incurred.  This
court affirmed an order of the trial court in favor of the wife, relying on the
applicable statute which provided that the court might "during the pendency of
the action, or at the final hearing, or afterwards, make such order for the
support of the wife, and maintenance and education of the children of the
marriage as may be just." (Stats. 1851, p. 187; Divorce Act, § 7.) The court
pointed out that it might be "for the interest and welfare of the child, that
his past as well as future support should be paid for by the defendant." (45
Cal. at p. 403.) In 1872, the statute was superseded by section 138 of the Civil
Code, which then provided that the court might "before or after judgment give
such direction for the custody, care, and education of the children of the
marriage as may seem necessary or proper, and may at any time vacate or modify
the same." In McKay v. McKay, supra, (1899), it was held that an allowance for
past expenditures could not be maintained under section 138.  The Wilson case
was not overruled, but distinguished on the ground that it was decided "prior to
the adoption of the codes, and under a statute which expressly authorized the
court to make an order subsequent to the judgment for the maintenance of the
children of the marriage." (125 Cal. at p. 69.) In 1905 section 138 was amended
to provide that the trial court might "during the pendency of the action, or at
the final hearing, or at any time thereafter during the minority of any of the
children of the marriage, make such order for the custody care, education,
maintenance and support of such minor children as may seem necessary or proper."
In Jaeger v. Jaeger (1925), 73 Cal.App. 128 [238 P. 139], it was determined that
the amendment was substantially the same as the 1851 statute that "had been
judicially interpreted by the court in Wilson v. Wilson, supra. No intention to
the contrary being shown, and the Wilson case, in respect to the court's
interpretation of the law then in force, not having been overruled, it may
fairly be inferred that the legislature intended that the amendment should bear
the same interpretation which had been given to the original act." (73 Cal.App.
at p. 136; see Holmes v. McColgan, 17 Cal.2d 426, 430 [110 P.2d 428].)

   The present action is based upon section 137, which provided at the time the
complaint herein was filed that the  wife may file an action "solely for the
support and maintenance of the children." This language, the basis of the Wilson
and Jaeger decisions, omitted the wording relied on in the McKay case.  The
conclusion is inescapable that an action for reimbursement for past expenditures
for support and maintenance of children may be maintained under section 137.

   In any event, even if the construction of section 137 urged by the majority
opinion be adopted, we should sustain the action of the trial court in the
present case.  When the wife has unpaid bills at the time of suit, it is
recognized that the trial court, in its discretion, may require the former
husband to contribute toward repayment of the debts.  As pointed out in Jaeger
v. Jaeger, supra, 73 Cal.App. 128, 135, the welfare of the children may require
reimbursement "to discharge her indebtedness and restore her credit" so as to
"leave her free from embarrassment through existing wants or present
indebtedness, obviate the necessity of devoting any part of the future allowance
to the payment of such indebtedness, and so enable her to live in the future
upon the allowance provided for that purpose." The power of the trial court to
order reimbursement to extinguish existing debts has been recognized in many
other cases.  ( Gay v. Gay, 146 Cal. 237, 243 [79 P. 885]; Larsen v. Larsen, 101
Cal.App.2d 862, 865 [226 P.2d 650]; Younger v. Younger, 112 Cal.App. 445, 446
[296 P.  1104]; Reed v. Reed, 40 Cal.App. 102, 106 [180 P. 43].)

   At the time of trial the plaintiff was able to support the children only by
borrowing from her father and from her second husband.  Neither had any legal
obligation to support the children.  The trial judge could reasonably conclude
that partial relief from past indebtedness was necessary to restore plaintiff's
credit, since the provision for $ 37.50 a month for each child for future
support would undoubtedly have to be complemented by further loans to plaintiff.


The Wife's Past Support

   Plaintiff's suit for support from the date of the Connecticut decree to the
date of her remarriage is an independent action in equity to compel defendant to
carry out the obligation to support her that he assumed by his marriage.
Plaintiff bases her action upon the theory that under the law of Connecticut she
had a right to support at the time of the divorce, that the question of that
right was not and  could not be litigated in the divorce proceedings because the
Connecticut court did not have personal jurisdiction over defendant, that her
right survived the divorce, and that the courts of this state have the power as
courts of equity to recognize and enforce defendant's duty to support her.  It
is contended on behalf of defendant that an action for support depends upon the
existence of the marital relation and that dissolution of the marriage ends the
right to support. Two theories are thus advanced to justify denial of the action
by the former wife for support: (1) that the divorce terminated the marriage
status and the duty to support dependent thereon and (2) that a support order is
obtainable only in an action for divorce or separate maintenance.

   In my opinion, the wife's right to support, although arising out of the
marriage, is not lost by dissolution of the marriage unless it could have been
litigated in the proceedings thereto; further, I believe that California courts
have jurisdiction to entertain proceedings in equity for support, independent of
actions for divorce or separate maintenance. I cannot agree that an action by a
former wife in such a situation as plaintiff's is barred simply because the
parties are no longer married.

   By marriage, a husband assumes the duty to support his wife ( Civ. Code, §§
155, 174; Sanderson v. Niemann, 17 Cal.2d 563, 568 [110 P.2d 1025]; Title Ins. &
Trust Co. v.  Ingersoll, 158 Cal. 474, 492 [111 P. 360]; Chaffee v. Browne, 109
Cal. 211, 219 [41 P. 1028]), a duty that is enforceable by the state ( Pen.
Code, § 270a) as well as by the wife.  Although that duty arises from the
marriage, it is not necessarily terminated by dissolution of the marriage. If
the marriage is dissolved through the wrong of the husband, he may be compelled
to support his former wife after the divorce. ( Civ. Code, § 139.) The allowance
of support following divorce "proceeds upon the theory that the husband entered
upon an obligation which, among other things, bound him to support the wife
during the period of their joint lives, and gave to her a right to share in the
fruits and accumulations of his skill; that by his own wrong he has forced her
to sever the relation which enabled her to enforce this obligation, and for the
wrong which thus deprived her of the benefit of the obligation, he must make her
compensation." ( Ex parte Spencer, 83 Cal. 460, 464 [23 P. 395, 17 Am.St.Rep.
266]; see Arnold v. Arnold, 76 Cal.App.2d 877, 885-886  [174 P.2d 674];
Remondino v. Remondino , 41 Cal.App.2d 208, 213 [106 P.2d. 437].)

   If the divorce court has personal jurisdiction over the husband, the wife has
an adequate remedy in the divorce proceeding to obtain an allowance for support.
If it does not, however, it may not award the wife support, although it may
dissolve the marriage. (Baldwin v.  Baldwin, 28 Cal.2d 406, 415 [170 P.2d 670].)
In that situation a wife's right to support is not lost, since it has never been
adjudicated.  There is nothing in section 139 to indicate that it was meant to
provide the only remedy of the wife.  A wife's right to support arises from the
marriage and is recognized by statute.  ( Civ. Code, §§ 155, 174.) It is not
created by a divorce decree; the decree is simply one means of enforcing the
right.

   It was settled at an early date that the power to award support falls within
the inherent powers of a court of equity and exists independently of statutory
authority.  ( Paxton v. Paxton, 150 Cal. 667, 670 [89 P. 1083]; Livingston v.
Superior Court, 117 Cal. 633, 635 [49 P. 836, 38 L.R.A. 175]; Galland v. Galland
, 38 Cal. 265, 268; see, also, Murray v. Murray, 115 Cal. 266, 274 [47 P. 37,
56 Am.St.Rep. 97, 37 L.R.A. 626].) "It may be admitted that where a statute
creates a right and also prescribes a particular remedy or procedure for its
enforcement, such procedure can alone be invoked for such enforcement; but that
is as far as the rule goes.  In such case the special procedure may be
considered as part of the right -- limiting and conditioning it.  But where the
right is given by statute without any prescribed remedy, it may be enforced by
any appropriate method recognized by the general law of procedure.  This
principle is crystallized in section 1428 of the Civil Code, which provides that
'an obligation arising from operation of law may be enforced in the manner
provided by law, or by civil action, or proceeding.' And a suit in equity is
peculiarly an appropriate remedy for the enforcement of the duty imposed by said
section." ( Paxton v. Paxton, supra, 150 Cal. 667, 670-671; see Tulare Irr.
Dist., v. Superior Court, 197 Cal. 649, 660 [242 P. 725].)

   The Paxton case involved section 206 of the Civil Code, imposing a duty upon
parents to maintain adult children unable to support themselves.  That section
provided no remedy to enforce the right,  but the court allowed an independent
suit in equity.  The Livingston case, supra, involved  section 176 of the Civil
Code, giving a husband the right to support from his wife when he was unable to
support himself; the court allowed an independent suit in equity to enforce that
right.  It bears noting that rules of law have likewise been developed to
protect the rights of an innocent person who enters into a husband and wife
relationship in the belief that there is a valid marriage, although the
Legislature has not provided a statutory solution to the variety of problems
that can arise from a putative spouse relationship.  (See Sanguinetti v.
Sanguinetti, 9 Cal.2d 95, 99-100 [69 P.2d 845, 111 A.L.R. 342]; Turknette v.
Turknette, 100 Cal.App.2d 271, 274 [223 P.2d 495].)

   The social policy that impels a court to award support in a divorce
proceeding when it has personal jurisdiction over the husband also impels the
court to award support when he is first brought before the court  after the
divorce. Accordingly, many courts have held that an action for support may be
maintained after a marriage has been dissolved by a court that lacked personal
jurisdiction over one of the parties.  ( Turner v. Turner, 44 Ala. 437, 451;
Davis v. Davis, 70 Colo. 37, 41 [197 P. 241]; Rodgers v. Rodgers, 56 Kan. 483,
488 [43 P. 779]; Pawley v. Pawley,    Fla.    [46 So.2d 464, 472]; Woods v.
Waddle, 44 Ohio St. 449, 457 [8 N.E. 297]; Cox v. Cox, 19 Ohio St. 502, 512 [2
Am.Rep. 415]; Searles v. Searles, 140 Minn. 385, 387 [168 N.W. 133]; Crawford v.
Crawford, 158 Miss. 382, 388 [130 So. 688]; Spradling v. Spradling, 74 Okla.
276, 277 [181 P. 148]; Nelson v. Nelson, 71 S.D. 342 [24 N.W.2d 327, 329];
Toncray v. Toncray, 123 Tenn. 476, 491 [131 S.W. 977, Ann.Cas. 1912C 284, 34
L.R.A.N.S. 1106]; Hutton v. Dodge, 58 Utah 228, 237 [198 P. 165]; Adams v.
Abbott, 21 Wash. 29, 32 [56 P. 931].) These decisions point out that it was
impossible for the wife to recover an allowance for support at the time of the
divorce decree because the court lacked personal jurisdiction over the husband.
If the question of support could not be litigated after dissolution of the
marriage, the wife would be forever denied her day in court,  and the husband
would be allowed to escape the obligations incurred by his marriage. The wife's
claim would be extinguished without an opportunity to present it for
adjudication.  In my opinion, the foregoing cases reach a sound result, and the
majority opinion does not advance persuasive reasons to justify a denial to the
former wife of an opportunity for adjudication of her claim to support from her
former husband.

    It is contended that the action by the former wife should be denied when, as
here, she obtained the decree, on the theory that she "elected" to "waive" her
right to support. Many courts have rejected this reasoning.  ( Woods v. Waddle,
supra; Hutton v. Dodge, supra; Adams v. Abbott, supra; Spradling v. Spradling,
supra; Nelson v. Nelson, supra.) In Hutton v. Dodge, supra, the court forcefully
stated: "Let us assume, for instance, that in the present case plaintiff [wife]
was not only entitled to a divorce and such property of defendant as was within
the jurisdiction of the court, but to alimony as well.  She could not follow her
husband into another state and obtain relief for she would first have to
establish residence there before she could sue.  She could not obtain a decree
for alimony here because she could not make personal service of summons on
defendant within this state.  In such circumstances, what remedy would the
plaintiff have?  If there ever was a case in which litigation by piecemeal was
justified because of the inherent difficulty of obtaining relief in one action,
it seems to the writer that the case presented is almost a perfect example.  . .
.  It would be a travesty upon justice and a sad commentary on the power of
judicial tribunals generally if the courts were powerless to grant relief in a
case of this kind where jurisdiction of the defendant is afterwards seasonably
obtained and the rights of third parties have not intervened.  We have no fault
whatever to find with cases which hold that where full and complete jurisdiction
has been obtained over the subject-matter and the parties, judgments rendered in
divorce cases as well as others are res adjudicata as to every question that
might have been litigated under the issues made.  In such cases the only remedy
for subsequent relief incident to the divorce seems to be by appropriate
proceedings in the case in which the divorce was granted.  Not so, however,
where jurisdiction of the person was not obtained." (58 Utah at pp. 232-234.)

   The former husband, however, is not foreclosed from litigating the issue of
his guilt in defending an independent action in equity for support by his former
wife. The divorce decree obtained by constructive service is, of course, binding
upon both parties insofar as marital status is concerned.  ( Rediker v. Rediker,
35 Cal.2d 796, 801 [221 P.2d 1, 20 A.L.R.2d 1152]; Estate of Hughes, 80
Cal.App.2d 550, 556 [182 P.2d 253].) It does not follow, however, that the
decree adjudicated the husband's fault with regard to his duty  to support.
(Rest. Judgments, § 74; see Estate of Williams, 36 Cal.2d 289, 292 [223 P.2d
248, 22 A.L.R.2d 716].) The full faith and credit clause does not compel such a
result ( Estin v. Estin, 334 U.S. 541, 549 [68  S.Ct. 1213, 92 L.Ed. 1561, 1
A.L.R.2d 1412]); moreover, such a result would create serious constitutional
problems under the due process clause.  ( Rediker v. Rediker, supra, 35 Cal.2d
796, 803; see Mullane v. Central Hanover Bank & Trust Co., 339 U.S. 306, 314 [70
S.Ct. 652, 94 L.Ed.  865].) "It would seem to follow as a corollary of the
doctrine herein enunciated that in such an action for alimony on the part of a
plaintiff, the defendant would have the right in his defense to contest the
merits of the divorce itself, not for the purpose of setting it aside, but for
the purpose of defeating the alimony for which the action was brought.  If the
plaintiff had the right to bring an independent action for alimony after a
divorce has been granted simply because she never had and could not have her day
in court in respect to alimony in the divorce proceedings, the defendant for the
same reason should be entitled to his day in court respecting the same matter."
( Hutton v. Dodge, supra, 58 Utah at p. 237.)

   The majority opinion discusses the California decisions at length and
concludes that an action for support could not be maintained by a California
wife after a divorce decree based upon constructive service. The cases cited,
however, do not preclude an independent suit in equity by a former wife for
support after dissolution of the marriage in a proceeding where the remedy under
section 139 was unavailable.

   No California case has squarely held that the action will lie, although there
have been strong indications that it will.  ( Matter of McMullin, 164 Cal. 504,
507 [129 P. 773] ["it fell within the power of the wife under supplementary
proceedings brought in this state with personal service upon the former husband
to have procured . . . an award of the custody of the children, with provision
for her own and their support"]; DeYoung v. DeYoung, 27 Cal.2d 521, 527 [165
P.2d 457], concurring opinion of Mr. Justice Schauer ["the right of a wife . . .
to support from the other spouse as of the date of the divorce is a property
right which can be adjudicated only by a court having jurisdiction in
personam"]; Bernard v. Bernard, 79 Cal.App.2d 353, 357 [179 P.2d 625].)

    In some of the California cases relied upon for a contrary rule ( Colbert v.
Colbert, 28 Cal.2d 276, 279 [169 P.2d 633]; Carbone v. Superior Court, 18 Cal.2d
768, 771 [117 P.2d 872, 136 A.L.R. 1260]; Talbot v. Talbot, 218 Cal. 1, 2 [21
P.2d 110]; Hite v. Hite, 124 Cal. 389, 391 [57 P.2d 227, 71 Am.St.Rep. 82, 45
L.R.A. 793]; Hinson v. Hinson, 100 Cal.App.2d 745, 746 [224 P.2d 405]), the
action was for support pendente lite.  The statements therein that marital
status is a prerequisite to the granting of alimony are irrelevant to the issue
presented by an action for support following an ex parte divorce. In such an
action the former wife's recovery is of course predicated upon existence of the
marital status at some time before suit is brought The real question, however,
is whether the relationship must continue until the date of suit.  The cited
cases do not supply an affirmative answer, for it is settled that suit money may
be awarded in proceedings brought long after entry of the final decree of
divorce. ( Lerner v. Superior Court, 38 Cal.2d 676, 685 [242 P.2d 321], and
cases cited therein.)

   In other cases ( Cardinale v. Cardinale, 8 Cal.2d 762, 768 [68 P.2d 351];
Patterson v. Patterson, 82 Cal.App.2d 838, 842 [187 P.2d 113]; Calhoun v.
Calhoun, 70 Cal.App.2d 233, 237 [160 P.2d 923]), the action was for separate
maintenance. Separate maintenance can be awarded only during the continuance of
the marriage. As Mr. Justice Schauer noted in his concurring opinion in DeYoung
v. DeYoung, 27 Cal.2d 521, 527 [165 P.2d 457]: "Separate maintenance differs
from alimony in that it presupposes a continuing marital status. The right to it
cannot be established without proof that such status is existent at the time of
trial.  Proof of prior dissolution of the marriage is, therefore, a complete
defense to such an action." (27 Cal.2d at p. 528; see, also, Monroe v. Superior
Court, 28 Cal.2d 427, 429 [170 P.2d 473].) Unlike separate maintenance, however,
the obligation to support a former wife may continue after the marriage is
dissolved.

    Cases are cited holding that when the divorce decree is silent as to an
allowance for support, or the provision therefor is limited as to time, and
power to modify is not reserved, further support payments cannot be ordered
except upon appeal or application of section 473 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
( Puckett v. Puckett, 21 Cal.2d 833, 841 [136 P.2d 1]; Long v. Long, 17 Cal.2d
409, 410 [110 P.2d 383]; Tolle v. Superior Court, 10 Cal.2d 95, 97 [73 P.2d 607]
;  McClure v. McClure, 4 Cal.2d 356, 359 [49 P.2d 584, 100 A.L.R. 1257].) In
these cases, however, the court had personal jurisdiction over the parties and
the question of support had been or could have been litigated. These cases do
nothing more than apply familiar principles of res judicata.  When, however,
jurisdiction was obtained by constructive service, an in personam judgment for
support could not be obtained.  The question of the husband's obligation to
provide for support of the wife was not and could not be litigated, and there is
therefore no basis for res judicata.  (See Rest. Judgments, § 74.)

   Two other California decisions require further discussion In Howell v. Howell
(1894), 104 Cal. 45, 47 [37 P. 770, 43 Am.St.Rep. 70], the wife obtained a
decree of divorce by constructive service. An allowance for support could not be
made.  After the decree became final, the wife attempted to reopen the divorce
action and obtain a modification of the decree to provide for her support.  The
court held that the decree, having become final, could not be modified.  The
case turned on this procedural point, and the question whether the wife could
bring an independent action in equity was not at issue.  The court stated,
however, in a broad dictum that after the marriage ended an action for support
could not be maintained.  This dictum overlooked the fact that in the divorce
proceeding the wife had no opportunity to litigate the issue of support and that
the doctrine of res judicata therefore did not apply.  The only California
authority cited by the court was Egan v. Egan, 90 Cal. 15, 21 [27 P. 22], where
the court had personal jurisdiction over the parties.

   In Calhoun v. Calhoun, supra, 70 Cal.App.2d 233, the husband obtained a
Nevada decree by constructive service. Subsequently, the wife filed an action in
California for separate maintenance, but did not question the validity of the
Nevada decree. The action by the wife was denied on the ground that separate
maintenance could not be obtained after dissolution of the marital status. (See
Cardinale v. Cardinale, supra.) The wife then filed an independent action in
equity for support.  A judgment in favor of the husband was affirmed.  ( Calhoun
v. Calhoun, 81 Cal.App.2d 297 [183 P.2d 922].) The court, however, expressly
left open the question whether the action could be maintained.  (81 Cal.App.2d
at pp. 300-301.) The court denied relief on the ground that at the time of the
earlier action the wife had been aware of the Nevada decree and, once she
elected to seek separate maintenance  instead of an allowance for support, she
would not be permitted to harass her former husband by a multiplicity of
actions.  The Calhoun decision would be inapplicable when the former wife had no
previous opportunity to recover an in personam judgment.

   If a valid ex parte divorce is granted the husband by another state, the
California wife may be protected only if she is allowed a subsequent action for
support.  California would of course be required to recognize that the marriage
had been dissolved by the ex parte decree ( Williams v. North Carolina, 317 U.S.
287, 299 [63 S.Ct. 207, 87 L.Ed. 279, 143 A.L.R. 1273]), but the Constitution of
the United States does not compel us to go farther and hold that the ex parte
decree of a sister state destroyed the former wife's right to support. ( Estin
v. Estin, 334 U.S. 541, 549 [68 S.Ct. 1213, 92 L.Ed. 1561, 1 A.L.R.2d 1412];
Kreiger v. Kreiger, 334 U.S. 555, 557 [68 S.Ct. 1221, 92 L.Ed. 1572]; Barber v.
Barber, 21 How. (U.S.) 582 [16 L.Ed. 226].) On the contrary, the requirement of
the Williams case that the foreign decree be upheld strongly supports allowance
of a subsequent action for support by a former wife. Formerly, when a husband
obtained a foreign decree by constructive  service the court would protect the
wife by refusing to recognize the decree. ( Haddock v. Haddock, 201 U.S. 562,
606 [26 S.Ct. 525, 50 L.Ed. 867]; Delanoy v. Delanoy, 216 Cal. 27, 37 [13 P.2d
719, 86 A.L.R. 1321].) Since the Williams case, a husband obtaining a bona fide
domicile in another state may secure a binding divorce decree by constructive
service. ( Williams v. North Carolina, supra; Baldwin v.  Baldwin, 28 Cal.2d
406, 410-411 [170 P.2d 670]; cf.  Crouch v. Crouch, 28 Cal.2d 243, 249 [169 P.2d
897].) If the wife's right to support does not survive such an ex parte decree,
she is compelled to protect that right indirectly by making a collateral attack
on the decree. There is no reason to drive her to such a cumbersome and perhaps
futile extreme.  The policy considerations that require recognition of the
foreign decree are not present when the question is the right to support. Since
the courts have evolved rules of law that allow the husband readily to obtain a
divorce, corresponding rules of law must be invoked to protect the wife and
prevent injustice.  Accordingly, we should give effect to an ex parte foreign
decree obtained by the husband insofar as it affects marital status, but declare
it ineffective on the issue of alimony, thus accommodating the interests of each
state by restricting it to matters of her dominant concern.  ( Estin v. Estin,
supra, 334 U.S. 541, 549.)

   For the foregoing reasons, I am of the opinion that a former wife domiciled
in California can bring an action for support, either following a divorce decree
granted her by a California court lacking personal jurisdiction over her former
husband, or following an ex parte decree granted her former husband by a foreign
court.  Although the present action is by a nonresident wife subsequent to a
divorce by a court of another state, there is no reason why the courts of this
state should not entertain the action.  "Alimony can in its discretion be
granted by a court under the law of its own state in favor of a spouse against
any spouse who is personally subject or whose property is subject to the
jurisdiction of the court." (Rest. Conflict of Laws, § 463; cf.  Hiner v. Hiner,
153 Cal. 254, 260 [94 P. 1044]; Wynne v. Wynne, 20 Cal.App.2d 131, 136 [66 P.2d
467].) Plaintiff invokes the inherent powers of courts of equity in this state
to protect the rights of innocent persons and to prevent injustice.  A former
wife in the position of plaintiff may have a just claim to support from her
husband upon dissolution of the marriage. By the marriage he assumed the
obligation of supporting his wife, and he should not be allowed to escape that
obligation by conduct that compels her to divorce him.  The wife is entitled to
her day in court, to have a court of equity pass on the merits of her claim that
her former husband should support her.  If the courts of this state are closed
to her, the former husband may unconscionably avoid his obligations; if the
action by the former wife is allowed, she will be able to present her claim for
adjudication.  California should not serve as an asylum to the former husband.

   A former wife, however, would not be permitted to bring an action in
California for support following an ex parte decree, if a similar action would
not be entertained by courts of the state where she was domiciled at the time of
the decree. If the wife was the plaintiff in the divorce action, and under the
law of the state granting the decree the right did not survive divorce, the full
faith and credit clause would compel California to give the same effect to the
decree and hold that the decree not only dissolved the marriage status but
terminated the wife's right to support. On the other hand, if the husband
obtains the decree in another state and under the law of the state of the wife's
domicile her right to support was lost when the marriage status terminated, she
would likewise  not be allowed, by migrating to another state, to revive a right
that had expired.

   The foregoing considerations are not present, however, if the husband leaves
the wife, and the state of the wife's domicile holds that her right to support
survives dissolution of the marriage. In that event, neither the full faith and
credit clause nor reasons of policy would bar the action in  a California court.
Whether the wife obtains the decree in the state where she remains, or whether
the husband obtains a valid decree in another state, we would be required to
hold that the marriage status was dissolved ( Williams v. North Carolina, 317
U.S. 287, 299 [63 S.Ct. 207, 87 L.Ed. 279, 143 A.L.R. 1273]), but would not be
required to deny the wife a right to bring an action in California for support
and thus give the foreign decree greater effect in California than it would have
in the state of the wife's domicile.

   The question remains whether the judgment may be sustained on the merits.
Under the Connecticut decisions, a wife granted a divorce for the misconduct of
her husband may receive an allowance for her support, in the discretion of the
trial court.  ( LaBella v. LaBella, 134 Conn. 312, 318 [57 A.2d 627].) "Alimony
is awarded the wife divorced for the fault of her husband that he may continue
to fulfill the obligation for her support which the law imposed upon him in
virtue of the marriage contract." ( Cary v. Cary, 112 Conn. 256, 260 [152 A.
302].) "It is based upon the duty of the husband to continue to support a wife
whom he has in legal effect abandoned." ( Wright v. Wright, 93 Conn. 296, 300
[105 A. 684].) In the present case, however, service of process was by
registered mail in New York.  Both parties agree that the in personam provisions
of the Connecticut decree are invalid.  * Plaintiff did not base this action
upon the alimony provisions of the Connecticut decree and, in view of
defendant's concession, he waived any contention that plaintiff's right to
support  was merged into the Connecticut decree and that her exclusive remedy is
an action thereon.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*   Service
outside the state by registered mail is apparently permissible under Connecticut
statutes (Conn. Gen. Stats., Rev. 1949, § 7330), but no decision of the highest
court of that state has been called to our attention and our research discloses
none holding that an in personam judgment, like that in the present case,
obtained on such service would be valid in Connecticut.  (Cf.  Cikora v. Cikora,
133 Conn. 456, 459 [52 A.2d 310]; Kohler v. Kohler, 12 Conn.Sup. 476; Sattler v.
Sattler, 7 Conn.Sup. 179.) Such a judgment is not necessarily in violation of
the United States Constitution.  ( Milliken v. Meyer, 311 U.S. 457, 463 [61
S.Ct. 339, 85 L.Ed. 278, 132 A.L.R. 1357]; but see De La Montanya v. De La
Montanya, 112 Cal. 101 [44 P. 345, 53 Am.St.Rep. 165, 32 L.R.A. 82].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    No Connecticut decisions have been discovered or cited by the parties that
directly pass on the question whether a wife domiciled in Connecticut at the
time of an ex parte divorce decree may subsequently bring an action for support.
The Connecticut courts, however, follow the same rule as do the California
courts and hold that the duty of the husband to support his wife may be
continued after dissolution of the marriage as part of the obligations assumed
by the marriage. ( LaBella v. LaBella, supra; Cary v. Cary, supra.) In the
absence of announcement of the law of Connecticut by the highest court of
appellate jurisdiction of that state ( Code Civ. Proc., § 1875(3); see Loranger
v. Nadeau, 215 Cal. 362, 366 [10 P.2d 63, 84 A.L.R. 1264]; Knox v. Pryor, 10
Cal.App.2d 76, 78 [51 P.2d 106]), we may assume that Connecticut would reach the
same result as would California, and that Connecticut would protect the wife and
not deny her the right to present her claim to support for adjudication.  (Cf.
German v. German, 122 Conn. 155, 163 [188 A. 429].)

   In Connecticut, as in California, a former wife cannot obtain an allowance
for support if the divorce is granted for the misconduct of the wife.  ( Allen
v. Allen, 43 Conn. 419, 426; Geer v. Geer, 8 Conn.Sup. 279, 282.) As previously
pointed out, defendant could have litigated the issue of his guilt in the
present proceeding.  At the trial, a copy of the Connecticut decree was admitted
in evidence, providing that the divorce was granted plaintiff on the ground of
defendant's "intolerable cruelty," and the case apparently was tried on the
theory that the Connecticut decree settled that issue.  Defendant did not
contend at the trial or on appeal that the decree improperly granted plaintiff
the divorce.

   The award in the present case was for past support and not for future
support.  An action by a former wife for reimbursement of past expenses for her
own support is not barred as a matter of law.  Since  she was unable to obtain
an allowance for support until personal service could be made on her former
husband, she should, absent proof of laches or the bar of a statute of
limitation, in a proper case be allowed reimbursement, as well as an award of
future support.  Otherwise, a premium would be placed on the ability of the
former husband to escape service of process.  The former wife cannot, however,
obtain greater relief in a subsequent action for support than she would have
received had the divorce court  had personal jurisdiction over the former
husband. She did not have at the time of the Connecticut decree an absolute
right to continued support from her former husband; she had only a right to have
a court pass on the merits of her claim that her husband should support her
after the marriage had been dissolved. Since the former husband could have
defeated or reduced a claim for support at the time of the divorce by showing
that the amount claimed was not needed by the wife or that he did not have the
ability to pay it, he similarly could contest a subsequent action for
reimbursement for past expenses.  Likewise, since an award made at the time of
the decree could be increased or decreased by the divorce court on the ground of
changed circumstances, either party can introduce evidence to show events that
have occurred between the date of the divorce and the date of the action for
support and that bear on the question of the amount of past support that should
be awarded.

   The final problem is whether the evidence in the present case justifies the
amount of past support awarded plaintiff.  The trial court in making an award
for support, or in modifying an award on the ground of changed circumstances,
must take into consideration the needs of the wife and the ability of the
husband.  It appears from the record in the present case that after defendant
left plaintiff she sold the property in Connecticut that had been purchased with
defendant's money, but placed in her name, and that, insofar as expenses for her
own past support were concerned, plaintiff was never in need before her
remarriage.  Nevertheless, the trial court awarded her $ 1,950 for past support.
Additionally, the awards for child support and suit money amounted to
approximately $ 3,400 outright plus $ 37.50 per month for each child for future
support.  The evidence of defendant's ability to pay that sum, although
sufficient to sustain the awards, is decidedly weak.  When the evidence of
plaintiff's need and defendant's ability to pay the additional $ 1,950 are
viewed together, it is apparent that the award reimbursing plaintiff for
expenses for her own support cannot be sustained.  (See Rawley v. Rawley, 94
Cal.App.2d 562, 564 [210 P.2d 891]; Farnsworth v. Farnsworth, 81 Cal.App.2d 380,
382 [184 P.2d 7].)

   For the foregoing reasons, I concur in the affirmance of the judgment in
favor of plaintiff on the cross-complaint, and in the reversal of that part of
the judgment awarding plaintiff $ 1,950 for her past support, solely on the
ground that  the evidence is insufficient to sustain the award.  I dissent from
the reversal of the judgments in favor of plaintiff in her actions for suit
money and past and future child support, and from the majority opinion insofar
as it holds that the trial court did not have jurisdiction to entertain
plaintiff's action for her support.


                              68 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent, v. HAROLD BROWN
                        PALMER, Defendant and Appellant

                                 Crim. No. 8749

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division One

            222 Cal. App. 2d 825; 35 Cal. Rptr. 476; 1963 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1736


                                December 4, 1963

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied December 23, 1963,
and Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court was Denied January
29, 1964.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County and from an order denying probation.  Kenneth E. Sutherland, Judge pro
tem.  *

*   Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

   Prosecution for bigamy.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Bigamy--Elements.  --One is not guilty of bigamy if he had a bona fide and
reasonable belief that facts existed that left him free to remarry; and whether
he in fact had such a belief is solely a question of fact.

(2) Criminal Law--Appeal--Questions of Law and Fact--When Judgment May Be Set
Aside.  --After conviction all intendments are in favor of the judgment and the
trial court's determination will not be set aside on the ground of insufficiency
of evidence unless the record clearly shows that on no hypothesis is there
substantial evidence to support it.

(3) Id.--Appeal--Questions of Law and Fact.  --Inasmuch as the trier of fact has
the exclusive power to resolve factual conflicts, determine credibility of
witnesses and weigh the evidence, if there is substantial evidence to support
its finding an appellate court will not substitute its determination for that of
the trial court.

(4) Bigamy--Evidence.  --A bigamy conviction was supported by a clear showing in
defendant's testimony of his complete lack of a bona fide and reasonable belief
that his wife had actually obtained either a divorce or an annulment.

(5) Criminal Law--Judgment--Determination of Punishment.  --Following a
conviction of guilty of bigamy, there was no abuse of discretion and no error in
the court's sentencing defendant to a prison term instead of a county jail
sentence where defendant had two prior felony convictions, and defense counsel
not only had every opportunity to explore and discuss the possibility of the
lighter sentence but talked to the court at length on defendant's behalf.

COUNSEL: I. A. Kanarek for Defendant and Appellant.

Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General,
and Rose-Marie Gruenwald, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.

JUDGES: Lillie, J.  Wood, P. J., and Fourt, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: LILLIE

OPINION

     Defendant appeals from a bigamy conviction; his attempted appeal from "all
other orders" and order denying probation is dismissed.  ( People v. Walters,
148 Cal.App.2d 426 [306 P.2d 606].)

   Defendant married Martha in 1960 and left her in November 1961; the marriage
was never annulled or dissolved by divorce. Prior to the separation, Martha told
defendant she wanted a divorce but was financially unable to obtain one and
intended to get one when she could.  After their separation defendant, who drank
considerably, "continually bothered her" and to get him to leave her alone and
stop seeing and bothering her, and because she "had so much grief and worry from
the marriage," Martha told defendant that -- she "was going to get a divorce or
had gotten a divorce, maybe"; was "getting a divorce"; was "probably getting a
divorce" but "wasn't financially able"; had gotten a divorce and didn't want to
see him any more; and had gotten a divorce and to leave her alone.  She
testified "[He] had asked me at one time to get the divorce and I asked him to
get the divorce and I told him that I wasn't financially able at that time.  I
wanted one because I didn't want him bothering me any more." She was emphatic
that at no time did she ever mention to defendant an annulment or tell him she
had obtained one; she mentioned a divorce, "but never an annulment." Neither
Martha nor defendant ever filed a complaint for divorce or annulment; no
separation agreement or other "papers" were ever prepared or filed; and Martha
at no time ever wrote defendant that she had gotten an annulment.

   Three months after leaving Martha, and on February 5, 1962, defendant married
Erma.  Erma testified that she knew he had been married before; that he spoke of
his former wife and said "they were divorced in November," that "it was final in
November"; that "[He] said it was final.  Just said it -- he didn't say
annulment or divorce; it was final in November"; and that later on he told her
"that he had an annulment."

    Appellant claims he "had the legal right to rely upon the representations of
. . . Martha . . . that she had obtained a divorce, and, thus . . . did not have
the requisite, specific intent to be found guilty of violation of Penal Code
section 281 when he went through the marriage ceremony with Irma [sic] . . . ."
(A.O.B., p. 5.)

     It is the rule that one "is not guilty of bigamy, if he had a bona fide and
reasonable belief that facts existed that left him free to remarry." ( People v.
Vogel, 46 Cal.2d 798, 801 [299 P.2d 850].) However, the question here is not
whether he had a legal right to rely on Martha's representations that she had
obtained a divorce, but whether defendant, in fact, did rely on her
representations and whether, at the time he married Erma, he had a bona fide and
reasonable belief that he was free to marry her.  Thus, it becomes solely a
question of fact -- one which the trial court resolved against defendant; the
real issue is whether there is substantial evidence to support the determination
of the trial court.  ( People v. Daugherty, 40 Cal.2d 876, 885 [256 P.2d 911].)
After conviction all intendments are in favor of the judgment and the trial
court's determination will not be set aside upon the ground of insufficiency of
the evidence unless the record clearly shows that upon no hypothesis is there
substantial evidence to support it.  ( People v. Lindley, 26 Cal.2d 780 [161
P.2d 227]; People v. Crooker, 47 Cal.2d 348 [303 P.2d 753].) However, a review
of the record reveals that even defendant's own testimony fails to support his
defense; further, that the trial judge disbelieved both defendant and his
sister.  Inasmuch as the trier of fact has the exclusive power to resolve
factual conflicts, determine credibility of witnesses and weigh the evidence (
People v. Newland, 15 Cal.2d 678 [104 P.2d 778]) and there is substantial
evidence to support its finding, we will not substitute our determination for
that of the trial court.

     According to defendant's testimony, when he married Erma his reliance, if
any, was not on Martha's representation "that she had obtained a divorce"
(A.O.B., p. 5), but on her statement to him in November "that she had an
annulment." (Martha denied she had ever mentioned annulment  to defendant.) Of
more significance, however, is the clear showing in defendant's testimony of his
complete lack of bona fide and reasonable belief that Martha had actually
obtained either a divorce or an annulment. In his own words, when he married
Erma, he "didn't know what to believe."  Defendant's uncertainty of his marital
status and his doubt of the truth of Martha's representations that she had
dissolved the marriage, are reflected in his testimony concerning: her
conflicting statements to him and the circumstances under which they were made;
his continued discussions with her concerning a divorce or annulment for the
next two months following her statement in November "that she had an annulment";
his request of her to see the "papers," indicating he knew papers were necessary
for a legal dissolution of the marriage and didn't believe her; the note he
wrote her in January 1962 declaring she had an annulment, not a divorce, to
which he secured her signature; and his admission, after considerable
cross-examination, that he "didn't know what to believe." Without question
defendant, knowing Martha had not been out of the state and a final decree was
necessary, wrote the note in January 1962 for her signature in the final
realization that no matter what she had told him in November it would have been
impossible for her to have obtained a divorce in one month.

   The inconsistencies and contradictions in defendant's testimony and his
obvious attempt to tailor it to fit certain established facts clearly reveal his
lack of any honest belief that he was free to remarry. His direct examination
was very brief; he simply testified that he believed, and relied upon, Martha's
statement to him that she had obtained a divorce. However, on cross-examination
and thereafter, he changed his story -- repeatedly stated that what he relied
upon was Martha's statement to him that she had gotten an annulment.  He
testified variously -- he thought "it was an annulment. That is what I
understood"; ". . . one time she told me that she had an annulment -- a divorce
and then she told me an annulment, so I knew it was one or the other," and she
told him this "in November . . . just about a month after" his separation; she
didn't tell him where she got the annulment or divorce; he asked her for the
"papers" and "she just asked me what I wanted them for"; he didn't know where
she had gotten "it" and didn't know if she had been out of California; and he
visited her all during this period and as far as he knew she had been in the
state.  When he was asked if he knew at the time (November) that "it takes a
year to get a divorce in California" he testified: "Well, she told me that she
had an annulment"; when it was pointed out to him that only a month had elapsed
making a divorce questionable, he said that in November she  "told me that she
had an annulment one time and another time a divorce so I didn't know what she
had, to tell the truth about it"; when asked by both the court and the
prosecutor if he didn't think it unusual that Martha got a divorce in just one
month, he admitted, "Yes, I give it thought.  I believe that she had an
annulment like she told me she had"; pressed further, defendant said:  "Well, I
didn't know what to believe"; and then, "I believed that she might have made a
mistake and said divorce and meant annulment. I didn't know what she - -."
Finally he was asked: "As a matter of fact, Mr. Palmer, you knew she couldn't
get a divorce in just one month," and he answered: "I didn't figure that -- I
don't -- I wasn't thinking about the divorce at the time.  I was thinking of
annulment"; then asked if, when he married Erma, he was relying upon what Martha
told him in November, defendant said: "Not exactly.  I had a - - - yes, I was
too.  I believed that she had an annulment like she told me." Defendant was
questioned thoroughly concerning the divorce upon which he claimed in his direct
examination he relied, and after the prosecution explored the time element
involved and the lack of "papers," he resorted to: "I believed that she had an
annulment," and  finally said "A divorce or annulment, I didn't know exactly
which . . . ."

   On redirect examination defendant, for the first time, claimed that Martha
signed a note declaring that she had an annulment, but on recross-examination it
developed that defendant himself wrote the note.  He testified that in January
1962 he, Erma and her sister took the note to Martha, "handed it to her through
the door" and asked her to sign it, and she did; that he can't "locate the note"
and doesn't know where it is now but his sister saw it and he showed it to Erma.
He further claimed that later in January Martha wrote him a letter saying she
had an annulment, but that he "never could find it," and doesn't know where it
is now, but that he showed it to his sister. Defendant's sister testified that
in middle January he showed her a letter written by Martha which said she had
gotten an annulment; that she read just the part relative to the annulment
"because it was of interest" to her; and that when defendant brought the letter
to her he said: "This letter says she has gotten an annulment," although he
never before had mentioned "annulment" to her.

   In rebuttal, Erma denied that she ever saw such a note signed by Martha, that
defendant ever discussed it with her or  ever showed her such note, and that
before their marriage she went with him to Martha's; Martha testified that she
"never wrote him anything," no documents "at all" pertaining to any subject, and
denied writing any letter to him, but said she did sign "something" that he
brought out, "she really didn't know what it was," she didn't read it "because
he is always writing something and he was drunk and he didn't know what he was
doing anyway."

   At the time the trial court found defendant guilty it indicated its
liberality in bigamy cases, but declared this to be "an unusual type case in
that defendant, it is obvious to me, he knew very well he didn't have any
divorce"; relative to the testimony of defendant's sister, the judge said: "It
appears to me that she told a bold-faced lie in court," and "obviously there was
no such letter."

   While People v. Vogel, 46 Cal.2d 798 [299 P.2d 850], heavily relied upon by
appellant, holds that if one had a bona fide and reasonable belief that facts
existed that left him free to remarry he could not be guilty of bigamy, it does
not hold, as urged by appellant, that a statement made by the wife that she
obtained a divorce constitutes sufficient proof of such belief.  The issue
therein was not the sufficiency of the evidence, it was whether the lower court
erred in refusing to admit testimony that defendant's first wife had told him
she was going to divorce him; and the Supreme Court held that it did.  The
record before us reflects an absence of proof that when defendant married Erma
he had a bona fide and reasonable belief that his marriage to Martha had been
dissolved. Inasmuch as the trial judge completely rejected the testimony of
defendant and his sister, his misstatement of one point in the evidence at the
time he found defendant guilty was no more than harmless error.

     Sentenced to the state prison, appellant claims that "the possibility of a
county jail sentence" was not fully explored. Defendant was charged with two
prior felony convictions -- "forgery" and "no account check" -- and the court
found the allegations to be true.  The finding on the priors made defendant
ineligible for probation. Before sentence defendant's counsel called his
client's ineligibility for probation to the court's attention, argued at length
the nature of the priors, discussed defendant's alcoholic problem and need for
medical attention, urged he be placed on probation and asked the court in the
interests of justice to strike out one of the priors that defendant might be
eligible for probation. His  application for probation was denied.  Counsel not
only had every opportunity to explore and discuss the possibility of a county
jail sentence, but he talked to the court at length on defendant's behalf;
however, the trial judge, having heard the evidence, read the probation report,
listened to defendant's argument  and considered the nature of the two priors,
apparently felt that the interests of justice did not justify a county jail
sentence. We see no abuse of the court's discretion and no error.

   For the foregoing reasons the judgment is affirmed.


                              69 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           UNION BANK AND TRUST COMPANY et al., Respondents, v. ELSIE
                               GORDON, Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 19231

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Three

            116 Cal. App. 2d 681; 254 P.2d 644; 1953 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      1121


                                 March 13, 1953

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Respondents' Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court
was Denied May 7, 1953.  Edmonds, J., was of the Opinion that the Petition
Should be Granted.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County and from an order made after judgment.  Harold B. Jeffrey, Judge.

   Action to quiet title.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Estoppel--Inconsistent Conduct.  --One who is silent when he ought to speak
may not speak when he ought to be silent. (See Code Civ. Proc., § 1962(3).)

(2) Divorce--Judgment--Estoppel to Attack Decree.  --A spouse who remarries in
reliance on a decree of divorce secured by the other spouse is estopped to
contest validity of the decree.

(3) Id.--Judgment--Estoppel to Attack Decree.  --In holding that a spouse is
estopped to assert that a decree of divorce is invalid a court does not give any
force or effect to the decree.

(4a) (4b) Id.--Foreign Divorces--Estoppel.  --The doctrine of estoppel is not
inconsistent with Civ. Code, § 150.1, which declares that a foreign divorce
decree obtained on simulated residence has no force or effect.

(5) Id.--Foreign Divorces--Residence or Domicile.  --Civ. Code, § 150.1,
relating to nonrecognition of foreign divorce where parties were domiciled in
this state, constitutes a statutory declaration of what was theretofore a rule
of decision.

(6) Marriage--Validity--Putative Marriage.  --A putative marriage is one which
has been solemnized and celebrated in good faith by both parties but which by
reason of some legal infirmity is either void or voidable.

(7) Id.--Incidents of Void and Voidable Marriages--Property Rights.  --On
dissolution of a putative marriage, property which the de facto spouses have
acquired as a result of their joint efforts is to be treated as though it was
the accumulation of a valid marriage, and such rule applies not only in an
action between a putative wife and children of the first wife, but also in an
action between two spouses.

(8) Divorce--Foreign Decrees.  --It cannot be said that knowledge of a laywoman
that another person obtained a foreign decree of divorce after complying with
the residence requirements of the foreign state conclusively establishes that
she knew that such person's divorce was invalid.

(9) Marriage--Incidents of Void and Voidable Marriages--Property Rights.
--Decedent's former wife who is estopped to attack the validity of a foreign
decree divorcing her from him has no interest by virtue of the marriage in
property acquired after the divorce through the joint efforts of himself and a
woman he married after the divorce.

(10) Appeal--Reversal--Directing Entry of Judgment by Trial Court.  --By failing
to take issue with a suggestion in appellant's brief that in the event of a
reversal it should be with directions to render judgment in appellant's favor,
respondent is deemed to have acquiesced therein.

COUNSEL: Stahlman & Cooper, Loeb & Loeb, Grant B. Cooper, Harry L. Gershon and
Herman F. Selvin for Appellant.

Kenny & Morris and Robert W. Kenny for Respondents.

JUDGES: Vallee, J.  Shinn, P. J., and Wood (Parker), J., concurred.

OPINION BY: VALLEE

OPINION

     Plaintiff, as special administrator of the estate of Leo Gordon, sued Elsie
Gordon to quiet title to various parcels of realty.  Elsie Gordon answered and
filed a cross-complaint, naming Sara Gordon as cross-defendant, in which she
prayed that title be quieted in her.  Sara Gordon answered the cross-complaint.
The judgment decreed that Sara Gordon, subject to administration of the estate
of Leo Gordon, and Elsie Gordon, is each the owner of an undivided half interest
in the property.  Elsie Gordon moved the court to vacate the judgment and to
have another and different judgment entered.  The motion was denied.  Elsie
Gordon appeals from the judgment and from the order denying her motion.

   The facts which are undisputed are these:

   1. December 21, 1921 -- Leo Gordon and Sara Gordon were married in New York.
One child was born to them, Lucille.

   2. June 3, 1927 -- Sara obtained a decree of separate maintenance against Leo
in New York.

   3. March 26, 1928 -- Leo moved to Los Angeles where he was domiciled at all
times until his death.

   4. May 31, 1929 -- Leo sued Sara for divorce in Nevada.  Sara was served by
publication in Nevada and personally  served in New York, but did not answer or
appear in the action.  Sara was never in Nevada.

   5. July 22, 1929 -- A final decree of divorce was granted Leo in the Nevada
action.

   6. July 29, 1929 -- Leo married Elsie Gordon in California.  At the time of
their marriage Elsie knew that Leo had been divorced from Sara in the manner
described above.  Leo and Elsie lived together in California as man and wife
until Leo's death.  One child was born to them, Arlene.

   7. September 6, 1936 -- Sara married Milton Lewis in New York.  Within two
years of the marriage Elsie learned of it.  Elsie testified that thereafter, in
reliance on the foregoing facts and the failure of Sara to challenge the
validity of the Nevada decree, she continued to cohabit with Leo as his wife and
to work with him in their business until his death.  She also testified she
would have done none of these things had Sara at any time successfully
challenged the validity of the Nevada decree prior to Leo's death.

   8. November 14, 1939 -- Leo and Elsie were without funds or assets.

   9. Between August 29, 1947, and July 31, 1949 -- The property which is the
subject of this litigation was purchased at various times during this period by
Leo and Elsie solely with funds accumulated by them through their joint efforts
after November 14, 1939.  The property was conveyed to and intended to be held
by them in joint tenancy, and was held by them as joint tenants until Leo's
death.

   10. October 17, 1949 -- Sara obtained a decree of the Supreme Court of New
York annulling her marriage to Milton.  The bill, filed by Sara, alleged that
she and Milton "were duly married" in New York on September 6, 1936; that their
marriage was the second marriage for both of them; and that   Milton had induced
her to marry him by fraud and misrepresentation as to his financial means to
support her and Lucille, the daughter of Sara and Leo.  The New York court found
that Sara and Milton "were duly married" on September 6, 1936, in New York and
that said marriage was the second marriage for both of them.  The decree
annulled the marriage on the alleged ground of fraud.

   11. May 9, 1950 -- Leo died in the county of Los Angeles.  He left a will
dated November 21, 1943, which was admitted to probate on January 5, 1951, in
which he bequeathed and devised all of his property, one-half to Elsie, and
one-fourth  each to Lucille and Arlene.  Plaintiff was appointed special
administrator of the estate.

   The court found that: At all times since December 21, 1921, Leo was the
lawful wedded husband of Sara; the marriage of Leo and Elsie was void; Elsie
never was the lawful wedded wife of Leo; the Nevada decree obtained by Leo was
void; Sara is not estopped or barred by laches to assert her claim to the
property involved by reason of the invalidity of the Nevada decree; the property
was purchased by Leo and Sara during their marriage solely out of their
community property;  Leo, during his lifetime, conveyed an undivided half
interest [ILLEGIBLE WORD] the property to Elsie.  The judgment decreed that
Sara, subject to administration of Leo's estate, and Elsie, is each the owner
and entitled to the possession of an undivided half interest in the property.

   The contest is actually between Elsie and Sara.  Elsie asserts, as ground for
reversal, that on the undisputed facts Sara is estopped to attack or assert the
invalidity of the Nevada decree, and that she (Elsie) is the owner of the
property in its entirety.  We have concluded her contention must be sustained.

     It is axiomatic that one who is silent when he ought to speak cannot speak
when he ought to be silent. (See Code Civ. Proc., § 1962(3).)   It is
established doctrine in this state that a spouse who remarries with knowledge of
and in reliance on a decree of divorce secured by the other spouse, is estopped
from contesting the validity of the decree. In the recent case of Wendell v.
Wendell, 111 Cal.App.2d 899 [245 P.2d 342], the court said (p. 902): "The law is
well settled in this state that one who remarries with knowledge of and in
reliance on a divorce secured by the other spouse,  is estopped to deny the
validity of the divorce. ( Bruguiere v. Bruguiere, 172 Cal. 199 [155 P. 988,
Ann.Cas. 1917E 122]; Kelsey v. Miller, 203 Cal. 61 [263 P. 200]; In re Kyle, 77
Cal.App.2d 634 [176 P.2d 96]; Rediker v. Rediker, 35 Cal.2d 796 [221 P.2d 1].)"
1 Bruguiere v. Bruguiere, 172 Cal. 199 [155 P.2d 988, Ann.Cas. 1917E 122], held
that a wife, divorced by her husband in a court of a state other than that of
his residence, was estopped from attacking the decree because of her subsequent
marriage to another.  The rule was reaffirmed in Kelsey v. Miller, 203 Cal. 61,
86-87 [263 P. 200]. (See, also, Hensgen v. Silberman, 87 Cal.App.2d 668 [197
P.2d 356]; Adoption of D. S., 107 Cal.App.2d 211, 214 [236  P.2d 821]; Appeal of
Richardson, 132 Pa. 292 [19 A. 82]; Woodson v. Colored Grand Lodge of K. of H.,
97 Miss. 210 [52 So. 457]; Harper v. Fears, 168 Miss. 505 [151 So. 745, 93
A.L.R. 341]; Joy v. Miles, 190 Miss. 255 [199 So. 771]; Moore v. Robinson, 139
S.C. 393 [137 S.E. 697]; Anno.  28 A.L.R. 1126.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   The
Supreme Court unanimously denied a hearing.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The accepted rule is declared in the Restatement as follows: "The validity
of a divorce decree cannot be questioned in a proceeding concerning any right or
other interest arising out of the marital relation, either by a spouse who has
obtained such decree of divorce from a court which had no jurisdiction, or by a
spouse who takes advantage of such decree by remarrying.

   "Comment: . . . a spouse who treats as valid a decree of divorce by
remarrying is precluded from subsequently disputing the validity of the decree
although he neither obtained the decree nor was personally before the court
which rendered it.  Illustrations: 1. A obtains a divorce in a state where
neither he nor  his wife is domiciled. B, his wife, knowing that the decree has
been granted, marries another man.  A dies.  B is barred from claiming a widow's
share in A's estate." (Rest. Conflict of Laws, § 112.)

   To refuse to permit Sara to contest the validity of the Nevada decree does
not mean that the courts of this state recognize the Nevada decree as valid, but
only that it is not open to her in this action to say it is void. ( Watson v.
Watson, 39 Cal.2d 305, 307-308 [246 P.2d 19];  Bernheimer v. Bernheimer, 103
Cal.App.2d 643, 647 [230 P.2d 17].)

   Sara urges that Civil Code section 150.1, enacted in 1949 (Stats. 1949, ch.
1292, p. 2275), prevents application of the estoppel rule.  Section 150.1 reads:
"A divorce obtained in another jurisdiction shall be of no force or effect in
this State, if both parties to the marriage were domiciled in this State at the
time the proceeding for the divorce was commenced." The section prohibits the
giving of force or effect to the divorce.  In holding that a spouse is estopped
from asserting that a decree of divorce is invalid a court does not give any
force or effect to the decree. It assumes the decree is invalid and of no force
or effect.  It merely says that because of the particular circumstances the
spouse is precluded from asserting its invalidity.

     The doctrine of estoppel is not inconsistent with section 150.1.   The
section merely declares a rule of  nonrecognition which has always existed in
California.  It has been invariably held that a foreign divorce decree procured
on simulated residence has no force or effect in this state.  ( Crouch v. Crouch
, 28 Cal.2d 243, 250 [169 P.2d 897]  and cases there cited.)   The rule of
estoppel has never been considered by the courts of this state to be
inconsistent with the rule that a foreign divorce decree obtained on simulated
residence has no force or effect.  In applying the rule of estoppel the courts
have assumed that the decree was invalid and therefore of no force or effect.  (
Harlan v. Harlan, 70 Cal.App.2d 657 [161 P.2d 490].) We cannot hold that a mere
statutory declaration of what had theretofore been a rule of decision is so
inconsistent with the rule of estoppel as to preclude application of the latter
rule.

   Massachusetts and New Jersey have had nonrecognition statutes for many years.
Notwithstanding those statutes, the courts of those states apply the rule of
estoppel when the circumstances are appropriate.  Langewald v. Langewald, 234
Mass. 269 [125 N.E. 566, 39 A.L.R. 674], a libel by a wife for divorce, is in
point.  A statute of Massachusetts provided that if an inhabitant of that
commonwealth went into another state or country to obtain a divorce for a cause
which occurred while the parties resided in Massachusetts, or for a cause which
would not authorize a divorce which by its laws,  such divorce should be of no
force or effect in Massachusetts.  (Rev. Laws [1920], ch. 152, § 35.) The
defendant husband had obtained a divorce in Wyoming under circumstances which
rendered it of no force or effect under the Massachusetts statute.  The wife had
voluntarily appeared in the Wyoming action, agreed to a property settlement, and
had taken advantage of the decree by accepting the payments which it ordered the
husband to make to her.  The Massachusetts court said the decree was of no force
or effect in that commonwealth, but held that the statute did not impair the
doctrine of estoppel, saying (125 N.E. 568): "Having done this, the wife as was
said in Loud v. Loud, 129 Mass. 14, 19, 'cannot treat' the husband's 'subsequent
marriage and cohabitation with another woman as a violation of his marital
obligations to herself.  The defense is allowed [to the husband], not upon that
ground of a strict estoppel, but because her own conduct amounts to a connivance
at or acquiescence in, his subsequent marriage.' Chapman v. Chapman, 224 Mass.
427, and cases cited at 435, 113 N.E. 359, L.R.A. 1916F 528; Bidwell v. Bidwell,
139 N.C. 402, 412, 52 S.E. 55, L.R.A.  (N.S.) 324, 111 Am.St.Rep 797; Nichols v.
Nichols,  25 N.J.Eq. 60; Fairchild v. Fairchild, 53 N.J.Eq. 678, 34 Atl. 10, 51
Am.St.Rep 650; Andrews v. Andrews, 176 Mass. 92, 96, 57 N.E. 333." The libel was
dismissed.  (See, also, United States v.  21.91 Acres of Land in Hampden County,
Mass. (D.C. Mass.) 50 F.Supp. 797.) Andrews v. Andrews, 176 Mass. 92 [57 N.E.
333], cited by Sara, is not analogous: The question of estoppel by remarrying
was not involved.  The court did not hold that an estoppel would never lie, but
only that in the circumstances of that case an estoppel had not been
established.  As will be noted the Andrews case was cited as authority for the
holding in the Langewald case.  It was distinguished in Chapman v. Chapman, 224
Mass. 427 [113 N.E. 359, 361, L.R.A. 1916F 528], in which a wife, who had
remarried after rendition of an assertedly invalid divorce decree, was held
estopped to assert its invalidity. Bruguiere v. Bruguiere, 172 Cal. 199 [155 P.
988, Ann.Cas. 1917E 122], was cited as authority for the holding.

    Sleeper v. Sleeper, 129 N.J.Eq. 94 [18 A.2d 1], applied the rule of estoppel
notwithstanding a nonrecognition statute.  The bill was by a wife for separate
maintenance and to void an earlier Nevada divorce decree obtained by her
husband.  The wife had appeared in and contested the Nevada action.  About two
years after the Nevada decree the husband remarried. A New Jersey statute
provided that full faith and credit should be given to a decree of divorce by a
court of competent jurisdiction in another state when the jurisdiction of such
court was obtained in the manner and in substantial conformity with the
conditions prescribed in other specified New Jersey statutes.  One of the other
specified statutes required, as a condition upon the privilege of instituting a
suit for divorce in New Jersey, bona fide residence there for a period of at
least two years next preceding the commencement of the suit.  The husband had
not resided in Nevada the required two years.  The suit for separate maintenance
was filed four and one-half months after the husband remarried. The court held (
18 A.2d 4): "New rights had arisen on the assumption of a legal status which
Mrs. Sleeper, over a long period, allowed to stand unchallenged notwithstanding
full opportunity to challenge.  Whether or not the facts incident to, and the
circumstances under which she entered into and vigorously conducted her defense
in, the Nevada suit would, by themselves, bar the relief now sought is not
determined; but those facts and circumstances, followed by her long inaction and
the intervention of the new marriage  contracted in good faith after a suitable
waiting period, do, in our opinion, serve to place her in laches and to bar her
from the relief prayed in her bill."

   The earlier case of Hollingshead v. Hollingshead, 91 N.J.Eq. 261 [110 A. 19],
a decision by a New Jersey trial court, cited by Sara, is factually dissimilar.
The suit was by a wife for maintenance.  The wife had previously secured a
decree of divorce in Nevada.  The question was one of pleading.  The pleading
alleged that the husband had caused the wife to secure the divorce by fraud and
duress.  The court held that if the husband's alleged fraud and duress were
proved it precluded any estoppel which might have arisen from the fact that the
wife, who was attacking the Nevada decree, had herself procured it.  It was
expressly recognized that an estoppel would lie in appropriate situations, the
court saying (110 A. 24): "The true rule, then, would seem to be that, where a
suitor comes into equity and asks for relief, notwithstanding a foreign decree
of divorce, which, if valid, would be a bar to his or her suit, which decree is
void for lack of jurisdiction, but which was obtained by the present
complainant, equity will examine into all the facts, and will accord or refuse
its aid upon general equitable principles, according to whether or not it deems
it conscionable so to do.  Among the facts and circumstances which are or may be
material factors in such a controversy are . . . whether there are children by
such second marriage; whether the complainant has 'accepted the benefits' of the
divorce, such as alimony, or by marrying again; . . .." To claim that the
Hollingshead case is an authority in support of Sara, in the case at bar, is to
ignore the distinction the New Jersey court clearly indicated in its opinion in
that case.

    We hold that Civil Code, section 150.1, does not prevent application of the
rule of estoppel.

   At no time subsequent to the date of the Nevada decree and prior to the death
of Leo did Sara question, or take any action to assert the invalidity of, that
decree. She acquiesced in it and married Milton.  She made no complaint or
protest, no claim of invalidity, no attempt to assert any interest in the
property being accumulated by Elsie and Leo.  She did not seek to have, nor did
she have, her marriage to Milton annulled on the ground she had not been validly
divorced from Leo, but on the ground of Milton's fraud.  She permitted Elsie to
believe that she (Elsie) was the lawful wife of Leo, to live and care for him as
a dutiful spouse, to secure  the benefits and incur the obligations incident to
a valid marriage, and to work and pool her earnings with his in order to
contribute to their joint savings and to enhance what she was led to believe was
their community property.  Sara lost nothing by Leo's death.  In fact, from the
time of the Nevada decree, there was a tacit relinquishment by each of all
claims upon the other.  Sara contributed neither money nor her industry nor
prudence to the accumulation of the property in which she now claims an
interest.  The property was all acquired while she was married to Milton.  She
is estopped by every principle of law and equity from attacking the Nevada
decree or asserting its invalidity.

     A putative marriage is one which has been solemnized in due form and
celebrated in good faith by both parties but which by reason of some legal
infirmity is either void or voidable.  On the facts it cannot be questioned that
Elsie entered into the marriage and thereafter lived with Leo as husband and
wife in good faith and under the bona fide belief that the marriage was valid.
It is the law in this state that on dissolution of a putative marriage the
property which the de facto spouses have acquired as a result of their joint
efforts is to be treated as though it was the accumulation of a valid marriage.
Estate of Krone, 83 Cal.App.2d 766 [189 P.2d 741], is in point.  In the Krone
case Fanny married Isaac believing in good faith that she had been validly
divorced, whereas in fact a final decree had not been entered.  They lived
together as husband and wife, and by their efforts accumulated property which
they agreed should be joint and should go to the survivor on the death of the
other.  After Isaac died, his children by the first marriage claimed and were
awarded half of that property.  In modifying the judgment so as to award all of
the property to the putative wife the court said (p. 769): "[The] preponderant
holdings of the appellate courts coincide with the view that upon the
dissolution of a putative marriage by decree of annulment or by death the wife
is to take the same share to which she would have been entitled as a legal
spouse. However, none of the authorities reviewed involved a consideration of
the statute subsequently enacted whereby the surviving spouse of a valid
marriage inherits the entire estate in event of intestacy.  ( Prob. Code, § 201
.) But the logic appears irrefutable that if according to statute the survivor
of a valid, ceremonial marriage shall be entitled to take all of the community
estate upon its dissolution, then by parity of reasoning why should not  the
wife inherit the entire estate of a putative union upon the death of her husband
intestate?  Clearly she does inherit all.

   "That appellant herein should be entitled to the inventoried estate is
implemented by the finding that she and decedent 'were partners with joint and
equal rights as partners,' and that all the property of the estate was acquired
by the parties during the marriage. But aside from the extraordinary services
rendered by appellant she justly claims the estate by virtue of the authorities
above reviewed, pursuant to section 201, supra.  This section had not been
enacted at the time of the pronouncement of the Coats [160 Cal. 671 (118 P. 441,
36 L.R.A.N.S. 844)] and Schneider [183 Cal. 335 (191 P. 533, 111 A.L.R. 1386)]
cases and for that reason it was not mentioned in either of them which may
explain the silence of the subsequent decisions upon its provisions.   However,
in view of the positive declarations in such later decisions it would now be
contrary to established law to deny to this putative wife her rights as a
surviving spouse to inherit the total of the gains of the putative marriage."
And the rule is applicable in a contest between two spouses. The fact that the
contest in Estate of Krone was between a putative wife and children of a first
wife does not make it any less an authority.  The children in the Krone case
were estopped because as heirs of their ancestor, the first wife, they were in
privity with her, and were thus bound by an estoppel which bound the ancestor.
(See Estate of Davis, 38 Cal.App.2d 579, 585 [101 P.2d 761, 102 P.2d 545]; 19
Am.Jur. 811, § 155.) In Mazzenga v. Rosso, 87 Cal.App.2d 790 [197 P.2d 770], the
first wife contended that "The rights of a 'putative wife' do not prevail over
those of the 'de jure' wife upon the death of the bigamous husband." The court
answered by applying the rule stated in Estate of Krone, supra, and held that
the putative wife was entitled to all the property.  There, as here, the
property had been held in joint tenancy by the putative wife and the deceased
husband.

   The suggestion that Elsie must have known that the Nevada decree was invalid
is without foundation in the evidence.  It is contrary to her uncontradicted
testimony.   It cannot be said that knowledge of a laywoman that another
obtained a Nevada decree of divorce, after complying with the residence
requirements of that state, conclusively establishes that she knew the divorce
was invalid. When we note the great difficulty courts and lawyers have had in
determining when an out-of-state divorce decree is or is not valid, it would be
incongruous indeed to charge a laywoman with absolute  knowledge merely because
she knew that a divorce decree had been rendered by a state other than that of
the residence of the parties.  (See Williams v. North Carolina, 317 U.S. 287 [63
S.Ct. 207, 87 L.Ed. 279, 143 A.L.R. 1273]; Williams v. North Carolina, 325 U.S.
226 [65 S.Ct 1092, 89 L.Ed. 1577, 157 A.L.R. 1366]; Sherrer v. Sherrer, 334 U.S.
343 [68 S.Ct. 1087, 1097, 92 L.Ed. 1429, 1 A.L.R.2d 1355]; Coe v. Coe, 334 U.S.
378 [68 S.Ct. 1094, 1097, 92 L.Ed. 1451, 1 A.L.R.2d 1376].) There is not a
scintilla of evidence that Elsie knew that Leo had not been validly divorced
from Sara.  To assume that she did know would impute to her an intention to
enter into a meretricious relation.  Sara obviously believed the divorce was
valid.  A different belief cannot be attributed to Elsie.  (See Estate of Krone,
83 Cal.App.2d 766, 768 [189 P.2d 741].)

     We hold, on the undisputed facts, as a matter of law, that Sara has no
interest in the property, and that the entirety is vested in Elsie.

     Since the facts are not disputed, Elsie suggested, in her opening brief,
that in the event of a reversal it should be with directions to render judgment
in her favor.  Sara does not take issue with the suggestion.  Accordingly she is
deemed to have acquiesced therein.  ( Reininger v. Eldon Mfg. Co., 114
Cal.App.2d 240, 245 [250 P.2d 4].)

   The judgment is reversed with directions to the superior court to amend the
findings of fact and conclusions of law in conformity with the views we have
expressed, and to render judgment adjudging that Elsie Gordon is the owner and
entitled to the possession of all of the property described in the
cross-complaint in its entirety, and that Sara Gordon has no right, title, or
interest therein.


                              70 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             CHARLES J. L. VICKERS, Petitioner, v. THE STATE BAR OF
                             CALIFORNIA, Respondent

                                L. A. No. 19218

                          Supreme Court of California

                32 Cal. 2d 247; 196 P.2d 10; 1948 Cal. LEXIS 221


                                 July 30, 1948

PRIOR-HISTORY:     PROCEEDING to review a recommendation of disbarment of an
attorney.

COUNSEL: Morris Lavine for Petitioner.

Fairfax Cosby and Jerold E. Weil for Respondent.

JUDGES: In Bank. Carter, J., dissents.

OPINION BY: THE COURT

OPINION

     Upon the petition of Charles J. L. Vickers, this court issued a writ to
review a disciplinary proceeding in which the Board of Governors of The State
Bar recommended that he be disbarred.

   The notice to show cause charged Vickers with three counts of professional
misconduct. First, The State Bar asserted, he  intentionally misled the court in
connection with a petition for special letters of administration upon the estate
of Olive Agnes Vickers, also known as Agnes Kirk.  The second count alleged that
after accepting a fee for legal services, he told a client that his action would
soon come to trial when, in fact, no complaint had been filed.  Finally, Vickers
was charged with  the appropriation of a typewriter belonging to a client.  Each
of these charges was denied by the petitioner and the matter proceeded to a
hearing before a local administrative committee.

   As a witness in his own behalf, Vickers related that on September 2, 1942, in
the Superior Court of Los Angeles County, his wife (nee Georgia Moore) obtained
an interlocutory decree of divorce. Olive Kirk was an acquaintance at this time.
On a visit to Ohio, she became ill and Vickers joined her there.  Early in
November they started for California by plane, but on account of travel
priorities only got as far as El Paso.  They went to a hotel there and
registered as man and wife.

   On November 21st, about a week after their arrival, Vickers consulted William
A. Cocke, an El Paso attorney specializing in Mexican divorces. There is
considerable conflict in the testimony as to how Cocke's name was obtained.
Vickers' testimony was that Olive made the appointment and persuaded him to go
to see Cocke.  At a meeting in Cocke's office on that day, certain legal aspects
of the proposed proceeding were discussed and a number of papers were signed.
Some of them concerned statistical data in regard to the marriage of Vickers and
Georgia Moore; others, including a power of attorney, written in Spanish,
Vickers signed without reading or inquiring about their contents.

   The same day, Vickers and Cocke crossed the international boundary line to
Juarez, Mexico, and in a public building there Vickers signed "some Spanish
roll." Vickers testified at one time that he believed this signature was "for
the divorce" but he later said that it was only for the purpose of establishing
residence, which accords with Cocke's explanation of the document.  Several
persons were present at the time of signing the roll but no testimony was taken
nor was anything translated for Vickers.  He "got a divorce decree" at that
time, he told the committee, but his later testimony shows that he was not
referring to a judgment in writing.  Vickers and Cocke then returned to El Paso
and Vickers did not make any further appearance in the matter.

    Two days later, in El Paso, upon an affidavit stating that he was a single
man, Vickers obtained a license to marry Olive.  They immediately went through a
marriage ceremony before a local judge.  The following day, a complaint for
divorce by Vickers against Georgia was filed in the Civil Court of First
Instance in Juarez.

   After the marriage ceremony Vickers and Olive resumed their journey to Los
Angeles by plane and lived in her apartment.  During the next five months,  they
lived together as man and wife, and introduced each other as such.  In May,
1943, because of Olive's ill health, they went to Texas.  Deciding to stay
there, Vickers secured part-time employment at electrical work and in a cigar
stand.  Early in July, they received word that property located in Los Angeles,
title to which stood in the name of Olive, was about to be sold.  They returned
to Los Angeles and Olive died there on July 29th.

   A few days later, Vickers filed a petition for special letters of
administration "In the Matter of the Estate of Olive Agnes Vickers, also known
as Olive Agnes Kirk." In this petition Vickers alleged that he was the husband
of the decedent. At the same time, he petitioned for letters of administration.
The petition for special letters was granted immediately, but before the date
set for the hearing of the application for letters of administration, a creditor
of the decedent petitioned for revocation of the special letters which had been
granted.  In this petition, it was alleged that these letters had been granted
to Vickers upon "the stated ground of necessity to enable him to pay decedent's
funeral and interment expenses" but that he "made no move to have the body taken
care of" and decedent's mother "was forced to pay the expenses of funeral
services and interment." Upon a hearing, the special letters were revoked and
the decedent's mother was appointed administratrix of the estate.

   In his testimony before the committee, Vickers gave two reasons for making
application for special letters of administration. First, he said, he was
without funds, and burial expenses amounting to approximately  $ 352 could not
be paid unless he obtained the money from the estate.  His second reason was
that because of the death of Olive, the escrow for the sale of her property
could not be completed.  The holder of a second trust deed then threatened to
foreclose, and special letters were applied for in order to complete the escrow
and save the equity in the property.

    The State Bar charges that, in making application for special letters of
administration, Vickers intentionally misled the court as to the true facts by
representing that he was the husband of the decedent. At that time, it is
alleged, Vickers knew, or should have known, that such a statement was untrue.
Other allegations are that the same statement was included in his petition for
letters of administration and each of them was made "for the sole purpose of
obtaining letters of administration of an estate in which you had no legal
interest or right thereto as an heir at law or otherwise, nor any legal right to
apply for such letters."

   According to the probate judge who granted the petition for special letters
of administration, Vickers stated to him that the decedent was his wife.  The
representations in regard to the nature of the property owned by the decedent,
and its value, were substantially the same as those made in the petition.  When
he made the order, he had no knowledge of the prior marriage to Georgia nor of
the divorce proceedings.  At that time, the judge told the committee, "he
appeared as any reasonable person would have appeared under the same
circumstances, having recently experienced a death in his immediate family, . .
. he seemed to be upset and disturbed mentally."

   As justifying his representations to the probate court, Vickers told the
committee that when Olive died he was without funds and had to borrow money for
her burial expenses; the purpose of the proceeding was to obtain money to
finance the funeral and purchase a grave.  And following the issuance of special
letters of administration to him, he told the attorney for the mother of the
deceased that as he was going into the Army he could not act as administrator;
he was not interested in the estate beyond providing money for funeral expenses,
and would be satisfied to allow the mother and her attorney to make a fair
distribution of the property.  The estate to be administered upon was in part
his separate property, he claimed, but to avoid a deficiency judgment on record
against him, he had Olive Kirk take title to the home, in which there was about
an $ 800 equity, in her maiden name.  According to this testimony, Vickers
received only $ 16 from the estate.

   Joseph Musgrove, the attorney for the mother, testifying for The State Bar,
told the committee that he had obtained the revocation of Vickers' letters, and
then had the mother appointed as administratrix.  In discussing the matter with
him, said Musgrove, the explanation made by Vickers for his conduct was that
"she wanted to be married and to please her  I did go through with the
ceremony." But Vickers added, "I also had it annulled." Further, Musgrove quoted
Vickers as saying, "for the purpose of administering the estate I think this
ceremony that we went through in Texas will be sufficient to qualify me as her
husband even though the marriage wasn't valid."

   Manuel Ruiz, Jr., licensed to practice in California and also in Mexico,
testified on behalf of The State Bar, that at the time in question, there was
merely a one-day residential requirement for a divorce proceeding, and after the
suit was commenced, unless the action was contested, the plaintiff did not have
to return; all necessary appearances could be made by counsel.  However, he
added, where the defendant did not contest or raise an issue, the shortest time
within which a default could be entered under the circumstances related by
Vickers was about 18 days from the date of filing the complaint.  Moreover,
entry of default, he said, was a prerequisite to the pronouncing of judgment and
the issuance of a decree.

   Upon this evidence the local committee found that the allegation of Vickers
in the petitions for letters of administration concerning his marital
relationship to Olive Agnes Vickers "was false and untrue and  was known by the
respondent to be false and untrue and was made for the purpose of deceiving the
judge of the Superior Court before whom . . . [those petitions] would be heard,
and the judge before whom the petition for special letters of administration was
heard was deceived by said allegation." The finding in regard to the charge that
Vickers had made false representations to a client is in favor of the
petitioner.  As to the last count, the committee determined that a client of
Vickers loaned him a typewriter, reasonably worth $ 56, which he sold for $ 30
without accounting for the proceeds, notwithstanding a demand from the client.

   The committee's conclusions of law from these findings were that in making
the representations to the court in the probate matter and in selling the
typewriter without paying its reasonable value, Vickers committed acts of moral
turpitude, and violated his oath and duties as an attorney at law; also, the
committee concluded, he commingled his property with that of a client.  As
discipline, the committee recommended that on count one Vickers be disbarred;
that count two be dismissed; and on count three, that he be suspended for a
period of six months.  Except for two inconsequential changes, the   findings of
the local administrative committee were adopted by the Board of Governors, which
recommended that the petitioner be disbarred. In fixing the degree of
discipline, the Board of Governors took into consideration the suspension of
Vickers for two years on account of professional misconduct, ordered by this
court on July 5, 1944 (Bar Misc. 1808).

   The petitioner contends that the evidence is insufficient to support the
findings of the Board of Governors.  In defense of his representations to the
court in the probate matter, he argues that as he went through a marriage
ceremony with Olive Kirk in Texas, he was her husband, and his status as such
could be affected only by an annulment of the marriage; no annulment ever was
had, hence, in law, he was the husband of Olive Kirk at the time of her death.
Moreover, Vickers says, his action did not involve professional misconduct as
such, but related only to his private life.  As to the other charge, he asserts
that Guthrie, the client who left the typewriter with him, solicited and
received considerable legal advice without paying for it, and is "a skilled and
congenital cheating chisler." Under these circumstances, Vickers contends,  the
penalty recommended by the Board of Governors was much too severe.  But in any
event, he concludes, the board erred in taking into consideration his two-year
suspension from the practice of law for professional misconduct. In support of
its action, The State Bar contends that there is no deficiency in the evidence
as to either offense, that the punishment recommended is justified, and that in
fixing discipline a prior suspension may be considered.

     Section 6103 of the Business and Professions Code provides as to an
attorney that "any violation of the oath taken by him, or of his duties as such
attorney, constitute causes for disbarment or suspension." By section 6068,
subsection (d) of that code, it is stated that, "It is the duty of an attorney
to . . . never seek to mislead the judge or any judicial officer by an artifice
or false statement of fact or law." In the same code it is further provided that
an attorney may be disbarred for "[the] commission of any act involving moral
turpitude, dishonesty or corruption, whether the act is committed in the course
of his relation as an attorney or otherwise, and whether the act is a felony or
misdemeanor or not.  (§ 6106.)

     Vickers'  commission of the acts of professional misconduct charged in
count one of the order to show cause depends first upon whether his
representation to the probate  court was in fact untrue, and secondly, whether
he knew that his statement was false and he intended thereby to deceive the
court.  In this latter connection the recently stated rule is that "[the]
presentation to a court of a statement of fact known to be false presumes an
intent to secure a determination based upon it and is a clear violation of the
quoted provision [§ 6068, subsec. (d)].  . . .  The conduct denounced by the
Business and Professions Code is not the act of an attorney by which he
successfully  misleads the court, but the presentation of fact, known by him to
be false, which tends to do so" (Pickering v. State Bar, 24 Cal.2d 141, 144-145
[148 P.2d 1]).

     After the matter was argued before this court, it was "referred to the
Board of Governors of The State Bar with instructions to take further evidence
with respect to the circumstances surrounding petitioner's divorce allegedly
obtained in the State of Chihuahua, Mexico, from Georgia Vickers, and his good
faith in subsequently representing to the probate court his marital relationship
to Olive Agnes Vickers." In the later proceedings, Vickers stated to the
committee that at the time of making application for special letters of
administration, he believed he was the legal surviving husband of Olive.  In
explanation of his belief, Vickers said that Cocke "had me sign a register, and
told me that was all that was sufficient.  That you only had to have one day's
lapse and you were entitled to your divorce."

   This is in direct conflict with Cocke's version of the conversation.  The
attorney summarized his statements to Vickers as follows: "I told Mr. Vickers
that service of summons on his wife in the absence of waiver was absolutely
essential to legality . . . that approximately not less than twenty-one days
would have to elapse from the date of service before the decree could issue . .
. [and] four to six weeks, usually five weeks, would have to elapse from the
date of registration before the decree could issue, even in the absence of
contest. . . .  I advise him, of course, that the summons would have to be
served after the action was filed but before any decree could issue." To be
noted in this connection is Vickers' statement at the first hearing before the
committee in regard to Cocke's explanation of the law.  Vickers then testified:
"He did say that in order to effect the validity of [the decree of divorce] . .
. as far as the United States is concerned that they were going to serve notice
upon [Georgia]. . . ."

    In relating his explanation to Vickers concerning the Mexican law, Cocke
said, "I did not tell Mr. Vickers that the whole proceeding 'was all over,' and
he had secured a divorce from Georgia Josephine Moore Vickers.  I probably did
tell him that his preliminary steps had all been taken and I would not need him
further unless a contest arose."

   This accords with the record, which shows that three days later, which was
after the marriage ceremony with Olive, a complaint was filed in the Civil Court
of First Instance at Juarez whereby Vickers commenced an action for divorce
against Georgia.  A week later, at Los Angeles, she was served with a copy of
the summons and complaint, but no further proceedings have been had.  As stated
by Cocke, this was "because Mr. Vickers never put me in a financial position to
make the final tax payment which was a condition precedent to securing the
divorce decree. I heard nothing from Mr. Vickers, notwithstanding I wrote him
several letters."

   Following the presentation of evidence, the committee made supplemental
findings of fact.  It found that Vickers went to the office of the mayor of
Juarez and affixed his signature to a certificate of registration, thereby
becoming eligible to commence a proceeding for divorce. But that registration,
as Vickers then well knew, had no other force or effect.  Other findings are
that at the time of Vickers' purported marriage to Olive, he "knew and was well
aware that the same was of no legal force or effect . . .; and further, knew and
was well aware that he was not divorced from Georgia. . . ."

   Upon consideration of the evidence, the findings formerly made were affirmed
and the issue of the good faith of Vickers' representation to the court was
determined adversely to him.  Vickers knew or should have known, the committee
found, that the allegation of his petitions to the probate court concerning his
relationship to Olive was false and untrue. That representation, the committee
further found, was made with the object of intentionally misleading the court as
to the true facts "and for the sole purpose of obtaining letters of
administration of an estate in which . . . [he] had no legal interest or right
whatsoever, nor any legal right to apply for such letters." From these facts,
the committee concluded in the same form as its original  recommendation, that
Vickers violated his oath and duties as an attorney at law within the  meaning
of the Business and Professions Code, and again recommended that he be disbarred
from the practice of law.

   When the supplemental proceeding reached the Board of Governors, Vickers made
a motion for a hearing de novo.  The motion was denied but he was allowed to
present certain additional evidence.  He testified to substantially the same
facts as he had stated to the committee and asserted that he "honestly believed"
he had done everything necessary to obtain a Mexican divorce. He also declared
that at the time of his appearance in the probate court he not only "honestly
believed" that Olive was his wife, but still has that belief.  "I was absolutely
acting in good faith in obtaining the Letters of Special Administration . . .
[There] was no doubt in my mind; my only purpose was to see that she got a
decent burial."

   Other testimony of Vickers was that he did not secure the marriage license in
El Paso in the belief that his previous marriage had been dissolved.  "I knew I
had a year to wait on the California action," he explained.  But, according to
his belief, he insisted, the Juarez action resulted in his being free to marry
notwithstanding the fact that in California the decree of divorce was not final.

     The interlocutory decree of divorce obtained by Georgia could not have
become final before September 2, 1943.  This was over nine months after the
marriage ceremony in El Paso and also after the time of filing the petitions for
letters of administration. It is elementary that an interlocutory decree of
divorce does not dissolve the union.  The parties continue to be husband and
wife until the entry of a final decree after the lapse of one year.  (Civ. Code,
§ 61, subsec. 1, and § 132.) There is no substance whatever to the assertion of
Vickers that by virtue of the Texas ceremony he was technically the "husband" of
Olive under a voidable marriage. At all times shown by this record he was the
husband of Georgia and by the terms of section 61 of the Civil Code, his
purported marriage to Olive not only was "illegal and void from the beginning"
but subject to collateral attack at any time.  (Estate of Elliott, 165 Cal. 339
[132 P. 439].)

     Vickers has had a legal education and some experience in divorce
litigation.  His marital status at the time of the marriage ceremony with Olive
and when she died primarily depended upon the status of his marriage to Georgia.
He admits knowledge of all of the essential facts of the proceeding brought by
Georgia, and considering all of the circumstances surrounding his acts with
Olive in El Paso, the findings of fact and conclusions of law made by the
administrative committee, and adopted with minor changes only by the Board of
Governors, are fully justified by the evidence.

   It is argued that, at the worst, Vickers was in the position of a putative or
de facto spouse, and for that reason had a standing in court in matters relating
to property.  But his argument begs the question, for the principal issue in the
present case is whether or not he acted in good faith in representing that he
was the surviving husband of Olive.  He relies upon Schneider v. Schneider, 183
Cal. 335 [191 P.  533, 11 A.L.R. 1386], and Coats v. Coats, 160 Cal. 671 [118 P.
441, 36 L.R.A.N.S. 844], but in these cases the parties who entered into the
marriage acted in good faith and honest belief in their right to do so.

   Concerning the complaint of Vickers as to the severity of the discipline
recommended, the representation to a court of a fact known by an attorney to be
false is a serious matter, particularly when that fact relates to his own
affairs and is the basis for an order by which he obtains financial advantage.
Vickers has been under suspension as discipline imposed in two proceedings
brought upon four different complaints against him, and the record of his prior
misconduct was properly considered by the Board of Governors in reaching a
determination as to the discipline to be recommended upon the present charge.  (
Herron v. State Bar, 24 Cal.2d 53 [147 P.2d 543]; McGregor v. State Bar, 24
Cal.2d 283 [148 P.2d 865]; Prime v. State Bar, 18 Cal.2d 56 [112 P.2d  881].)
However, the recommendation by the Board of Governors in the present proceeding
will be modified, and it is ordered that the petitioner be suspended from the
practice of law for a period of three years commencing 30 days after the date of
the filing of this opinion.

DISSENT BY: CARTER

DISSENT

   CARTER, J.  I dissent.

   The sole basis for the judgment of suspension in this case is a claimed
knowingly false representation by petitioner to the probate court that he was
the husband of Olive Agnes Vickers, deceased, in a proceeding for special
letters of administration on her estate.  Not only is the result based upon the
wholly private conduct of petitioner unconnected with his capacity as an
attorney of law but the alleged misrepresentation was of a purely technical
import and was clearly not intended to cause injury to anyone.  Any other
conclusion finds no substantial support in the evidence.

   The judgment of suspension is based upon the finding that petitioner
knowingly misrepresented his marital status to the court in his petition as
above mentioned.  That alleged falsity must turn upon the assumption that
petitioner's marriage to Olive was invalid, which in turn depends upon the
legality of the proceedings for a divorce in Mexico.  It should be noted that
while no divorce was ever granted by the Mexican court, proceedings therefor
were commenced.  Whether or not the proceedings there taken, together with all
the other circumstances, were sufficient to make petitioner's claim that he was
Olive's husband, in bad faith, is the question presented.  It should first be
observed in this connection that the legal question as to the legality of
Mexican divorces is difficult and involved.  Mexican divorces have been held
valid (Commonwealth v. Yarnell, 313 Penn. 244 [169 A. 370]). And also invalid (
Bethune v. Bethune, 192 Ark. 811 [94 S.W.2d 1043, 105 A.L.R. 814]; Garman v.
Garman, 102 F.2d 272 [70 App.D.C. 4]; Bergeron v. Bergeron, 287 Mass. 524 [192
N.E. 86]; May v. May, 251 App.Div.. 63 [295 N.Y.S. 599]; Estate of McNutt, 36
Cal.App.2d 542 [98 P.2d 253]; du- Quesnay v. Henderson, 24 Cal.App.2d 11 [74
P.2d 294]; Kegley v. Kegley, 16 Cal.App.2d 216 [60 P.2d 482]; People v. Harlow,
9 Cal.App.2d 643 [50 P.2d 1052]; 105 A.L.R. 817). There may be an estoppel to
question the validity of the foreign decree. (Bruguiere v. Bruguiere, 172 Cal.
199 [155 P. 988, Ann.Cas. 1917E, 122]; Kelsey v. Miller, 203 Cal. 61 [263 P.
200].) In an article on Mexican marriages and divorces by William B. Stern,
Foreign Law Librarian of the Los Angeles County Law Library, appearing in the
March-April, 1945, edition of The State Bar Journal, the following statement
appears:

   "It would be beyond the scope of this article to point out details in which
the codes of the several states differ from the Old or the New Federal Civil
Codes, or from both of these codes.  But I would like to emphasize the need of
consulting the codes and laws of each particular state whose law forms the basis
of a controversial marriage or divorce. Such a search of the law should not only
comprise the  normative rules of the laws, but should also embrace statutory
provisions by which dispensatory faculties are conferred on judicial and
administrative authorities; many marriages and divorces which at first glance
seem to be defective, actually derive their validity from dispensations and
waivers."

   So far as the record in this case discloses, no judicial tribunal has passed
upon the validity of petitioner's marriage to Olive Agnes Vickers.  The petition
for revocation of the special letters of administration issued to petitioner
alleged that petitioner was not married to Olive, but other grounds were
advanced, and it does not appear upon which ground the order of revocation was
granted.  It is not claimed that the marriage was not legally consummated
according to the law of Texas where it was solemnized.  The sole claim of
invalidity is predicated upon the assumption that petitioner's marriage to
Georgia Vickers had not been dissolved at the time his marriage to Olive was
consummated, giving consideration to the point to which the proceedings had
developed and the effect thereof.  This presented a legal question which could
only be determined by a judicial tribunal in an  appropriate proceeding after
obtaining jurisdiction over the parties and the subject matter.

   It clearly appears from the record in this case that the charge against
petitioner is based upon the conclusion reached by The State Bar that petitioner
was guilty of unprofessional conduct involving moral turpitude because he made
an alleged misrepresentation relative to his marital status. In my opinion it is
not the function of The State Bar to pass upon the validity of the marital
status of members of the bar, or predicate a charge of moral turpitude against a
member of the bar upon representations made by him in good faith with respect to
his marital status, especially in a case such as this where the record shows
that the validity of petitioner's marriage to the deceased was dependent upon
the validity of divorce proceedings which petitioner claims he instituted in
Mexico where he says he was advised by legal counsel that such decree was valid
and legal and resulted in the permanent dissolution of his former marriage. Even
conceding that a judicial tribunal might determine such proceedings to be
insufficient to sever the bonds of matrimony in an appropriate proceeding to
test their validity, it would not necessarily follow that a member  of the bar
would be guilty of moral turpitude in making a representation in good faith that
such proceedings were effective before they had been adjudged invalid by a
judicial tribunal having jurisdiction to pass upon their validity.  Many cases
have been decided by the courts of last resort of several of our states and by
the Supreme Court of the United States involving questions of this character and
we find these courts divided on the question of whether or not divorce
proceedings consummated in certain states were effective to dissolve the
marriages which were the subject of such proceedings.  The following citations
reflect the wide divergence of judicial opinion which has existed and apparently
still exists on this subject.  (Sherrer v. Sherrer, 334 U.S. 343 [68 S.Ct. 1087,
92 L.Ed.   ]; Coe v. Coe, 334 U.S. 378 [68 S.Ct. 1094, 92 L.Ed.   ]; Estin v.
Estin, 334 U.S. 541 [68 S.Ct. 1213, 92 L.Ed   ]; Kreiger v. Kreiger, 334 U.S.
555 [68 S.Ct. 1221, 92 L.Ed.   ]; Williams v. State of North Carolina, 325 U.S.
226 [65 S.Ct. 1092, 89 L.Ed. 1577, 157 A.L.R. 1366]; Esenwein v. Commonwealth (
Esenwein v. Esenwein), 325 U.S. 279 [65 S.Ct. 1118, 89 L.Ed. 1608, 157 A.L.R.
1396]; Williams v. State of North Carolina, 317 U.S. 287 [63 S.Ct. 207, 87 L.Ed.
279, 143 A.L.R. 1273]; Haddock v. Haddock, 201 U.S. 562 [26 S.Ct. 525, 50 L.Ed.
867]; Andrews v. Andrews, 188 U.S. 14, 5 to 3 [23 S.Ct. 237, 47 L.Ed. 366];
Atherton v. Atherton, 181 U.S. 155 [21 S.Ct. 544, 45 L.Ed. 794]; Bell v. Bell,
181 U.S. 175 [21 S.Ct. 551, 45 L.Ed. 804]; Olds v. Olds, 219 Iowa 1395 [260 N.W.
1, 5 to 4, 261 N.W. 488]; Golden v. Golden, 41 N.M. 356 [68 P.2d 928, 3 to 2],
and 17 Am.Jur., Divorce & Separation, § 747.)

   In the concurring opinion of Mr. Justice Douglas in the Esenwein case he made
the very pertinent observation that "The question of marital capacity will often
raise an irreconcilable conflict between the policies of the two States."

   In view of the great conflict of judicial opinion as to the jurisdictional
requirements necessary to consummate a valid divorce proceeding it is not
possible for me to see how a charge of unprofessional conduct can be predicated
upon a representation made in good faith by a member of the bar relative to his
marital status where such member of the bar launches proceedings to obtain a
divorce in accordance with the law of a state or foreign country before
consummating the marriage in question.  In other words, in view of the conflict
of judicial opinion on the difficult and complex  problems involved in the
determination of the validity of the marital status, it seems to me that it is
expecting too much of a lowly member of the bar to be absolutely certain of his
marital status under the circumstances here presented.

   It is my understanding that under recent decisions of the United States
Supreme Court, the courts of one state are not required to give full faith and
credit to a divorce decree obtained in another state where jurisdictional
requirements have not been met (Williams v. State of North Carolina, 325 U.S.
226 [65 S.Ct. 1092, 89 L.Ed.  1577, 157 A.L.R. 1366]; Esenwein v. Commonwealth,
325 U.S. 279 [65 S.Ct. 1118, 89 L.Ed. 1608, 157 A.L.R. 1396]), and parties who
remarry after obtaining such a decree may be adjudged guilty of bigamy. There
are no doubt many cases of this character where no prosecution will ever be
instituted because of inaction of the prosecuting officials or where both
parties to the invalid divorce decree have remarried.  Nevertheless, the crime
of bigamy has been committed in such cases, and if a lawyer is involved, he is
subject to disbarment because the crime of bigamy certainly involves moral
turpitude.  If the majority opinion in this case is permitted to stand, then The
State Bar may successfully proceed with disbarment proceedings against every
member of the bar of this state who has remarried after his former marriage was
presumably dissolved by a decree of divorce which is subject to a jurisdictional
infirmity without a prior determination of its invalidity by a judicial tribunal
of competent jurisdiction.  In other words, The State Bar will be permitted to
perform the functions of both our criminal and civil courts in addition to its
function as an administrative agency.  This was never contemplated by even the
most ardent supporters of the State Bar Act.

   The asserted disability relied upon in order to disqualify Vickers from
entering into a marriage with the decedent was that he had not complied with the
procedural requirements necessary in order to obtain a divorce in Mexico.  To
hold that Vickers knew the falsity of the allegation in his petition for special
letters of administration that he was the husband of the deceased, and that he
made the representation with the intent to deceive, is quite different from a
determination as to what his actual marital status may have been after the
Mexican divorce proceeding and the Texas marriage ceremony, and is unsupported
by any evidence  in the entire record.  The majority opinion apparently upholds
the finding referred to upon the slim basis of what Cocke, petitioner's attorney
in the Mexican divorce proceedings, said he told petitioner.  Plainly petitioner
did not understand it in that fashion, otherwise it is not to be supposed that
he would have married Olive thereafter and commit the crime of bigamy. On the
contrary the presumption is, in accordance with his testimony, that he believed
the marriage was severed, that he acted innocently and did not violate the law.

   It is well settled in this state that when a marriage has been shown in
evidence the law raises a strong presumption of its legality. (In re Pusey, 173
Cal. 141 [159 P. 433]; Hunter v. Hunter, 111 Cal. 261, 267 [43 P. 756, 52
Am.St.Rep. 180, 31 L.R.A. 411]; Estate of Newman, 34 Cal.App.2d 706, 710 [94
P.2d 356].) There is also a presumption that a person is innocent of crime or
wrong.  (See, Code Civ. Proc., § 1963(1); Estate of Newman, supra.) (If Vickers
did not obtain a divorce in Mexico his marriage to the decedent was bigamous.)
It is obvious that these presumptions have not been dispelled in this case.
Certainly, it was to Vickers' advantage to complete the Mexican divorce
proceeding as there would have been no object in going to the trouble and
expense of hiring a lawyer and instituting a proceeding if he had no intention
of pursuing the matter to completion.  The good faith of Vickers in the premises
is shown by the fact that he lived with the deceased, outwardly manifesting
himself as her husband during the entire remainder of her life.  Although she
had a mother and brother living, it was he who was endeavoring to make the
arrangements for her funeral and burial and see that the expenses thereof were
paid.  It was for that latter purpose, primarily, that he petitioned for special
letters of administration.

   The testimony of Vickers cannot be made the basis of an inference that he
knew he had not obtained a divorce in Mexico.  An inference is a conclusion as
to the existence of a material fact that may properly be drawn from the
existence of certain primary facts.  (See, Code Civ. Proc., §§ 1832, 1958.)
Whether a particular inference can be drawn from certain evidence is a question
of law and depends upon its reasonableness.  (See, Code Civ. Proc., § 1960.) The
majority opinion points to no primary facts  testified to by Vickers from which
it can reasonably be inferred that he knew the Chihuahua court had no
jurisdiction to enter or did not enter  a divorce decree prior to the marriage
ceremony in El Paso.  On the other hand, quite to the contrary, Vickers'
testimony reveals the following: His attorney told him that it took six months
to get a divorce in the State of Baja California; 30 days in Sonora, and by
virtue of special treaty with the State of Chihuahua, a divorce could be
obtained there in one day.  When in Juarez, Chihuahua, he appeared in court
before a judge and signed an official "document roll." While returning to El
Paso his attorney told him it "was all over" and that he had a divorce. He was
told that it was not essential to the validity of the divorce in Chihuahua that
the defendant be notified, because under the laws of Chihuahua the opposing
party could not contest the grounds for divorce; that the fact of the filing of
a complaint is taken to show dissatisfaction and incompatibility and the divorce
is automatically rendered.  He was further informed that notice would be sent to
the county of the residence of the defendant for personal service upon her, in
accordance with the general practice carried on in order to satisfy the comity
requirements of some of the adjoining states.  Also, that this notice, when
returned, would be filed in the divorce action nunc pro tunc.  His testimony
further reveals that he informed the court of the residence address where the
defendant could be found and served.

   Furthermore, under the facts of this case, Vickers' state of mind at the time
he went through the marriage ceremony in El Paso has no bearing upon what he
knew at the time he filed his petition for special letters in the estate of
Olive Agnes Vickers.  In other words, even if it were possible to infer from
Vickers' testimony concerning the notice or waiver that was to be sent or
obtained from his first wife, that he must have known that no divorce decree had
been entered prior to the El Paso marriage ceremony, this furnishes no support
for the charge in this proceeding that he knew that he was not the husband of
the deceased eight months later when he filed his petition in the probate court.
This for the reason that Vickers was also told that this waiver or notice would
be entered nunc pro tunc.  The question is not whether this actually could or
could not confer jurisdiction upon the court to render a divorce decree at or
prior to the time of the marriage ceremony with the deceased (assuming such
notice or waiver to be necessary), but whether such fact furnished a reasonable
basis for Vickers to believe that it could.  In view of the further fact that
his wife could not contest the divorce suit, even if she wanted to, it appears
to have been most reasonable for him to so believe.

   The contention that Vickers knew Mexican legal procedure gains no support
from the facts of his education and experience.  At the time of the events here
concerned he was 33 years of age.  His legal experience was quite limited.  He
had been a member of The State Bar less than four years and had not practiced
elsewhere.  It need scarcely be said that the modes and methods of civil
procedure in Mexico are not matters of common knowledge to the bar of this
state.  Respondent proved what it claimed to be the law of Chihuahua, Mexico, at
the time in question by a member of the bar of that place, qualified as an
expert upon divorce law.  Moreover, Vickers did not represent himself in the
Mexican proceeding, but engaged an attorney licensed to practice in Chihuahua,
Mexico.

   I further am unable to subscribe to the majority opinion for the reason that
it characterizes the acts charged in count one of the order to show cause as
"professional misconduct." Vickers did not appear before the probate court in
his capacity as an attorney, but appeared in his personal capacity and so
advised the court.  He did not even prepare the petition, but another attorney,
whose name appears thereon, did so for him.  If by the citation of Business and
Professions Code, section 6106, the majority mean to imply that Vickers was
guilty of "moral turpitude, dishonesty, or corruption," then the opinion is
further erroneous for the reason that there was no attempt at personal gain.
Vickers obtained the appointment as special administrator for legitimate reasons
within the purview of the Probate Code provisions for such appointment. He was
in need of funds to provide a funeral and decent burial for the  one with whom
he had been living, ostensibly, and in good faith as his wife.  Immediate action
was also necessitated in order to consummate a sale of real property that had
belonged to the deceased and petitioner before such sale was rendered impossible
by virtue of foreclosure proceedings then under way.  A special administrator is
an emergency officer, appointed  where necessary, not to conduct administration
or distribution of the estate, but solely to conserve the property.  (11B
Cal.Jur. 864.) He was required to post a $ 2,000 surety bond as a condition
precedent to be appointed special administrator, and it does not appear that any
claim has ever been made against the surety on account of maladministration by
Vickers nor has it been shown in this proceeding that any detriment was caused
to the estate by his appointment.

   It appears that the petition for special letters of administration was filed
six days after the death of Olive Agnes Vickers, claimed by petitioner to be his
wife, and at a time when he had but 25 cents to his name.  One's qualifications
to discharge whatever trust may be reposed in him by virtue of his profession or
general occupation should not be judged too strictly by what he does at such a
dismal hour and under stress of such circumstances.  Under any view of the facts
in this proceeding nothing is shown that is deserving of any further discipline
than that which the petitioner is now undergoing.

   In conclusion, I deem it appropriate to quote from the opinion of the
District Court of Appeal in the case of In re Kling, 44 Cal.App. 267, at page
271 [186 P. 152], where the court speaking through Mr. Justice Victor E. Shaw
said: "The record, as we read it fails to disclose any deception on the part of
appellant, or that he acted through corrupt motives or otherwise violated the
provisions of section 282 of the Code of Civil Procedure. The oath required by
section 278 of the Code of Civil Procedure of any attorney is that he will
'faithfully discharge the duties of an attorney and counselor at law to the best
of his knowledge and ability.' Moral turpitude cannot be predicated upon errors
of judgment as to the law, or action had and taken in good faith by an attorney,
openly and with notice to the adverse party under an honest assertion of legal
right, where there is no deception practiced or unfair advantage sought."
(Italics added.)

   In my opinion the proceeding against the petitioner should be dismissed.


                              71 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              DOROTHY F. SCHULZE, Respondent, v. FRANK S. SCHULZE,
                                   Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 19408

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Three

          121 Cal. App. 2d 75; 262 P.2d 646; 1953 Cal. App. LEXIS 1311


                                November 4, 1953

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  Daniel N. Stevens, Judge.

   Action for installments due under foreign judgment of separate maintenance.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Judgments -- Summary Judgments -- Issues Precluding.  --On motion for
summary judgment the court must determine whether plaintiff or defendant has
presented any facts which give rise to a triable issue or defense rather than
pass on or determine the issue itself.

(2) Id.--Summary Judgments--Affidavits.  --A summary judgment for plaintiff is
proper only if the affidavits in support of his motion state facts which if
proved would be sufficient to sustain judgment in his favor and defendant does
not by affidavit or affidavits show such facts as may be deemed by the judge
sufficient to present a triable issue of fact.

(3) Id. -- Summary Judgments -- Affidavits.  --With respect to a motion for
summary judgment, an affidavit does not raise a triable issue of fact unless it
states facts showing that the party has a good and substantial defense to
plaintiff's action or that a good cause of action exists on the merits.

(4) Id. -- Summary Judgments -- Hearing and Determination.  --Plaintiff's motion
for summary judgment in the amount accrued under a foreign judgment of separate
maintenance is properly granted despite defendant's allegations denying the
validity of a subsequent decree of divorce rendered by the foreign court, where
his pleadings do not deny that the amount did accrue under the judgment of
separate maintenance or that it is unpaid and his affidavit does not disclose a
defense.

(5) Election of Remedies--Effect of Election.  --A party who, in opposing a
motion for a summary judgment for installments due under a foreign decree of
separate maintenance, relies on the validity of a subsequent decree of divorce
rendered by the foreign court is thereby estopped to claim that the divorce is
void as a ground for opposing a subsequent motion.

(6) Id.--Effect of Election.  --A person who elects one of two available
inconsistent courses of action is thereby precluded from subsequently pursuing
the other.

(7) Appeal--Decisions Appealable.  --An order denying a motion for summary
judgment is not appealable.

(8) Id.--Decisions Appealable.  --A judgment entered on an order granting a
motion for summary judgment is appealable. (Code Civ. Proc., §§ 437c, 963.)

(9) Judgments--Summary Judgments--Hearing and Determination.  --An order denying
a motion for summary judgment does not determine any issue, its effect being
merely a finding that there is an issue of fact to be tried.

(10) Id.--Summary Judgments--Hearing and Determination.  --A final judgment for
the moving party follows the granting of a motion for summary judgment.

(11) Id. -- Summary Judgments -- Hearing and Determination.  --Denial of a
motion for summary judgment is not a final judgment but merely determines that
on the pleadings as they existed at that time there was a triable issue.

(12) Id.--Res Judicata.  --The doctrine of res judicata is that an existing
final judgment on the merits of a cause rendered by a court of competent
jurisdiction is in all subsequent actions conclusive of the rights of the
parties and of their privies, which were or might have been determined.

(13) Id.--Res Judicata.  --The application of the principle of res judicata
depends in part on an affirmative answer to the question: Was there a final
judgment on the merits?

(14) Id. -- Summary Judgments -- Hearing and Determination.  --Since an order
denying a motion for a summary judgment is not a final judgment, the order is
not res judicata.

COUNSEL: Alfred M. Klein for Appellant.

Hahn, Ross & Saunders for Respondent.

JUDGES: Vallee, J.  Shinn, P. J., and Wood (Parker), J., concurred.

OPINION BY: VALLEE

OPINION

     Appeal by defendant from a summary judgment in an action for installments
accrued under a foreign judgment for support and maintenance.

   On March 30, 1950, the circuit court of Cook County, Illinois, having
jurisdiction of the defendant, granted plaintiff a judgment for separate
maintenance in which it decreed that: 1. Under an order made in the action on
August 4, 1949, there was $ 2,660 due and owing from defendant to plaintiff for
her support and maintenance and $ 200 for her attorney's fees; 2. Defendant pay
the same to plaintiff; 3. Defendant pay plaintiff $ 60 a week for her separate
support and maintenance until further order of the court; 4. Defendant pay
plaintiff the rent of her apartment in Chicago in the sum of $ 105 a month until
further order of the court; 5.  Defendant pay plaintiff an additional attorney's
fee of $ 500.

   On October 2, 1950, plaintiff filed the complaint in the present action in
the superior court of the County of Los Angeles in which she alleged: The terms
of the Illinois judgment for separate maintenance; no part of the sums therein
ordered to be paid to plaintiff had been paid except $ 100; there were due and
owing from defendant to plaintiff $ 4,511 for support and maintenance and for
rent of her apartment and $ 700 for attorney's fees; and the judgment had not
been modified.  Plaintiff prayed that the Illinois judgment be established as a
judgment of the superior court of this state; judgment for $ 4,511 and $ 700
against defendant; defendant be ordered to pay plaintiff $ 60 a week for her
support and maintenance and $ 105 a month for the rent of her apartment in
Chicago.

    On October 20, 1950, defendant filed an answer in which he denied for want
of "sufficient information and knowledge" the allegations of the complaint with
respect to the Illinois decree, admitted he had paid plaintiff only $ 100 and
denied any sum was due or owing to plaintiff.  As a separate defense and as a
cross-complaint, defendant alleged facts for the purpose of showing a change of
circumstances after the rendition of the Illinois judgment.  He prayed that: 1.
Plaintiff take nothing; 2. If the court recognize and establish the Illinois
judgment, it supersede the provisions  thereof for the support and maintenance
of plaintiff and render judgment relieving him from further payments.  Plaintiff
answered the cross-complaint denying its allegations generally for want of
information and belief.

   On May 11, 1951, plaintiff made a motion for a summary judgment. In support
thereof she made and filed an affidavit in which she set forth the same facts as
alleged in her complaint.  In opposition thereto, defendant made and filed an
affidavit in which he stated facts for the purpose of showing a change of
circumstances after the rendition of the Illinois judgment.  He also stated that
within the preceding two months plaintiff had filed a petition in the circuit
court of Cook County, Illinois, in the action in which the judgment for separate
maintenance had been rendered, praying that that judgment be changed to one of
divorce. Defendant also filed in opposition to the motion an affidavit by his
attorney in the present action, which incorporated therein exemplified copies of
a supplemental complaint for divorce and a judgment of divorce in the Illinois
action.  The judgment recites that "due notice for leave to file the
Supplemental Complaint in Chancery for Divorce was given to Milton K. Joseph,
Esq., one of the attorneys of record for the defendant in this cause, who
personally appeared in court on April 18th, 1951; and thereupon the court
ordered that the defendant answer or otherwise plead to said Supplemental
Complaint in Chancery for Divorce within thirty (30) days thereafter, as will
more fully appear from the order of this court entered on April 18th, 1951; and
it also appearing to the court that on May 23d, 1951, this cause came on to be
heard upon the motion of the defendant to dismiss plaintiff's Supplemental
Complaint in Chancery for Divorce; and that the court, thereupon, having
considered the motion of the defendant to dismiss plaintiff's Supplemental
Complaint for Divorce and the pleadings on file, and having heard the arguments
of the  respective counsel for and in opposition of the motion to dismiss, it
denied defendant's motion to dismiss." In the judgment of divorce, the court
found that $ 8,550 was due from defendant to plaintiff and decreed that
defendant pay $ 50 a week for permanent alimony and support and $ 350 additional
attorney's fees and that defendant pay plaintiff $ 7,850, "the amount found to
be due to the plaintiff from the defendant, for her support and rent to date
under this decree." The affidavit stated that the judgment of divorce
"superseded and replaced" the judgment for separate maintenance "upon which the
present action is based." Plaintiff made and filed a counteraffidavit stating
facts for the purpose of showing no change of circumstances.

   On July 19, 1951, the motion for a summary judgment was denied on the ground
the judgment for separate maintenance had been superseded by and merged in the
judgment of divorce.

   On October 30, 1951, plaintiff was granted leave to, and she filed a
supplemental complaint denominated by stipulation as an amended and supplemental
complaint, referred to hereinafter as the supplemental complaint.  The
supplemental complaint alleged the filing of the complaint for separate
maintenance; the rendition of the judgment for separate maintenance; the
judgment of divorce and that by its terms plaintiff was awarded judgment against
defendant for $ 8,900, no part of which had been paid.  The prayer was for
judgment against defendant in that amount and interest.

   Defendant answered the supplemental complaint admitting he had been served
with summons in Illinois in the action for separate maintenance; denying that
the circuit court of Cook County, Illinois, had jurisdiction of him "in any
Supplemental Complaint for Divorce or of the subject matter" referred to in the
supplemental complaint, and denying that any sum was owing to plaintiff.  As a
separate defense defendant alleged that no summons was ever issued "in
connection with said Supplemental Complaint for Divorce"; a copy of said
supplemental complaint was never served on him, nor "was he ever duly served
personally with process of said Supplemental Complaint for Divorce," nor did he
personally appear or plead thereto, or authorize any appearance or plea to be
made or entered thereto on his behalf; the Illinois  court did not obtain
jurisdiction either of the cause of action or of the defendant sufficient to
enable it to legally render "any  such Decree of Divorce." As a further defense
the answer alleged that the judgment for separate maintenance was on a single
cause of action and disposed of all the issues made in the complaint therefor;
that the court did not reserve jurisdiction for any purpose except to carry the
judgment into effect; that by that judgment the Illinois court lost jurisdiction
of the action and of the defendant for any purpose other than "to carry out" the
judgment for separate maintenance, and did not have or retain jurisdiction to
entertain a new and separate cause of action for divorce; consequently, all
proceedings subsequent to the judgment for separate maintenance including the
judgment for divorce are null and void.

   On November 30, 1951, plaintiff moved for a summary judgment. In support
thereof, she made and filed an affidavit in which she stated all of the facts
alleged in the supplemental complaint.  She also filed an affidavit by her
attorney in this action, which stated that the record of the Illinois action
revealed that a motion to dismiss the supplemental complaint for divorce was
filed therein by one of the attorneys who had appeared for defendant in the
action prior to the judgment for separate maintenance, which motion was based on
the following grounds: 1. The original complaint was for separate maintenance;
the judgment for separate maintenance finally and completely adjudicated the
single cause of action stated in the complaint; the judge did not reserve
jurisdiction for any purpose except to carry the judgment into effect.  2. By
virtue of the judgment for separate maintenance, the Illinois court lost
jurisdiction of the cause for any purpose other than "to carry out" the
judgment; the Illinois court lacks jurisdiction to entertain a new and separate
cause of action as prayed for in the supplemental complaint therefor.  3.
Defendant, therefore, asks that the supplemental complaint be dismissed for want
of jurisdiction. The affidavit further stated the record of the Illinois action
reveals an order was made by the Illinois court denying defendant's motion to
dismiss and entering his default for failing to answer or otherwise plead to the
supplemental complaint for divorce; that thereafter a motion was filed in the
Illinois action by counsel for defendant requesting "that the Order heretofore
entered herein on May 23, 1951, overruling defendant's Motion to dismiss
plaintiff's Supplemental Complaint for Divorce and all subsequent orders be
vacated and set aside"; that the "Order entered May 29, 1951, setting for
hearing on June 5, 1951, plaintiff's Supplemental Complaint for Divorce" and
the "Decree for Divorce entered June 8, 1951," be vacated for want of
jurisdiction, and that an order was made by the Illinois court denying this
motion.

   On April 11, 1952, the court, in the present action, made an order which
provided that if plaintiff within a specified time filed her consent in writing
to the entry of judgment for $ 5,211 on the judgment for separate maintenance,
the motion for summary judgment would be granted in that amount, and if such
consent was not filed, that the motion would be denied.  Plaintiff filed her
written consent and judgment for $ 5,211 was entered.  Defendant appeals.

     The issue to be determined by the trial court in considering a motion for a
summary judgment is whether plaintiff or defendant has presented any facts which
give rise to a triable issue or defense, and not to pass upon or determine the
issue itself.  ( Eagle Oil & Ref. Co. v. Prentice, 19 Cal.2d 553, 555 [122 P.2d
264]; United States Fid. & Guar. Co. v. Sullivan, 93 Cal.App.2d 559, 561 [209
P.2d 429].)   A summary judgment for a plaintiff is proper only if the
affidavits in support of his motion state facts which if proved would be
sufficient to sustain judgment in his favor and defendant does not "by affidavit
or affidavits . . . show such facts as may be deemed by the judge hearing the
motion sufficient to present a triable issue of fact." ( Code  Civ. Proc., §
437c, Hardy v. Hardy, 23 Cal.2d 244, 245-247 [143 P.2d 701].)   An affidavit
does not raise a triable issue of fact unless it states "facts showing that the
party has a good and substantial defense to the plaintiff's action . . . or that
a good cause of action exists upon the merits." ( Code Civ. Proc., § 437c; Hardy
v. Hardy, supra, 246-247.)   As will appear, in view of plaintiff's consent to a
judgment for $ 5,211, the affidavits in support of the motion state facts which,
if proved, are sufficient to sustain the judgment in plaintiff's favor; and the
affidavit of defendant does not state any facts showing he has any defense to
the action.

   The cause of action alleged in the supplemental complaint is for $ 7,850,
accrued installments under the judgment for separate maintenance, and $ 1,050
ordered to be paid by the judgment for divorce. The supplemental complaint
eliminated the prayer of the original complaint that the Illinois judgment for
separate maintenance be established as a judgment of the superior court of this
state and eliminated the prayer for future support.  Defendant's assertion that
"the issue of the separate maintenance decree was not within either the
allegations nor the prayer" of the supplemental complaint is contrary to the
fact.  The supplemental complaint specifically alleged the granting of the
judgment for separate maintenance; by reference, alleged the judgment of divorce
in which the Illinois court found the facts with respect to the judgment for
separate maintenance; and prayed for judgment for a sum of money which included
the accrued installments under that judgment.  Defendant in his answer to the
supplemental complaint admitted these facts by failure to deny them.  Since
defendant in his answer to the supplemental complaint admitted that the
installments which had accrued under the judgment for separate maintenance had
not been paid, and inasmuch as he did not in his affidavit state otherwise,
there was no triable issue as to such installments.

   Defendant contends that his affidavit raised a triable issue as to the
authority of the attorney in Illinois to act for him after rendition of the
judgment for separate maintenance and as to the jurisdiction of the Illinois
court to render a judgment of divorce in the same action in which a final
judgment for separate maintenance had been rendered.  These questions were not
relevant.  There was no such triable issue raised as to the installments which
had accrued under the judgment for separate maintenance. The summary judgment
was not predicated on the accrued installments under the judgment of divorce; it
was based on installments which defendant did not deny had accrued under the
judgment for separate maintenance.

     There is another reason why defendant may not claim that the judgment of
divorce is void for want of authority in the Illinois attorney to appear for him
or for want of jurisdiction in the Illinois court.  At the time of the hearing
on the first motion for a summary judgment prior to the filing of the
supplemental complaint, his counsel in the present action made and filed an
affidavit in opposition to the motion in which he relied on the judgment of
divorce. He said in the affidavit that the judgment of divorce "superseded and
replaced" the judgment for separate maintenance, and that by reason thereof he
had "a good and substantial defense to the present complaint." On the strength
of that affidavit the motion was denied, the court stating in its order that it
found the judgment for separate maintenance has been superseded by and merged in
the judgment of divorce. On the motion for a summary judgment after the filing
of the supplemental complaint, from which judgment this appeal was  taken,
defendant made and filed an affidavit in opposition to that motion in which he
stated facts in an attempt to show that the attorney who appeared in the
Illinois action after the filing of the supplemental complaint for divorce did
so without authority and that the Illinois court had no jurisdiction to render
the judgment of divorce. The defendant may not play fast and loose with the
court in this fashion.  He cannot in one breath say the judgment is valid, --
obtain relief thereby; and in the next, say it is invalid.  Having relied on the
validity of the judgment of divorce on the first motion,  he is estopped from
thereafter claiming it is void.  One to whom two inconsistent courses of action
are open and who elects to pursue one of them is afterward precluded from
pursuing the other.  ( Steiner v. Rowley, 35 Cal.2d 713, 720 [221 P.2d 9];
Austin v.  Hallmark Oil Co., 21 Cal.2d 718, 727 [134 P.2d 777]; Alexander v.
Hammarberg, 103 Cal.App.2d 872, 878-879 [230 P.2d 399]; Steiner v. Thomas, 94
Cal.App.2d 655, 660 [211 P.2d 321]; Calhoun v. Calhoun, 81 Cal.App.2d 297, 305
[183 P.2d 922]; Monroe v. Owens, 76 Cal.App.2d 23, 27 [172 P.2d 110]; Sacramento
etc. Dist. v. Pacific G. & E. Co., 72 Cal.App.2d 638, 649 [165 P.2d 741];
Garnette v. Mankel, 71 Cal.App.2d 783, 787 [163 P.2d 466]; 10 Cal.Jur. 646, §
26.)

   Lastly, defendant urges that the order denying the motion for a summary
judgment on the original complaint is res judicata and that therefore the order
granting the motion on the supplemental complaint was in error.   An order
denying a motion for a summary judgment is not appealable.  A judgment entered
on an order granting the motion is appealable. ( Code Civ. Proc., §§ 437c, 963.
1)  An order denying the motion does not determine any issue.  Its effect is
merely a finding that there is an issue of fact to be tried.  It is otherwise,
if the motion is granted.   A final judgment for the moving party follows.
Denial of the motion is not a final judgment; it is not a final decision on the
merits.  The order denying the motion on the original complaint merely
determined that on the pleadings as they existed at that time there was triable
issue.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   For the
history of the origin and effect of summary judgment statutes see Fisher v. Sun
Underwriters Ins. Co., 55 R.I. 175 [179 A. 702, 103 A.L.R. 1097].
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     The doctrine of res judicata is that an existing final judgment on the
merits of a cause rendered by a court of  competent jurisdiction is, in all
subsequent actions, conclusive of the rights of the parties thereto and of their
privies which were or might have been determined.  ( French v. Rishell, 40
Cal.2d 477, 479 [254 P.2d 26]; Dillard v. McKnight, 34 Cal.2d 209, 213 [209 P.2d
387, 11 A.L.R.2d 835]; Bliss v. Security-First Nat. Bank, 81 Cal.App.2d 50, 58
[183 P.2d 312].)   The application of the principle in a given case depends in
part upon an affirmative answer to the question: Was there a final judgment on
the merits?  ( Bernhard v. Bank of America, 19 Cal.2d 807, 813 [122 P.2d 892];
Dillard v. McKnight, supra, 214; Citizens Nat. T. & S. Bank v. Hawkins, 87
Cal.App.2d 535, 541 [197 P.2d 385]; Estate of Eaton, 38 Cal.App.2d 180, 182-184
[100 P.2d 813].)

     Since the order denying the motion for a summary judgment made on the
original complaint was not a final judgment, it is not res judicata.

   Affirmed.


                              72 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           WINONA MARSHALL, Respondent, v. CARLOS MARSHALL, Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 7106

            Court of Appeal of California, Third Appellate District

           69 Cal. App. 2d 20; 157 P.2d 854; 1945 Cal. App. LEXIS 621


                                 April 26, 1945

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from an order of the Superior Court of San Joaquin
County refusing to set aside the levy of a writ of execution.  M. G. Woodward,
Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Foreign Divorces--Bona Fides of Residence--Evidence.  --The trial
court's conclusion that a divorced husband never acquired a bona fide residence
in Nevada and that the divorce in that state was obtained fraudulently was
sustained by evidence that, during his stay in Nevada for about six weeks, gas
and electric service was maintained in his name at his place of residence in
California, that letters written by him during that period gave his California
address, and that at the time he testified in the Nevada court that his
permanent home was in that state, he was actually residing in California and
continued to reside there after the decree was entered.

(2) Id.--Foreign Divorces--Full Faith and Credit.  --A decree of divorce is not
entitled to full faith and credit where it has been granted on constructive
service by the court of a state in which neither spouse is domiciled.

(3) Judgments--Sister State Judgments--Full Faith and Credit.  --The Supreme
Court of the United States is the final arbiter as to the meaning of and
limitations on the full faith and credit clause of the federal Constitution.

(4) Divorce--Judgment--Res Judicata--Waiver and Estoppel.  --In a wife's action
for divorce, where the husband appeared and asked for affirmative relief by
filing a cross-complaint for divorce without either pleading or referring to his
divorce action in Nevada, in which he was granted a divorce from present
plaintiff, he ought not, after the wife had been granted an interlocutory decree
by the California court, be heard to say that that court had no jurisdiction.

COUNSEL: Johnson & Hogan for Appellant.

Lawrence Edwards and Chas. H. Epperson for Respondent.

JUDGES: Adams, P. J.  Thompson, J., and Peek, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: ADAMS

OPINION

     On April 10, 1942, plaintiff and respondent, Winona Marshall, filed an
action for divorce against defendant and appellant, Carlos Marshall, in the
Superior Court of San Joaquin County, of which county she was then a resident.
Summons was served upon defendant in Plumas County on June 4, 1942, and on
September 26th of the same year defendant filed an answer and cross-complaint,
praying that he be awarded a decree of divorce against cross-defendant on the
ground of extreme cruelty, that he be awarded all of the community property of
the parties and the custody of their minor child.  Plaintiff filed an answer to
defendant's cross-complaint October 1, 1942, and thereafter on the motion of
defendant and cross-complainant said action was set for trial.  After hearing of
the cause and the waiver of findings, an interlocutory decree was rendered on
January 9, 1943, in favor of plaintiff, and she was awarded alimony in the sum
of $ 30 per month, the custody of the child and the sum of $ 40 per month for
his support.  The community property of the parties was divided between them.

   In August, 1943, defendant was in arrears in his payments  under the decree,
and the trial court ordered that an execution issue, directed to the Sheriff of
Sacramento County.

   On September 16, 1943, defendant, appearing by his present counsel, who had
not represented him in the divorce proceedings, served and filed a notice of
motion to set aside the levy of the writ of execution, on the ground that the
interlocutory decree of divorce was void and without legal force or effect.  The
motion was accompanied by an affidavit of one of defendant's attorneys in which
it was alleged, on information and belief, that defendant, under the name Don
Carlos Marshall, had prior to November 2, 1942, filed a complaint for divorce
from plaintiff in the State of Nevada, that on November 2, 1942, a decree of
absolute divorce had been granted to him, that by reason of said Nevada decree
the parties had been restored to the status of single persons,  and that at the
date of the granting of the interlocutory decree in California the parties to
said action were not husband and wife. Hearing on defendant's said motion was
had on April 20, 1944, testimony was adduced, and the motion of defendant was
denied.  From that order this appeal was taken.

   The record before us contains a transcript of the testimony taken and
documentary evidence introduced at the hearing of defendant's motion.
Appellant, who was a locomotive engineer, himself testified that he was employed
by the Western Pacific Railway Company for many years prior to April, 1942, and
just prior to said date was employed on a run between Keddie, California, and
Bieber, California; that he applied for a transfer to Nevada, and when same was
granted left California on April 5, 1942, and went to Reno, Nevada; that the
next day he went to Winnemucca, where he was employed on a run between
Winnemucca and Sand Pass, Nevada; that on May 19th or 20th he "moved out of
Nevada" and returned to Quincy, California, having bid for a run in California;
that he worked in California until October when he was assigned to a run between
Portola, California, and Winnemucca, Nevada; that he would be in the latter
place only between runs; that before going to Nevada he had lived at Payne's
Cabin, Quincy, until April 5, 1942, and that he resumed his residence there when
he came back to California in May, 1942.

   The record in the Nevada action was introduced in evidence and shows that the
complaint was filed May 18, 1942, just before Marshall returned to California;
that service of summons  on Mrs. Marshall was made by publication and the
service of a copy of the summons on Mrs. Marshall at Stockton on June 1, 1942;
and that on November 2, 1942, the Nevada proceeding was heard and a decree of
divorce entered.  Marshall at that time appeared and testified that he resided
at Winnemucca and had resided there since the 4th day of April; that he was in
the State of Nevada continuously after April 6th until the 18th day of May when
his company sent him out of the state for a little while, but that he was now
back in Nevada, and that Winnemucca was his permanent home. No mention was made
by him of the divorce  proceeding pending in California, though he had not only
filed his answer and cross-complaint in that proceeding on September 26, 1942,
but also had, appeared personally there in June when the court heard a motion
for support pendente lite, and later had appeared before the children's court of
conciliation.

     After the hearing in the proceeding now before us the trial court filed a
memorandum opinion which is included in the record before us.  It appears
therefrom that the court concluded that Marshall never acquired a bona fide
residence in Nevada, but that he went to that state for the sole and only
purpose of obtaining a divorce and with the intent to leave that state as soon
as he had accomplished his purpose; and that the divorce in Nevada was obtained
fraudulently. The evidence amply sustains this conclusion.  During his stay in
Nevada in April and May, 1942, gas and electric service was maintained in
Marshall's name at his place of residence in Quincy.  On May 11, 1942, while he
claims that he was a resident of Nevada, he wrote a letter to the American Trust
Company, at Oakland, and gave his address as "Box 972, Quincy, Calif." Also in a
letter to a real estate firm in Stockton, dated "5-25-42," he gave the same
address at Quincy.  Other communications sent by him during May, June, July,
August and September, 1942, gave this same return address.  In a letter to his
son written from Nevada, dated May 12, 1942, he said, "I don't think I will have
to stay here much longer." And at the very time that he testified in the Nevada
court that Winnemucca was his permanent home, he was actually residing in
Quincy, California, and had been since about May 18th; and he continued to
reside there after the decree was entered.

    Appellant's counsel in his briefs before this court apparently concedes that
the evidence introduced at the hearing of his motion is sufficient to show that
Marshall gave perjured testimony in the Nevada court, and that he never acquired
a bona fide residence in that state; but it is contended, nevertheless, that the
Nevada decree is valid on its face, that the fact that it is based upon false
testimony given by Marshall is not ground for setting it aside, and that even
though Marshall was never a bona fide resident of that state the California
courts are compelled to give full faith and credit to its decree; and that
since, by that judgment, the parties to this proceeding ceased to be husband and
wife on November 2, 1942, the California court had no jurisdiction at the time
it made and entered its interlocutory decree, and that the execution issued in
the action was of no force and effect.  In short, he contends that where a
judgment of a foreign state is valid upon its face, it must be given full faith
and credit in every other state, regardless of the fact that it was obtained by
fraud, and though the court of such foreign state was actually without
jurisdiction to render such judgment.  He asserts, though without citation of
authority for it, that the Nevada decree could not be set aside in that state.
The decisions of the Nevada courts are to the contrary.  (See Fleming v. Fleming
, 36 Nev. 135 [134 P. 445]; Presson v. Presson, 38 Nev. 203 [147 P. 1081];
Walker v. Walker, 45 Nev. 105 [198 P. 433]; Latterner v. Latterner, 51 Nev. 285
[274 P. 194]; Lamb v. Lamb, 57 Nev. 421 [65 P.2d 872]; Barber v. Barber, 47 Nev.
377 [222 P. 284, 39 A.L.R. 706].)

     In support of his contention that the judgment of the Nevada court is
necessarily binding here, appellant cites Estate of Morris, 56 Cal.App.2d 715
[133 P.2d 452], from which he quotes extensively, especially pages 720 to 723
wherein Williams v. North Carolina , 317 U.S. 287 [63 S.Ct. 207, 87 L.Ed. 279,
143 A.L.R. 1273], is cited and quoted.  In Estate of Morris, John F. Morris,
aged ninety-two years, adopted his niece Winifred R. Morris, aged sixty-one
years, in Rhode Island, in conformity with the laws of that state which
authorized such an adoption.  The parties came to California where both died and
their respective estates were administered; and in the course of the probate
proceedings it was contended that, since the laws of California did not sanction
the adoption of adults, the decree of the Rhode Island court need not be given
full faith and credit as the adoption laws of that state were contrary to the
public policy of this state.  It was conceded in that case that the adoption
proceedings in Rhode Island were regularly and duly had in accordance with the
laws of that state.  No fraud or irregularity therein were alleged or relied
upon.  And all that our court held was that California was bound to give full
faith and credit to the judgment notwithstanding a claimed conflict with the
announced  policy of this state.  Therefore, there is nothing in that case which
conflicts with the decision under review here.

   Nor do we find anything in the decision of the United States Supreme Court in
Williams v. North Carolina, supra, that supports appellant's contentions.  There
the court specifically stated in its opinion that a suit for divorce is one in
which domicile of the plaintiff in the state of the forum is essential to give
the court jurisdiction which will entitle the divorce decree to extraterritorial
effect, at least where the defendant has neither been personally served nor
entered an appearance.  It said, page 302 (L.Ed. 288), that it was assuming that
petitioner had a bona fide domicile in Nevada, and not that the Nevada domicile
was a sham; and that it was not reaching the question as to the power of North
Carolina to refuse full faith and credit to Nevada decrees because, contrary to
the findings of the Nevada court, North Carolina found that no bona fide
domicile was acquired in Nevada.

   The exact question presented in the case before us has, however, been decided
in Bell v. Bell, 181 U.S. 175 [21 S.Ct. 551, 45 L.Ed. 804], and Streitwolf v.
Streitwolf, 181 U.S. 179 [21 S.Ct. 553, 45 L.Ed. 807], both of which hold that a
decree of divorce is not entitled to full faith and credit when it has been
granted on constructive service by the courts of a state in which neither spouse
is domiciled.  In the former case Mrs. Bell brought suit for divorce in New
York.  Defendant appeared in the case and pleaded a divorce decree obtained by
him in Pennsylvania.  Plaintiff, in reply, denied that the Pennsylvania court
had any jurisdiction to grant the decree, alleging that she had not been served
with process in the action and that neither she nor her husband ever was a
resident or citizen of Pennsylvania.  The New York court, on what was held to be
sufficient evidence, found that the husband had never acquired a residence in
Pennsylvania, and granted a  divorce to the plaintiff wife.  The Supreme Court
of the state affirmed the judgment, and the matter went to the United States
Supreme Court on writ of error.  That court held that upon the record the
Pennsylvania court had no jurisdiction of the husband's suit for divorce because
neither party had a domicile in Pennsylvania, and that the decree of divorce was
entitled to no faith and credit in New York or any other state.  That case is
cited in the Williams case (317 U.S. p. 291) and held not there applicable; but
its validity is not challenged.  It has been cited and followed in numerous
decisions by the courts of the several states since the decision in the Williams
case, and the latter case distinguished.  (See Davis v. Davis,    Ohio App.
[57 N.E.2d 703]; Wilkes v. Wilkes, 245 Ala. 54 [16 So.2d 15, 16]; Atkins v.
Atkins 386 Ill. 345 [54 N.E.2d 488, 489]; Shuart v. Shuart, 183 Misc. 270 [51
N.Y.S.2d 359]; Reese v. Reese, 268 App.Div. 993 [51 N.Y.S.2d 685]; Hultz v.
Hultz, 51 N.Y.S.2d 301; Kraunz v. Kraunz, 51 N.Y.S.2d 433; Wolff v. Wolff, 134
N.J.Eq. 8 [34 A.2d 150, 158]; Melnick v. Melnick, 154 Pa.Super. 481 [36 A.2d
235, 240].) Our courts in numerous cases have passed upon the validity of
divorce decrees granted in other jurisdictions, and where they have found that
same were secured upon simulated or pretended residence alone, have not
hesitated to declare them invalid.  (See Brill v. Brill, 38 Cal.App.2d 741 [102
P.2d 534]; Ryder v. Ryder, 2 Cal.App.2d 426 [37 P.2d 1069]; Estate of McNutt, 36
Cal.App.2d 542 [98 P.2d 253]; Estate of Bruneman , 32 Cal.App.2d 606 [90 P.2d
323]; DuQuesnay v. Henderson, 24 Cal.App.2d 11 [74 P.2d 294]; Bruguiere v.
Bruguiere, 172 Cal. 199 [155 P. 988, Am.Cas. 1917E 122].  Also see Crouch v.
Crouch, 149 P.2d 437, hearing in Supreme Court granted August 3, 1944.)

   In the Streitwolf case, hereinabove cited, the plaintiff wife, on August 17,
1896, filed suit for divorce in New Jersey where the parties had lived as
husband and wife until August 3rd of that year, and the husband was served with
summons personally in New Jersey.  On August 9, 1897, the husband filed a suit
for divorce in North Dakota and caused summons to be personally served on the
wife in New Jersey.  On August 19th the husband filed an answer to the wife's
suit in New Jersey but made no reference therein to the suit in North Dakota.
On September 7, 1897, the wife filed an action in New Jersey, seeking an
injunction against the suit in North Dakota, alleging  that the domicile of both
parties was in New Jersey and that the husband's pretended residence in North
Dakota was wholly fictitious and fraudulent;  that she had not appeared in that
suit.  Though a temporary injunction was issued in that suit, the husband
obtained a decree in the North Dakota court on October 4, 1897, which recited
that "plaintiff now is and for more than ninety days prior to the commencement
of this action has been in good faith a resident of the State of North Dakota."
The wife then filed in the New Jersey divorce court a supplemental bill alleging
that the North Dakota decree was void for want of jurisdiction of the
subject-matter and of the wife as a party and was secured by fraud and in
contempt of the court of chancery of New Jersey.  On trial of the issues in the
divorce action evidence was adduced which was held to be sufficient to sustain
the contentions of the wife, and the court held that the husband had no bona
fide domicile in North Dakota, that the judgment there was secured by fraud and
imposition on the court, and that the court there had no jurisdiction.  The
United States Supreme Court in affirming that judgment said, page 183 (L.Ed., p.
810):

   "The law of North Dakota requires a domicil in good faith of the libellant
for ninety days as a prerequisite to jurisdiction of a case of divorce. Smith v.
Smith, 7 N.D. 404, 413, 75 N.W. 783. The facts in evidence warranted,  and
indeed required, the finding that the husband had no bona fide domicil in the
state of North Dakota, when he obtained a divorce there; and it is not pretended
that the wife had an independent domicil in North Dakota, or was ever in that
state.  The court of that state therefore had no jurisdiction."

     The Supreme Court of the United States is the final arbiter as to the
meaning of the limitations upon the full faith and credit clause of the
Constitution of the United States ( Milwaukee County v. M. E. White Co., 296
U.S. 268, 274 [56 S.Ct. 229, 80 L.Ed. 220, 226]; Williams v. North Carolina,
supra, at page 302 [L.Ed. p. 288]), and whatever may be its determination, if
any, on the point before us when it renders its second opinion in the Williams
case -- which case is again before it after retrial in North Carolina and
affirmance by the North Carolina Supreme Court of a judgment of conviction (
State v. Williams, 224 N.C. 183 [29 S.E.2d 744]) -- this court is constrained to
follow the decisions in Bell v. Bell, and Streitwolf v. Streitwolf, which are
still the law of  the land and will be until reversed by the Supreme Court of
the United States, the court of last resort.

   As for appellant's argument that a judgment or decree cannot be set aside
merely upon a showing that same was procured by and based upon false testimony,
it is not pertinent, for the Nevada decree was not declared invalid upon that
ground, but because the testimony shows what is practically admitted, that
Marshall was never a bona fide resident of Nevada whose courts had no
jurisdiction, and that he perpetrated a fraud upon the Nevada court by
testifying that Winnemucca was his permanent home at a time when he was actually
making his home in Quincy, California.   And it might be added that when
Marshall appeared in the California court and asked for affirmative relief by
filing a cross-complaint for divorce, and when he appeared and testified in that
divorce proceeding without either pleading or referring to the action in Nevada,
he submitted himself to the jurisdiction of that court and sought affirmative
relief by way of a decree on his cross-complaint. Under these circumstances he
ought not now be heard to say that that court had no jurisdiction.  (See Spitzer
v. Superior Court, 74 Cal.App. 494, 498 [241 P. 270]; Rideaux  v. Torgrimson, 12
Cal.2d 633, 638 [86 P.2d 826].)

   The judgment is affirmed.


                              73 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              GEORGE W. RIGGINS, Appellant, v. SADIE RUTH RIGGINS,
                                   Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 21250

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Three

            139 Cal. App. 2d 712; 294 P.2d 751; 1956 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      2164


                                 March 6, 1956

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  Alfred E. Paonessa, Judge.

   Action for divorce.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Causes for Divorce--Incurable Insanity.  --The Legislature's power
to specify incurable insanity as a ground of divorce and to establish
requirements as to the proof thereof may not be challenged.

(2) Constitutional Law--Classification--Reasonableness.  --Circumstances
prevailing at the time of enactment of a statute are to be considered in
determining whether a classification is arbitrary or unrelated to the object of
the statute.

(3) Divorce--Causes for Divorce--Incurable Insanity.  --In view of fact that, in
making incurable insanity a ground for divorce, the Legislature was for the
first time permitting a divorce on a ground which involved no fault on
defendant's part, it was not unreasonable to require strict proof as to that
additional ground.

(4) Constitutional Law--Classification -- Reasonableness.  --A distinction in
legislation is not arbitrary if any set of facts that would sustain it can
reasonably be conceived.

(5) Divorce--Causes for Divorce--Incurable Insanity.  --It cannot be said as a
matter of law that the Legislature did not have the constitutional right to
require proof of confinement under order of court as a part of the proof to
obtain a divorce on the ground of incurable insanity.

(6) Constitutional Law -- Classification -- Legislative Duty.  --The Legislature
is not bound, in order to support the constitutional validity of its regulation,
to extend it to all cases which it might possibly reach.

(7) Divorce--Causes for Divorce--Incurable Insanity.  --It cannot be said as a
matter of law that the Legislature made an arbitrary classification in
requiring, in Civ. Code, § 108, proof of confinement under order of court as
part of the proof to obtain a divorce on the ground of incurable insanity, nor
can it be said that the classification had no bearing on the object to be
accomplished.

(8) Id.--Causes for Divorce--Incurable Insanity.  --That portion of Civ. Code, §
108, requiring proof of confinement under Welf. & Inst. Code, §§ 5000-5189, is
not unconstitutional as resulting in an unreasonable and discriminating
classification of insane persons confined in state institutions.

COUNSEL: Hubert W. Swender for Appellant.

Harold W. Kennedy, County Counsel, and A. Thomas Grazer, Deputy County Counsel,
for Respondent.

OPINION BY: THE COURT

OPINION

     Plaintiff appeals from a judgment of dismissal based upon an order
sustaining demurrer to amended complaint and upon the failure of plaintiff to
amend with the time allowed for amending.

   The amended complaint alleged that plaintiff is and for more than one year
last past has been a resident of Los Angeles County, California; plaintiff and
defendant were married on June 29, 1940, and ever since have been husband and
wife; the date of separation was August 1, 1950; two children were born of the
marriage. Said complaint contained adequate allegations for the statistical
purposes required by section 426a of the Code of Civil Procedure. It was also
alleged in said complaint that there is community real property in Los Angeles
County standing in the names of the parties as joint tenants (description and
value being alleged); more than three years prior to the filing of said action,
to wit: about August 7, 1951, defendant entered Camarillo State Hospital for the
insane for treatment as a voluntary patient on a voluntary basis; defendant at
said time was diagnosed as dementia praecox, paranoid, and the defendant ever
since said date has been and now is confined in said institution or under the
jurisdiction of the institution; said insanity of defendant still exists; about
June 30, 1954, the patient appeared at diagnostic staff conference before the
staff of said hospital, and on said date the medical superintendent and medical
director of said hospital certified that defendant is incurably mentally ill and
has been at all times since her entry and confinement in said hospital incurably
mentally  ill; defendant has no general guardian or guardian of her person;
plaintiff has reasonable ability to support the insane spouse, so far as any
obligation imposed by law as a result of the marriage is concerned, for the
remainder of the life expectancy of said spouse; the two minor children are in
the custody of plaintiff and the plaintiff is a fit and proper person to be
awarded the custody of the children.  The prayer of said complaint was for
judgment granting a decree of divorce to plaintiff, awarding custody of the
children to plaintiff, and awarding the community property to plaintiff.  The
prayer was also for an order appointing the district attorney of Los Angeles
County, or such other person as the court might deem proper, guardian ad litem
of defendant for the purpose of said action.

   S. Ernest Roll, the District Attorney of Los Angeles County, as guardian ad
litem of defendant, demurred to said amended complaint on the ground that said
complaint fails to allege facts sufficient to constitute a cause of action.  On
December 16, 1954, the demurrer was sustained with leave to amend within 10
days.  A notice of said order sustaining the demurrer was served upon the
attorney for plaintiff on January 10, 1955.  The plaintiff failed to amend said
amended complaint, and on February 18, 1955, a judgment of dismissal was
entered.

    Section 92 of the Civil Code provides: "Divorces may be granted for any of
the following causes: . . .  Seven.  Incurable insanity." Section 108 of the
Civil Code provides:  "A divorce may be granted on the grounds of incurable
insanity only upon proof that the insane spouse has been incurably insane for a
continuous period of three years immediately preceding the filing of the action
and has been confined in an institution, or under the jurisdiction of the
institution, under the provisions of Chapter 1, Part 1, Division 6 of the
Welfare and Institutions Code or under the provisions of Section 1026 of the
Penal Code or Chapter 6, Title 10, Part 2 of the Penal Code, for a period of at
least three continuous years immediately preceding the filing of the action and
upon the testimony of a member of the medical staff of said institution that
such spouse is incurably insane." (The Penal Code provisions, referred to in
said section 108, are not involved herein.) Said part 1 of the Welfare and
Institutions Code, referred to in said section 108 of the Civil Code, is
entitled "Commitments." Said chapter 1 of said part 1 is entitled "Mentally Ill
Persons  and Insane Persons." That chapter comprises sections 5000 to 5189
inclusive.  It may be said generally that those sections pertain to
apprehension, examination, commitment by court, and hospitalization of mentally
ill and insane persons.  Stated in another way, it may be said generally that
those sections pertain to court commitment procedure or procedure whereby a
mentally ill person enters a state hospital under order of court or
involuntarily. Under other sections of the Welfare and Institutions Code a
mentally ill person may (1) voluntarily enter a state hospital for treatment (§
6602); (2) enter a state hospital upon an application in his behalf by a health
officer (§§ 6610-6612); and (3) be temporarily admitted to such a hospital upon
application in his behalf by a relative or other designated persons (§§
6605-6605.6).

   Respondent (defendant) asserts in effect that the demurrer was properly
sustained because the amended complaint shows that the defendant entered the
state hospital as a voluntary patient on a voluntary basis.  In other words,
respondent asserts in effect that said complaint does not show that defendant
was confined to the hospital under the provisions of chapter 1, part 1, division
6, of the Welfare and Institutions Code (§§ 5000-5189) -- under court procedure,
that is, involuntarily.

   Appellant contends that the portion of section 108 of the Civil Code
requiring that the confinement be under the provisions of chapter 1, part 1,
division 6, of the Welfare and Institutions Code is unconstitutional for the
reason that it results in an unreasonable and discriminating classification of
insane persons confined in state institutions, thus violating the equal
protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution,
and provisions of the California Constitution, namely: article I, section 2
(that government is for protection of the people); and article I, section 21
(that special privileges shall not be granted); and article IV re legislative
department).  He quotes from Morganti v. Morganti, 99 Cal.App.2d 512, 517 [222
P.2d 78], to the effect that a purpose of said section 108 is "to provide the
manner of proof where the ground for divorce is the incurable insanity of the
defendant spouse." He argues that the method of entry into a state hospital in
California, whether voluntary or under court commitment, has no bearing on that
purpose or object of section 108; and that the method of entry into the hospital
has no bearing on the question or manner of proving incurable insanity where the
defendant has been certified,  by the medical  superintendent of the hospital,
to be incurably insane for over three years and has been confined in the
hospital for over three years.  He also argues that said portion of said section
108, which restricts the ground of divorce (incurable insanity) to those persons
whose insane spouses entered the hospital involuntarily, does not bear equally
upon all persons whose spouses are incurably insane.

    Dribin v. Superior Court, 37 Cal.2d 345 [231 P.2d 809, 24 A.L.R.2d 864],
involved the question as to whether the Legislature, in enacting section 108,
acted within its constitutional power in limiting divorce on the ground of
incurable insanity to cases wherein there was proof of confinement under said
sections 5000 to 5189, that is, confinement in this state as distinguished from
confinement outside this state.  It was held therein that the requirement of
proof of confinement in this state was constitutional.  Principles of law with
respect to determining the constitutionality of a statute are stated in that
case at pages 351 and 352.  Some of those principles are: "Wide discretion is
vested in the Legislature in making the classification." The "decision of the
Legislature as to what is a sufficient distinction to warrant the classification
will not be overthrown by the courts unless it is palpably arbitrary . . ." "A
distinction in legislation is not arbitrary if any set of facts reasonably can
be conceived that would sustain it." "The classification should be reasonable;
i.e., 'have a substantial relation to a legitimate object to be accomplished . .
.  [It] is not our concern whether the Legislature has adopted what we might
think to be the wisest and most suitable means of accomplishing its objects.'"

   Incurable insanity was not a ground for divorce in California until 1941,
when that additional ground was added to  the grounds for divorce stated in
section 92 of the Civil Code.  In section 108 of the Civil Code, also enacted in
1941, it was provided that a divorce on the ground of incurable insanity might
be granted "only upon proof" that the defendant had been incurably insane for a
certain time and had been confined in a certain place "under the provisions" of
certain sections of the Welfare and Institutions Code.  The confinement referred
to in those sections is confinement under order of court.  It thus appears that
the Legislature excluded voluntary confinement or admission in its determination
as to the proof that should be required.  (Voluntary admission is provided for
in a different section -- § 6602.)  "The power of the legislature to specify
incurable insanity as a  ground of divorce and to establish requirements as to
the proof thereof cannot be challenged." (16 Cal.Jur.2d, p. 309, § 13; see also
Morganti v. Morganti, supra, 99 Cal.App.2d 512, 515 [222 P.2d 78].)

   As stated in Dribin v. Superior Court, supra, at page 352: "The insane have
always been regarded as subject to control on the part of the state, both for
their protection and for the protection of others." It was said further therein
(p. 352) that the Welfare and Institutions Code "throws about an alleged insane
or incompetent person various safeguards by way of notice, service of process,
hearings, evidence, jury trial, etc., before an adjudication of insanity and
commitment therefor may be made." The Legislature in requiring proof of
confinement under an order of court might have considered that such requirement
was necessary in order to protect or safeguard the personal and property rights
of the alleged incurably insane defendant.  It might have considered that such
requirement would be a protection or safeguard in the event a spouse, with a
view to creating a possible basis for divorce, were inclined to unduly persuade
the other spouse to voluntarily enter a state hospital. Also the Legislature
might have considered that evidence as to incurable insanity of the defendant
would be more reliable and trustworthy if the evidence included an adjudication
of insanity (at the time of entering the hospital) in addition to testimony of a
medical staff member as to incurable insanity.   Circumstances prevailing at the
time of enactment of a statute are to be considered in determining whether a
classification is arbitrary or unrelated to the object of the statute.  (
Pacific Gas & Elec. Co. v. Moore, 37 Cal.App.2d 91, 97 [98 P.2d 819].) Prior to
the enactment making incurable insanity a ground for divorce, the existing
grounds for divorce involved fault or wrongdoing on the part of the defendant.
The new or additional ground of incurable insanity involved no element of fault
of the defendant.   In view of the fact that, in making incurable insanity a
ground for divorce,  the Legislature was for the first time permitting a divorce
upon a ground which involved no fault on the part of defendant, it was not
unreasonable to require strict proof as to that additional ground.

     As above stated, "A distinction in legislation is not arbitrary if any set
of facts reasonably can be conceived that would sustain it." It appears, as
above shown, that there were considerations which reasonably would have
warranted the  Legislature in making a distinction, in the matter of divorce on
the ground of incurable insanity, between proof of confinement under order of
court and proof of voluntary confinement.   In view of such considerations, it
cannot be said as a matter of law that the Legislature did not have the
constitutional right to require proof of confinement under order of court, as a
part of the proof, in order to obtain a divorce on the ground of incurable
insanity. As counsel for appellant suggests, the legislation is favorable to a
person whose spouse entered the institution involuntarily and is unfavorable to
a person whose spouse entered the institution voluntarily.   However, as stated
in Lelande v. Lowery, 26 Cal.2d 224, 232 [157 P.2d 639,  175 A.L.R. 1109],
"[The] legislature is not bound, in order to support the constitutional validity
of its regulation, to extend it to all cases which it might possibly reach."  It
cannot be said as a matter of law that the Legislature made an arbitrary
classification in requiring proof of  confinement under order of court; nor can
it be said that the classification had no bearing on the object to be
accomplished by said section 108.   The portion of said section 108 of the Civil
Code requiring proof of confinement under the provisions of chapter 1, part 1,
division 6 of the Welfare and Institutions Code (§§ 5000 to 5189, inclusive) is
not unconstitutional.

   In view of the above conclusion, it is not necessary to discuss the other
assertion of respondent to the effect that if said portion of section 108 is
unconstitutional that portion is not severable from the remainder of the
section.

   The judgment is affirmed.


                              74 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           REGINA JOSEPHINE BROWN, Plaintiff and Respondent, v. RALPH
                 WALDO BROWN et al., Defendants and Appellants

                                  Civ. No. 993

            Court of Appeal of California, Fifth Appellate District

            274 Cal. App. 2d 178; 82 Cal. Rptr. 238; 1969 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2037


                                 June 19, 1969

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied July 18, 1969, and
the Opinion was Modified to Read as Printed Above.  Respondent's Petition for a
Hearing by the Supreme Court was Denied August 13, 1969.  Peters, J., was of the
Opinion that the Petition Should be Granted.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Merced County.
Jack L. Hammerberg, Judge.  *

*   Assigned by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.

   Action for divorce.

COUNSEL: Frederick L. Hilger for Defendants and Appellants.

C. Ray Robinson, William T. Ivey, Jr., John Bucan, Peter Morris and John E.
Whiting for Plaintiff and Respondent.

JUDGES: Gargano, J.  Conley, P. J., and Stone, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: GARGANO

OPINION

     Ralph Waldo Brown (hereafter referred to as Ralph) and Regina Josephine
Brown (hereafter referred to as Regina) were married in 1916.  The marriage
commenced to deteriorate in 1932 when they ceased living together except for
occasional weekend visits by Ralph.  Regina brought this action for a divorce in
1966, almost 35 years later.  She named Charlotte Lundblade (hereafter referred
to as Charlotte), who has lived with Ralph, as Ralph's wife, since 1939, as
co-defendant.  Ralph and Charlotte appeal from the judgment granting Regina an
interlocutory decree of divorce on the ground of extreme cruelty and awarding
Regina approximately one-fourth of all the property standing in Ralph's and
Charlotte's joint names and one-fourth of most of the property standing in
Charlotte's own name, together with alimony in the amount of $ 440 per month and
attorney fees and costs.  In short, the trial court found that Ralph was validly
married to Regina, that his 1939 ex parte Mexican divorce from Regina was
invalid, that his 1939 marriage to Charlotte was also invalid, that Charlotte
was not Ralph's putative spouse but, rather, had lived with him for more than 28
years after their invalid marriage in a meretricious relationship, that Ralph
and Charlottle so commingled their individual properties that the separate
interests could not be traced, that one-half of all property standing in Ralph's
and Charlotte's joint names and one-half of all property (with a few minor
exceptions)  standing in Charlotte's name alone was the community property of
Ralph and Regina, that Regina was entitled to one-half of the community
property, or about $ 600,000, plus attorney fees and costs in the amount of $
78,802.01.

   It is conceded that Ralph acquired a Mexican divorce from Regina in 1939
without giving her notice.  Thus, it is also clear that the court's findings
that Ralph's divorce was void and that his subsequent marriage to Charlotte in
1939 was invalid are supported by the evidence and the law.  The California
courts have long denied validity to Mexican divorces obtained by California
residents "ex parte without reasonable notice." ( Scott v. Scott, 51 Cal.2d 249,
256 [331 P.2d 641] [concurring].) Moreover, once a divorce is proved invalid, a
subsequent marriage by either party is also deemed invalid ( Estate of Goldberg,
203 Cal.App.2d 402 [21 Cal.Rptr. 626]). Nevertheless, this case is a classic
example of the basic unfairness of an archaic rule, which purports to allow a
wife, who stood silently and complacently by, collecting support payments for
almost 28 years with the knowledge that her husband was openly and notoriously
living with her rival in a marital relationship, to step in and successfully
claim almost $ 600,000 of property accumulated by the husband and his new
partner, partly through their combined efforts and partly through the use of the
other woman's separate property. And, significantly, this archaic rule was
applied in this case merely because the wife did not have "any substantial or
convincing knowledge" that the husband had procured an invalid Mexican divorce.
The facts leading to this bizarre result are these:

   Ralph and Regina were married in Tehama County, California in 1916.  Three
children were born to the marriage, in 1917, 1920 and 1927, respectively.  Ralph
was a civil engineer engaged in construction work, and from 1917 to 1930 the
family moved from one construction job to another; they then settled in Oroville
in 1930.

   Two years later, in 1932, Regina received an anonymous letter from Eureka,
stating that Ralph was keeping company with "a very respectful young woman of
this town and posing as an unmarried man." She hired a private detective and
learned that her husband was having an affair with Charlotte.  Regina then
confronted Charlotte in Eureka and asked her if she was "going around with her
husband." Charlotte admitted that she was keeping company with Ralph; she stated
that he told her that he "had been married  but had a divorce in the making."
The two women agreed to confront Ralph in Sacramento.

   On the following day the parties to the triangle met in a hotel room in
Sacramento.  Charlotte testified that Ralph told Regina that he wanted her to
obtain a divorce and that if she refused he would obtain the divorce himself.
Charlotte also testified that she told Ralph and Regina that if they were not
going to get a divorce, and could make up and live happily together, she would
never see Ralph again.  Regina denied that Ralph asked her for a divorce and
that Charlotte offered to give Ralph up.  However, a short time later she wrote
Ralph "when you told me in Sacramento that you would never live with me again,
did you think for one minute I would try to make you?"

   Following the confrontation in the hotel in Sacramento, Ralph continued his
meretricious relationship with Charlotte until 1939.  In 1939 he informed her
that he acquired a final decree of divorce. He also asked her to marry him.
Charlotte consented, and the marriage ceremony was performed in  Azusa,
California on March 25, 1939.  At the time, Ralph had no assets of his own; he
was a salaried employee of a construction firm earning about $ 300 a month.  On
the other hand, Charlotte owned a summer home at Orick, a home on Porter Street
in Eureka, a bowling alley in downtown Eureka, an apartment house with four
rental units in Eureka, and an undivided one-eighth interest in ranch property
on the Eel River.

   In November 1940 Charlotte purchased a construction company with her own
money and in her own name. 1 She then transferred most of her separate property
to the company to insure adequate capitalization.  2 A few months later the
company was reincorporated as the Mercer, Fraser Corporation, and a single stock
certificate, representing 100 percent ownership, was issued to Charlotte.
Thereafter, the new corporation engaged in the contracting business with Ralph
as its general manager until October 1942.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   The terms
of the sale were $ 7,500 cash down and a balance of $ 10,500 payable in
installments of not less than $ 250 per month plus 5 percent per annum upon the
deferred balance.  Real property owned by the seller corporation was to be
purchased within three years for $ 12,000.
2   Charlotte transferred the following properties: "The summer home at Orick,
her apartment building in Eureka, the bowling alley in downtown Eureka, the 1/8
interest in the Eel River Ranch, and the home which she had recently acquired in
Eureka, apparently from the sale of her old Porter Street home.  However, the
deeds in which these properties were conveyed to the new company were not
recorded.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In October 1942 Ralph and Charlotte formed a limited partnership. Ralph was
designated a general partner and given a salary of $ 500 per month.  He was also
given one-half of the partnership profits.  On the other hand, Charlotte was
designated as a limited partner and was to receive the remaining one-half of the
partnership profits.  Charlotte then dissolved the Mercer, Fraser Corporation
and transferred its assets actually used in the contracting business to the
limited partnership. Charlotte's separate properties are reflected on the
corporation balance sheet as being transferred back to and retained by her as
her separate property. 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   There
were no deeds back from the corporation to Charlotte, apparently because the
initial deeds from Charlotte to the corporation had not been recorded.  Also,
the closing balance sheet of the Mercer, Fraser Corporation shows a balance due
Ralph of some $ 53,000.  It is not clear from the record how Ralph acquired this
interest.  However, Charlotte testified that at Christmas in 1941 she gave Ralph
one-half of the stock in the corporation as a Christmas gift.  She said that a
Eureka attorney, Mr. Woodman, drafted a document purporting to legalize the
gift.  No copy of this legal document has ever been found, and Mr. Woodman has
been dead for many years.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Two years later, in 1944, Ralph adopted Charlotte's daughter, Beverley, and
when  Beverley died (in 1960) he and Charlotte adopted Beverley's three
children.

    In 1948 Ralph and Charlotte formed a corporation and again named it the
Mercer, Fraser Corporation.  They also transferred all of the limited
partnership assets to the new corporation.  Ralph became the president and
general manager and held this position until 1963.  In 1963 Ralph became very
ill from Parkinson's disease.  He visited the Mayo Clinic in Rochester,
Minnesota for treatment, but his condition deteriorated rapidly.  Ralph was
never again in full active charge of the business.

   In 1962 the Mercer, Fraser Corporation encountered severe financial
difficulties.  In November of that year the company borrowed $ 300,000 from the
Small Business Administration, and after applying this loan to the payment of
its debts still owed about $ 600,000.  The following year the company was in
serious financial difficulty and borrowed an additional $ 100,000 from the bank.
Charlotte personally guaranteed the Small Business Administration loan and even
pledged her downtown Eureka commercial property to guarantee the corporation's
credit.  She also loaned the company $ 20,000 and $ 50,000 from funds standing
in her own name. The company's financial picture changed after 1963, and by July
31, 1966, it showed a net worth of approximately $ 1,000,000.

   Returning to Regina, we find that in 1933 she moved, with Ralph's mother (who
by then was living with her) and the children to Oakland so that the oldest son,
John, could enroll at St. Mary's College.  Ralph visited the family on weekends
and holidays.  He also sent Regina $ 200 a month.  Ralph's visits were
discontinued in 1939, and by 1940 almost all correspondence stopped.  However,
the monthly payments continued (with the exception of one short interval) until
June 1966.  Moreover, Ralph sent $ 30 a month to his oldest son John to help him
with his schooling, and he also paid the tuition for his daughter for a master's
degree at Stanford.

   In 1941 Regina moved to a home in Albany, which was purchased by "Ralph W.
Brown and Regina J. Brown, his wife, as joint tenants." 4 The children lived
with Regina in  this home until the youngest was old enough to leave in 1944.
Ralph's mother also lived with Regina in the home until her death in 1947.
After her mother-in-law's death, Regina continued to live in the Albany home by
herself until 1965 when she moved to Livingston, California to be with her
daughter Betty.  In the meantime she worked for several years and even took a
trip to Europe.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   Ralph and
Regina executed a deed of trust against the house to secure a note in the amount
of $ 3,500.  Two and one-half years later, on August 26, 1943, Ralph executed a
deed conveying his interest in the house to Regina.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In June 1966 Regina received a $ 200 check from Charlotte with a notation
stating that it was the last check Regina was going to receive.  Then Regina
applied for Medicare and learned that she was eligible for Social Security
payments.  The Social Security Administration contacted Charlotte about Ralph
and Regina's marital status and discovered that Ralph had acquired a Mexican
divorce. When Regina learned of the invalid divorce, she contacted a lawyer and
this litigation followed.

   At the trial Charlotte denied that she had any knowledge or suspicion that
Ralph obtained a divorce in Mexico when she married him in 1939.  She said that
Ralph was a close mouthed individual and seldom discussed his affairs.  She
testified that he told her that he had procured a divorce, that she believed him
and that she never questioned him or asked to see the papers until she was
contacted by the Social Security Administration in 1966.  Charlotte related that
she discovered that Ralph had acquired the Mexican divorce when she found the
decree in a box of old documents after following his directions.

   Appellants' well considered brief contains numerous contentions for reversal
of the judgment.  However, before directing  our attention to their crucial
contentions, we are constrained to observe, from the very outset, that our own
independent review of the voluminous record leads us to believe that the trial
judge was unduly swayed by the eloquence of respondent's lawyer.  For example,
he declared that Ralph and Charlotte had so commingled their individual
properties that their separate interests could not be traced.  Thus, he
apparently declined to trace to Charlotte all of the separate property she owned
when she married Ralph,  which not only had substantially increased in value but
which, from our view of the evidence, was readily traceable.  Moreover, he
seemingly ignored the fact that most of the money that Ralph and Charlotte
earned during the 28 years of their invalid marriage was earned from a
construction business purchased by Charlotte in 1941 with her own money, and
then given  financial stability with her own separate assets.  He also seemingly
ignored Charlotte's uncontradicted testimony, amply supported by the evidence,
that she made a gift of one-half of this business to Ralph.

   For a further example, the judge awarded Regina approximately $ 600,000 worth
of property and then ordered Ralph, who was an extremely ill man, to pay all
community property debts (including his own attorney fees), alimony in the
amount of $ 400 per month, and Regina's attorney fees and costs (amounting to $
78,802.01) out of his one-half share.  Thus, the trial judge awarded Regina
substantially more than one-half of the so-called community property which Ralph
accumulated over a 28-year period without her assistance.

     As further evidence that the judge was unduly swayed, he found that
Charlotte was not Ralph's putative spouse, albeit the uncontradicted evidence
and all rational inferences which can be drawn therefrom lead to the inescapable
conclusion that she was in good faith when she married him in 1939.   Stated in
a slightly different manner, good faith is the essential ingredient to a
putative marriage, and when the trial judge found that Charlotte did not act in
good faith when she married Ralph, he did so contrary to the rule that it is
presumed that persons who participate in marriage ceremonies do so in good faith
and that "he who would assert 'bad faith' should be able to point to some
evidence proving or tending to prove" it.  ( Krizman v. Industrial Acc. Com., 14
Cal.App.2d 419, 422 [58 P.2d 405]; Brennfleck v. Workmen's Comp. App. Bd., 265
Cal.App.2d 738 [71 Cal.Rptr. 525].)   Charlotte testified that when Ralph asked
her to marry him in 1939, he informed her that he had received his final decree
of divorce. This uncontradicted testimony is not inherently improbable and is
not impeached by other evidence.  On the contrary, the testimony is corroborated
by convincing circumstantial evidence.  Significantly, Charlotte engaged in a
meretricious relationship with Ralph for almost seven years after she learned
that he was married. However, she did not marry Ralph nor did she live with him
as his wife until he told her he had secured a divorce. Moreover, before the
invalid marriage, Charlotte managed her own substantial property interests
without Ralph's help and maintained a separate home in Eureka with her daughter
Beverley.  After the marriage she established a home with Ralph in Eureka,
allowed him to adopt her daughter, purchased a construction business with her
own money and then  either gave or allowed Ralph to acquire a half interest in
this valuable business.   As the California Supreme Court succinctly stated in
Gomez v. Cecena, 15 Cal.2d 363, 366 [101 P.2d 477]: "While no universal and
immutable formula can be prescribed for determining the weight to be accorded
testimonial evidence, it has frequently been said that testimony which is not
inherently improbable and is not impeached or contradicted by other evidence
should be accepted as true by the trier of fact."

     In rebuttal Regina points to Charlotte's testimony that she would not have
married Ralph had she known that he obtained a  divorce in Mexico.  She argues
that this testimony is substantial evidence to support the court's implied
finding of "bad faith" because it can be inferred that Charlotte knew of the
invalidity of Mexican divorces. However Charlotte's admission is a two-edged
sword; it supports the inference that when she married Ralph she knew that ex
parte Mexican divorces are invalid. On the other hand, it cuts against any
inference that she knew where Ralph had obtained his divorce.

   Regina argues that Charlotte cohabited with Ralph long before their marriage
and that this shows a lack of good faith belief in the validity of their
marriage. Charlotte admitted visiting Ralph on several occasions at various
places where he was working around the state, and to registering with him in
various hotels and motels on these visits.  She also admitted living in Ralph's
apartment for several weeks on one of those visits.  However, we reiterate the
self-evident fact that Charlotte's involvement in a meretricious relationship
with Ralph for almost seven years before she married him, corroborates her claim
that she believed him when he told her he was divorced.

   Regina asserts that Charlotte schemed, coerced and cajoled Ralph for seven
years before she could overcome his strong reluctance to divorce Regina.  She
concludes that having finally obtained her goal, Charlotte must have feasted her
eyes upon the divorce papers which constituted a symbolic representation of her
victory.  However, this argument is not based on substantial evidence; it is
mere conjecture and nothing more.  Morever, while it is true that Charlotte
admitted that she insisted that Ralph obtain a divorce or she would break off
their relationship, it is also clear that Ralph wanted a divorce from the very
beginning and that his long delay in obtaining one was due to the transient
nature of his employment.

   Regina alleges that in 1961 Charlotte began pumping funds  held jointly by
her and Ralph into her separate bank accounts.  She maintains that this evidence
supports the inference that Charlotte knew of the invalidity of Ralph's divorce
and was afraid that Regina too would discover its invalidity after she wrote to
Ralph in 1960, requesting his divorce papers.  However, even if it is true that
Charlotte began "pumping" joint funds into her separate accounts in 1961, it
does not support the inference that she knew of the invalidity of Ralph's
divorce 20 years earlier.  If anything, it raises an inference that she learned
of the Mexican divorce decree in 1960 after she was alerted by Regina's letter.

     With this view of the evidence firmly in mind, we turn to appellants' main
contentions for reversal of the judgment.  Briefly, they assert that Regina's
cause of action for a divorce on the ground of extreme cruelty is barred by the
statute of limitations because the more than 34 years which elapsed between the
separation in 1932 and the filing of the divorce complaint in 1966 is an
"unreasonable lapse of time" as a matter of law ( Civ. Code, § 124).  They also
assert that Regina is estopped from challenging the validity of Ralph's Mexican
divorce and argue that the denial of a divorce to Regina on this ground will
subserve the public policy of this state as articulated in Rediker v. Rediker,
35 Cal.2d 796 [221 P.2d 1, 20 A.L.R.2d 1152], because it has the effect of
severing the marriage between Ralph and Regina (which is what Regina wants)
without injuring the innocent third party, Charlotte.  We shall deal first with
estoppel.

   The doctrine of equitable estoppel is "pre-eminently" the creature of equity
and "[its] foundation is justice and good conscience." (3 Pomeroy, Equity
Jurisprudence, § 802, p. 180.) It has been defined by Professor Pomeroy as ". .
. the effect of the voluntary conduct of a party whereby he is absolutely
precluded, both at law and in equity, from asserting rights which might perhaps
have otherwise existed, either of property, of contract, or of remedy, as
against another person, who  has in good faith relied upon such conduct, and has
been led thereby to change his position for the worse, and who on his part
acquires some corresponding right, either of property, or contract, or of
remedy." (3 Pomeroy, Equity Jurisprudence, § 804, p. 189.)  In short, it is the
object of equitable estoppel to prevent a person from asserting a right which
has come into existence by contract, statute or other rule of law where, because
of his conduct, silence or omission, it would be unconscionable to allow him to
do so.

     This salutary doctrine under the nomenclature "quasi estoppel" was
initially drawn upon by the courts of this state to foreclose parties who
procured, or aided in the procurement of, invalid divorce decrees from attacking
a subsequent good faith marriage, and more particularly from unconscionably
claiming community property rights in property acquired by the other marital
partner after the invalid divorce was procured ( Spellens v. Spellens, 49 Cal.2d
210 [317 P.2d 613]; Harlan v. Harlan, 70 Cal.App.2d 657 [161 P.2d 490]; Estate
of Davis, 38 Cal.App.2d 579 [101 P.2d 761, 102 P.2d 545]). Later, however, the
equitable defense was also upheld against a husband who did not actually assist
his wife to procure a Mexican decree but who knew that she had acquired a
divorce in Mexico and did nothing to ascertain its validity ( Estate of Shank,
154 Cal.App.2d 808 [316 P.2d 710). In an enlightened opinion Justice Stone,
speaking for a unanimous court, stated at page 811: "However, no particular set
of facts is necessary to invoke an equitable estoppel if the facts come within
the principle enunciated in Estate of Davis, 38 Cal.App.2d 579, 584 [101 P.2d
761, 102 P.2d 545], where the court says:

   "' . . . our courts have recognized another species of estoppel, called "
quasi estoppel," which is based upon the principle that one cannot blow both hot
and cold, or that one "with full knowledge of the facts shall not be permitted
to act in a manner inconsistent with his former position or conduct to the
injury of another." (10 Cal.Jur., p. 645; McDaniels v. General Ins. Co., 1
Cal.App.2d 454, 459 [35 P.2d 394, 36 P.2d 829]. . . .'

   "Here, Worley was personally served with a copy of the summons and complaint
for divorce. He did nothing to ascertain their validity nor to attack the decree
even though he knew that it had been secured in Mexico.  Rather, he continued to
live separate and apart from decedent, he made no effort to contact her, and he
did not support her but let her purported second husband, Shank, assume that
obligation.  Worley took title to real property in his name alone and had
himself designated on the deed as 'a single man.' It is true as Worley says, he
did not remarry, but he did establish a relationship with a housekeeper whom he
paid $ 25 a week while she lived in his home.  The trial court concluded the
relationship was of a meretricious nature.  We believe the facts in this case
bring it within the rationale of Estate of Davis, 38 Cal.App.2d 579 [101 P.2d
761, 102 P.2d 545]; Hensgen v. Silberman, 87 Cal.App.2d 668   [197 P.2d 356];
Rediker v. Rediker, 35 Cal.2d 796 [221 P.2d 1, 20 A.L.R.2d 1152]; Estate of
Coleman, 132 Cal.App.2d 137 [281 P.2d 567]; and cases cited in those opinions."

   We conclude that this case contains all the ingredients of an equitable
estoppel mentioned by Professor Pomeroy in his treatise on Equity Jurisprudence.
Moreover, it falls within the ambit of Estate of Shank, 154 Cal.App.2d 808 [316
P.2d 710]. In fact, in our judgment, this case is a classic example of a wife
who slept on her property rights year in and year out and who, by her silence
and acquiescence, allowed the rights of a third party to intervene.  Thus, she
must bear the consequences of her own omission.  As the court aptly stated in
Union Bank & Trust  Co. v. Gordon, 116 Cal.App.2d 681, 684 [254 P.2d 644]: "It
is axiomatic that one who is silent when he ought to speak cannot speak when he
ought to be silent."

   Our reasons are these: It is absolutely clear from the evidence that when
Ralph married Charlotte in 1939 he had no property of his own.  It is also
absolutely clear from the evidence that the property which Ralph and Charlotte
acquired during the more than 28 years of their invalid marriage was acquired
partly through their combined efforts and partly through the use of Charlotte's
separate property. In fact, as we have mentioned, Ralph and Charlotte made most
of their money from a construction business that was purchased by Charlotte with
her own money, given financial stability through the use of Charlotte's separate
assets, and saved from possible bankruptcy in 1963 when Ralph was seriously ill,
by loans guaranteed by the pledging of property standing in Charlotte's own
name. Moreover, Regina knew that Ralph and Charlotte were living together as
husband and wife and were accumulating property.  In fact, she visited her son
John, who was employed by his father in the construction business, on numerous
occasions in Eureka, and knew that Ralph and Charlotte were operating a
successful construction company.  In addition, she knew that her husband was
earning only $ 300 a month when they separated in 1932 and that Charlotte had
substantial property interests at that time.  5 Thus, she probably even
suspected that the construction business which her husband was managing was
acquired with funds furnished by Charlotte.  Nevertheless,  she stood silently
by for more than 28 years and accepted, without complaint, the support payments
which her husband sent to her month in and month out.  Consequently, by her
acquiescence and silence Regina lulled Ralph and Charlotte into the false sense
of security which probably induced them to commingle their separate properties
to the extent that the court found that these properties could no longer be
traced.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   The
report which Regina acquired from the private detective which she hired in 1932
listed the property owned by Charlotte at that time.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     Significantly, up to this point we have held only that Regina is estopped
from claiming a community property interest in property acquired by Ralph and
Charlotte during the period of their invalid marriage. We have not, however,
stated that Regina is also estopped from challenging the validity of Ralph's
Mexican divorce in order to acquire a California divorce in her own right.  We
decline to do so because we believe that there are different degrees of culpable
conduct on the part of both parties in a divorce action which make it possible
for the plaintiff to be estopped from claiming a community property interest in
property accumulated by the defendant spouse after a separation, while still
having the right to sever the marriage. In fact, we can visualize numerous
situations in which the public policy of this state would be subserved by the
legal severance of a hopelessly broken marriage even though the same public
policy would be subverted if the aggrieved party were permitted to claim a
community property interest in property acquired by the estranged marital
partner during the period of a subsequent putative good faith invalid marriage.
Thus, we should not be required to wear "judicial blinders" nor should we refuse
to embrace expansions in legal concepts whenever necessary to accomplish
substantial justice, no matter how dramatic they may appear to be.

     Our main reason for adhering to this view is this: The denial of a divorce
on the estoppel theory does not validate a subsequent marriage ( Spellens v.
Spellens, supra, 49 Cal.2d 210, 220). On the contrary, its sole object is to
prevent the estopped spouse from destroying a subsequent marriage or
unconscionably claiming property rights.  And, it was solely in this context
that our Supreme Court stated that ". . . the public policy of this state
requires the preservation of the second  marriage and the protection of the
rights of the second spouse 'rather than a dubious attempt to resurrect the
original' marriage." ( Rediker v. Rediker, 35 Cal.2d 796, 808 [221 P.2d 1, 20
A.L.R.2d 1152].) However, a stranger to the invalid divorce decree who has
married one of the estopped parties, in good faith, is not himself estopped from
challenging  the invalid marriage ( Rudnick v. Rudnick, 131 Cal.App.2d 227 [280
P.2d 96]), nor is the state estopped from prosecuting for bigamy nor the
government from denying federal benefits ( Williams v. North Carolina, 325 U.S.
226 [89 L.Ed. 1577, 65 S.Ct. 1092, 157 A.L.R. 1366]; Gersten v. Commissioner of
Int. Rev., 267 F.2d 195).

     Manifestly, Regina did not assist her husband to procure a Mexican divorce
and is not in pari delicto with Ralph in this respect.  Moreover, she obviously
knew that Ralph and Charlotte were living together as husband and wife.  Thus,
we may safely assume that she must have believed, or at least surmised, that her
husband had secured a divorce and, having no expertise in this respect, that the
divorce was valid although secured without notice.  6 Ralph told Regina in 1932,
during the confrontation with Charlotte in the Sacramento hotel, that he wanted
a divorce; Regina filed income tax returns in which she claimed to be divorced;
Ralph's mother told Regina that she heard that Ralph had obtained a divorce;
Regina knew that Ralph had adopted Charlotte's daughter Beverley; and she wrote
Ralph in 1960 and asked for a copy of his divorce papers.  7 Consequently, she
should not, in good conscience, be estopped from removing the shackles of a
hopelessly broken marriage, not only as between herself and Ralph, but
completely, legally and in the eyes of the entire world.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6
Significantly, the trial judge did not find that Regina had no belief that Ralph
had procured a divorce; he merely found that she had no ". . . substantial or
convincing knowledge of defendant Ralph Waldo Brown's fraudulent attempt to
procure a Mexican divorce. . . ."
7   In 1960 Regina wrote Ralph the following letter:


        "Dear Ralph,

        For business reasons, I need your divorce papers.  Please send them
     to me at once.  This is urgent.

        We all feel very sad about Beverley.  Please tell her mother that
     for me.  It is a terrible thing to lose an only daughter and words are
     pretty inadequate when one is grief stricken.  However, she has my
     sincere sympathy.

        I will appreciate your sending the papers to me, and will return
     them to you as soon as I have completed my business with them."


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     Moreover, although Regina is estopped from claiming a community property
interest in Ralph's and Charlotte's property, she is not estopped from seeking
reasonable alimony from Ralph.  Ralph sent Regina $ 200 a month from the very
beginning of their separation.  In addition, with the exception of a short
interval, Ralph continued to send the monthly payments until June of 1966, long
after his youngest child left home, and long after his mother died.  Thus, it
would be  inconsistent to hold that Regina is not entitled to continuation of
support from Ralph, since she relied upon such regular monthly support for many
years prior to its abrupt termination in 1966.  In short, she has not waived her
rights in relation to reasonable support from Ralph.

   Appellants' secondary contention that there was "an unreasonable lapse of
time" between Regina's separation and the filing of her divorce complaint, is
without substantial merit.  As we have stated, we can reasonably assume from the
evidence that Regina believed, or at least surmised, that Ralph had acquired a
divorce, and that she also believed the divorce was valid.  It is therefore
logical to conclude that when Regina discovered that the divorce was invalid and
that she was still married to a man who was living with another woman, it
reopened old wounds and caused her mental anguish, as she claimed at the trial.
And, since she filed her action within one year thereafter, she was not guilty
of an "unreasonable delay" as a matter of law.

   In any event, there is ample evidence to support the court's judgment on the
ground of wilful desertion.  Wilful desertion is a "continuing offense" upon
which the statute of limitations never operates as long as the desertion
continues ( Price  v. Price, 114 Cal.App.2d 176 [249 P.2d 841]; Van Ness v. Van
Ness, 32 Cal.App.2d 66 [89 P.2d 166]; Dee v. Dee, 87 Cal.App. 17 [261 P. 501]).
It is the rule that if a judgment is right on any applicable theory, it must be
sustained on appeal ( Sears v. Rule, 27 Cal.2d 131 [163 P.2d 443]; Kuhn v. Ferry
& Hensler, 91 Cal.App.2d 805 [206 P.2d 1]).  And, since we have disposed of the
property issue on the ground of estoppel, we see no reason why the court's
judgment granting the divorce should not be upheld on the desertion theory.

   In view of our decision that Regina is estopped from claiming a community
property interest in the property accumulated by Ralph and Charlotte during the
period of their invalid marriage, we do not reach the question as to whether the
trial court had the power to declare the Ralph-Charlotte limited partnership
dissolved or the other issues relating thereto.  Thus, appellants' only
remaining contention, which must be disposed of in this appeal, is that the
court fixed excessive fees and costs for respondent's attorney.

     It is evident from the record that respondent's counsel, an experienced and
capable lawyer, expended considerable time and effort in the preparation and
presentation of  respondent's divorce case both at the trial level and in this
appeal.  In fact, the trial record alone supports respondent's assertion that
the litigation "involved many intricate and difficult questions, particularly
with regard to the amount and character of the property." Thus, if we were going
to affirm the judgment in its entirety, we would be more reluctant to interfere
with the trial judge's discretion, because in fixing the fee he was entitled to
exercise his discretion and to draw on his own knowledge and experience after
taking into consideration such factors as the nature of the litigation, its
difficulty, the time consumed, the skill required, the skill employed, the
attorney's standing in the profession and the success or failure of the
attorney's efforts ( Elconin v. Yalen, 208 Cal. 546 [282 P. 791]; Berry v.
Chaplin, 74 Cal.App.2d 669 [169 P.2d 453]; 6 Cal.Jur.2d, Attorneys, § 101, pp.
169-172).  However, the success or failure of an attorney's efforts is often the
major factor which is considered in the fixing of attorney fees ( Smith v. Smith
, 115 Cal.App.2d 92 [251 P.2d 720]). Consequently, since we have no way of
knowing to what extent this important factor may have influenced the court
below, we deem it essential that he reconsider this issue in light of our
decision.  Moreover, in doing so the court should also take into consideration
the services rendered and the costs incurred by respondent's attorney in
presenting respondent's viewpoint in this appeal.  As our Supreme Court observed
in Arenson v. National Auto. & Cas. Ins. Co., 48 Cal.2d 528, 540 [310 P.2d 961]:
"Although it has been said that this court possesses the power and ability to
appraise and adjudicate the value of an attorney's services ( Kirk v. Culley
(1927), 202 Cal. 501, 510 [261 P. 994]), we deem it better practice,
particularly where it appears as it does here that there was some
misapprehension in the trial court as to the nature of the issue to be resolved,
that the new determination be made in the trial court."

   For the reasons we have set forth herein, that part of the judgment granting
respondent, Regina Brown, an interlocutory decree of divorce on the ground of
extreme cruelty is affirmed.  In all other respects, the judgment is reversed
and the cause is remanded to the trial court with directions to enter judgment
on the property issue in accordance with the views expressed herein, and on the
basis of evidence previously presented and such additional evidence as may be
presented by the parties, to (1) redetermine  the alimony issue in accordance
with appellant Ralph Waldo Brown's financial position and respondent's needs as
affected by this decision,  and (2) redetermine respondent's attorney fees and
costs, including any allowance for reasonable compensation and costs for
representing respondent in this appeal.


                              75 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              M. R. KERN, Plaintiff and Respondent, v. G. E. KERN,
                            Defendant and Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 8922

           Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

            261 Cal. App. 2d 325; 67 Cal. Rptr. 802; 1968 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1750


                                 April 18, 1968

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied May 10, 1968, and
Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court was Denied June 11,
1968.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of San Bernardino
County and from an order setting aside the judgment and granting the final
decree of divorce nunc pro tunc.  Joseph T. Ciano, Judge.

   Action for divorce.

COUNSEL: Marshall Miles for Defendant and Appellant.

Chapman & Sprague and Leo S. Rich for Plaintiff and Respondent.

JUDGES: Gabbert, J. pro tem.  * McCabe, P. J., and Tamura, J., concurred.

*   Assigned by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: GABBERT

OPINION

     The plaintiff and respondent herein, M. R. Kern, is now deceased and was
the wife of defendant and appellant, G. E. Kern.  For convenience, they may be
referred to respectively as wife or respondent and husband or appellant.

    The wife obtained an interlocutory decree of divorce from the husband on
April 15, 1965.  In May 1965 she suffered a heart attack and was hospitalized
for a week and then spent three weeks recuperating with friends in Los Angeles.
On June 10th or 11th the husband picked her up and brought her back to the home
formerly occupied by the parties in San Bernardino.  They lived together some
eight or nine days before the wife suffered a severe stroke and heart attack on
June 19, 1965.  She was partially paralyzed and rendered mentally incompetent,
and was confined to hospitals or rest homes until her death October 12, 1966.

   On October 12, 1966, Mr. Brock, conservator of the person and estate of the
wife, executed an affidavit for a final decree of divorce. The affidavit states
that the parties had not become reconciled and were both living.  The Brock
affidavit was forwarded to the wife's attorneys but, because October 12 was a
legal holiday, it was not presented to the court, and the final decree was not
entered, until October 13.  In a later declaration filed, opposing the motion of
the husband to set aside a final decree of divorce granted as a result of the
original affidavit for a final decree, Brock declared that when he filed the
affidavit he did not know of the death of the wife.

   In December 1966 the husband filed a motion to set aside the final decree.
The motion so filed was continued for hearing on several occasions.  Before it
could be heard, Mr. Cooper, administrator of the estate of the wife (probate
proceedings being in Los Angeles County) moved for entry of a final  judgment of
divorce nunc pro tunc as of April 1, 1966.  On April 14, 1967, the court granted
both motions:

   (1) Setting aside the final decree of divorce granted October 13, 1966, and

   (2) Ordering a final judgment of divorce entered nunc pro tunc as of April 1,
1966.

   A number of affidavits and declarations by various persons were filed
covering the actions of the parties during the period between the entry of the
interlocutory decree and the date of the wife's death.

   Before considering the merits of the case, the status of the parties is cause
for brief discussion.

     Appellant argues that the right to obtain a final judgment of divorce is a
personal right which should be exercised by a party.  He further contends that
the conservator and administrator had no authority to act because of the failure
to have a substitution of a party made after death of the wife.

   Respondent replies that a person, not a party, may obtain the entry of a
final decree of divorce. He argues that the fact that the administrator of the
estate of Mrs. Kern was not substituted as party-plaintiff is, at most, a mere
irregularity or technical defect.

   The general rule is that, after death of a party, it is improper to render
judgment for or against him without first substituting his executor or
administrator. Many decisions hold that an order entered after the death of a
party to an action is void in the absence of the substitution of the personal
representative of such decedent.  ( Munchiando v. Bach, 203 Cal. 457, 458 [264
P. 762]; Hamilton v. Hamilton, 83 Cal.App.2d 771, 774 [189 P.2d 722]; Maxon v.
Avery, 32 Cal.App.2d 300, 302 [89 P.2d 684]; Scoville v. Keglor, 27 Cal.App.2d
17 [80 P.2d 162]; 1 Witkin, Cal. Proc., p. 399.)

   There is authority, however, which holds such technical lapse to be a mere
irregularity. ( Machado v. Flores, 75 Cal.App.2d 759, 761 [171 P.2d 440]; Hogan
v. Superior Court, 74 Cal.App. 704 [241 P. 584]; Rest., Judgments, § 78.)

   In the case of Hamrick v. Hamrick, 119 Cal.App.2d 839 [260 P.2d 188], the
court discusses the propriety of entering a nunc pro tunc final decree on motion
of a defendant's second wife after his death.  The second wife had married the
husband one day before the entry of a final decree which had been obtained by
the first wife.  The first day on which the final decree could have been entered
was some eight days earlier  than the date of actual entry of the final decree.
The  husband was killed while in the armed services during the Korean conflict,
and the second wife sought the entry of the final decree nunc pro tunc to
protect her marital position and the status of children of the second marriage.

   The first wife contended that the second wife was not a proper party to make
the motion since she was not a party to the divorce proceeding.  The court
rejected this position and stated: "Section 132 gives the court the power to
enter a final judgment after death.  Section 133 gives the court the power to
enter a final judgment nunc pro tunc.  These sections must be read together.  .
. . * While it is true the first sentence of section 133 provides for nunc pro
tunc entry 'on the motion of either party' the second sentence (under which
respondent presented her motion) contains no such language, and such language in
the case of a death (which is the case here) would be just as inappropriate in
section 133 as it would be in section 132.

   "Since under section 132 the power of the court remains unimpaired to enter a
final judgment of divorce after the death of either or both of the parties, and
since sections 132 and 133 relate to the same subject and must be construed
together . . . * we are satisfied that the court had the power under section 133
to make the nunc pro tunc entry as of July 6, 1950, on the motion of respondent,
who, after all, was seeking only that to which Lieutenant Hamrick, the party
defendant, would have been clearly entitled had he lived, namely, the validation
of their marital status as of July 12, 1950." (* Citations omitted [original
emphasis].) ( Hamrick v. Hamrick, supra, 119 Cal.App.2d 839, 843, 845.)

   It would appear that there is authority for the court to consider the failure
to substitute a personal representative for the deceased in this case as a mere
irregularity. Additional cases cited below will establish the fact that the
right to obtain a final decree of divorce is a right that can be exercised by
someone not a party to the divorce action. Thus, the failure to substitute the
administrator of the wife's estate as plaintiff after her death is not a
jurisdictional defect.

   The various issues relating to vacating the final decree of divorce and the
entry of the final judgment of divorce nunc pro tunc were contested on the
merits.  At most, the only action lacking was a formal substitution order.
This, at best, was a mere irregularity in procedure not affecting any
substantial right which, in view of the circumstances, would hardly warrant a
reversal.

     The husband received a favorable ruling from the trial court on his motion
to set aside the final decree of divorce which was entered at the request of the
conservator There is no attack on this ruling in the appeal before us.  The
determination of husband's motion by the trial court was amply supported on the
ground that the declaration for the entry of the final decree made by the
conservator was at best a mistake, and at worst a fraud on the court.  Since the
wife was deceased at the time the declaration was filed and the final decree
signed, and these facts were not presented to the court, the action of the court
in setting aside the final decree first entered was entirely proper.

   The husband, in his brief on appeal, directs his attack against the action of
the trial court granting the motion of the administrator to enter the final
decree of divorce nunc pro tunc and contends that:

   (1) The motion for a final judgment of divorce was not supported by
substantial evidence;

   (2) The court had no power to grant a final decree of divorce when that
marriage had already been dissolved by death of a party;

   (3) There was no showing of mistake, negligence or inadvertence to justify
the court in entering the final judgment nunc pro tunc.

    These contentions are controverted in each instance by the respondent.

     First, considering the question as to whether there was substantial
evidence to support plaintiff's motion for entry of a final decree of divorce
nunc pro tunc, we must look at the declarations filed before the trial judge.

   A major question before the trial judge was the issue of reconciliation. An
analysis of the declarations shows that the purported reconciliation had been in
effect for nine or ten days up until the time that Mrs. Kern was taken seriously
ill and thereafter spent the rest of her life under medical or rest home care.
Her mental condition was also such that she apparently was unable to make
decisions for herself after her stroke, and a conservator of her person and
estate was appointed.  Mr. Kern visited her frequently during this period before
her death.

   Some of the opposing declarations cast doubt on the true nature of the
claimed reconciliation. The primary difficulty of the marriage was the drinking
problem which plagued the husband.  The declarations and transcript of the
default hearing on the divorce point out that this caused the divorce in  the
first place, and that the wife was wary of the promises of reformation made by
the husband.

     The general rule is that a reconciliation will result if the parties
intended to and did reunite as husband and wife.  There must be a mutual
intention to so reunite ( Dean v. Dean, 77 Cal.App.2d 98 [174 P.2d 705]), and
this intention must be in good faith.  ( Helbush v. Helbush, 209 Cal. 758 [290
P. 18].)

     The California Family Lawyer (2 Cont.Ed. Bar, pp. 1350, 1351) contains an
excellent summary of the rules governing reconciliation. Occasional cohabitation
and isolated acts of intercourse are not controlling circumstances.  An intent
to permanently reunite is necessary.  The length of time that the parties
cohabit is not controlling if they have actually resumed marital relations
intending to become reconciled. In Peters v. Peters, 16 Cal.App.2d 383 [60 P.2d
313], the parties cohabited (as in the present case) for about ten days.  The
court there held that mere passage of time was not conclusive as to a permanent
reconciliation. The controlling question is the actual finding of an intent to
reconcile.

    Angell v. Angell, 84 Cal.App.2d 339 [191 P.2d 54], held that it was an abuse
of discretion for the trial court to deny a final decree of divorce to a wife
who had accepted her husband back on condition that he stop drinking for a year,
a condition which he violated.  The court stated at page 343: "If a
reconciliation based on unconditional forgiveness is effected before the entry
of a final decree the trial court should deny such a decree to either party.  .
. .  But mere cohabitation where a reconciliation had not in fact been effected
will not prevent the trial court from granting the final decree."

     Assuming that the declarations in this case might sustain a conditional
reconciliation, such would be a question of fact for the trial court to
determine.  In the Angell case, supra, the court stated: "Whether an agreement
is an unconditional one of forgiveness, and therefore justifies the denial of
the final decree, or is a conditional one, and therefore warrants the granting
of the final decree, is a question of fact. If the evidence, or the reasonable
inferences therefrom, is conflicting, the determination of the question by the
trial court, in accordance with elementary principles, is conclusive on the
appellate court." ( Angell v. Angell, supra, 84 Cal.App.2d 339, 343.)

   An examination of the various declarations which were filed in the present
case reveals sufficient factual basis for a finding  that the parties had not
become so reconciled as to have fully resumed their marital status with the
intention of making it permanent.

     The second question for consideration is whether the court had the power to
grant a final decree of divorce when it had, in fact, already been dissolved by
the death of one of the parties.

   A final judgment of divorce may be entered after the death of a spouse.
Section 132 of the Civil Code provides, in part, as follows: "The death of
either party after the entry of the interlocutory judgment does not impair the
power of the court to enter final judgment as hereinbefore provided; but such
entry shall not validate any marriage contracted by either party before the
entry of such final judgment. . . ." Section 133 of the Civil Code, as it was in
effect at the time this matter was heard, provides: "Whenever either of the
parties in a divorce action is, under the law, entitled to a final judgment, but
by mistake, negligence or inadvertence the same has not been signed, filed and
entered, if no appeal has been taken from the interlocutory judgment or motion
made for a new trial to annul or set aside the judgment or for relief under
Chapter 8, Title 6 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the court, on the
motion of either party thereto or upon its own motion, may cause a final
judgment to be signed, dated, filed and entered therein granting the divorce as
of the date when the same could have been given or made by the court if applied
for.  The court may cause such final judgment to be signed, dated, filed, and
entered nunc pro tunc as aforesaid, even though a final judgment may have been
previously entered where by mistake, negligence or inadvertence the same has not
been signed, filed or entered as soon as it could have been entered under the
law if applied for.  Upon the filing of such final judgment, the parties to such
action shall be deemed to have been restored to the status of single persons as
of the date affixed to such judgment, and any marriage of either of such parties
subsequent to one year after the granting of the interlocutory judgment as shown
by the minutes of the court, and after the final judgment could have been
entered under the law if applied for, shall be valid for all purposes as of the
date affixed to such final judgment, upon the filing thereof."

    Sections 132 and 133 of the Civil Code must be construed together. ( Estate
of Hughes, 80 Cal.App.2d 550 [182 P.2d 253].) Prior to 1935, entry of final
judgment of divorce was governed by section 132 of the Civil Code.  A marriage
was  dissolved only on the entry of the final judgment and there was no
provision in law for the entry of a judgment nunc pro tunc.  Section 132
provides that the death of either party shall not impair the court's  power to
enter a final decree. In 1935 section 138 was enacted.  It expressly authorizes
the court to enter final judgments nunc pro tunc as of the date when such could
have been entered in the event that through mistake, negligence or inadvertence
none has been entered.  (Also see Hamrick v. Hamrick, supra, 119 Cal.App.2d 839,
843, 845; Hurst v. Hurst, 227 Cal.App.2d 859 [39 Cal.Rptr. 162]; Adoption of
Graham, 58 Cal.2d 899 [27 Cal.Rptr. 163, 377 P.2d 275]; Macedo v. Macedo, 29
Cal.App.2d 387 [84 P.2d 552]; Price v. Price, 242 Cal.App.2d 705 [51 Cal.Rptr.
699].)

   Thus, the court had the power to enter the final decree nunc pro tunc even
though one of the parties was deceased.

     Third, it is argued by appellant that there was no showing of mistake,
negligence or inadvertence to justify the court in entering the final judgment
of divorce nunc pro tunc.

   It is clear under the circumstances of this case that there was no mistake,
negligence or inadvertence on the part of Mrs. Kern to seek a final decree of
divorce. For several months before and after the date on which a final decree
could have been granted, she was mentally unable to fully comprehend the marital
situation.

    Mr. Brock, the conservator, who filed the declaration for the final decree
on the day she died, stated in one of his declarations filed herein: "She
[plaintiff] had intermittent lucid periods, but in my opinion her mental
condition was such that she would not have been able to decide whether or not
she wanted to reconcile with Mr. Kern.  I was advised by my attorney that a
final judgment of divorce could be entered in this case at any time after March
10, 1965 . . . and that I could effect the entry of the final judgment if I
thought it was necessary or proper.  However, I did not do so because I hoped
that Mrs. Kern's mental condition might improve to the point where I could
intelligently discuss it with her." [Italics added.]

   The conservator, in his declaration filed in support of the motion for nunc
pro tunc entry of final decree of divorce stated:

   [Paragraph II] "After the defendant left the state of California having, as I
later learned, gone to Indiana, the attorney representing me as conservator of
the person and estate of the plaintiff in this case agreed with me that we
should proceed to enter a final judgment of divorce. We came  to that conclusion
several months after Mr. Kern left.  He left around April of 1966.

   [Paragraph III] "My attorney and I discussed the entry of a final judgment
again from time to time thereafter but we inadvertently did not do so until Mrs.
Kern's illness became worse in October 1966.  As indicated by the file in the
conservatorship proceeding, this Court's Case No. C 266, there were numerous
other matters to be handled therein and we inadvertently did not get around to
requesting the entry of the final judgment because of the press of the other
business of the conservatorship."

   There is no indication that Mrs. Kern requested the entry of the final
judgment at any time.

   The case of Berry v. Berry, 140 Cal.App.2d 50, 59-60 [294 P.2d 757], states:
"There must be a showing of mistake, negligence, or inadvertence. . . .* In the
absence of such a showing the court is without power to enter the final decree
nunc pro tunc.  'A mistake of fact is when a person understands the facts to be
other than they are; a mistake of law is when a person knows the facts as they
really are but has a mistaken belief as to the legal consequences of those
facts.  . . .* Inadvertence is defined as lack of heedfulness or attentiveness,
inattention, fault from negligence.' . . .* Negligence may be passive in
character: it may consist in heedlessly refraining from doing the proper thing.
When the circumstances call for activity, one who does not do what he should is
negligent.  . . .* Negligence is sometimes defined as the failure to use
ordinary care in the management of one's person or property.  . . .* The essence
of negligence is the failure to exercise due care and take proper precaution in
a particular case.  . . .* In determining the presence or absence of negligence
the test is: what would a reasonably prudent person do under similar
circumstances?  . . .* Negligence always relates to some circumstances of time,
place, or person.  . . .*

   "There is no rule of law which compels a party to apply for a final decree
and the circumstances may be such that a party does not wish to apply for one.
Many factors may prompt inaction, i.e., there may have been a reconciliation or
there may be hope of one.  There was no showing in the present case of any
mistake or inadvertence; or of any circumstances which called for activity on
the part of plaintiff between July 7, 1953, and July 20, 1954; or of failure on
his part to exercise ordinary care; or that a reasonably prudent person would
have applied for the final decree within that period.  In short,  there was no
showing of 'mistake, negligence or inadvertence.'  The mere failure of a party
to apply for a final decree does not constitute mistake, negligence, or
inadvertence. . . ." [* Citations omitted.]

   It has been held that inadvertence and negligence may consist of a lack of
heedfulness or attentiveness by refraining from doing the proper thing, and by
failing to act when action is required.  ( Hurst v. Hurst, supra, 227 Cal.App.2d
859; Berry v. Berry, supra, 140 Cal.App.2d 50; Hull v. Hull, 102 Cal.App.2d 382
[227 P.2d 546].) The Hurst case points out at page 867: "Likewise, delay in the
entry of the final judgment of divorce beyond the time when such judgment could
have been obtained is a sufficient basis for finding inadvertence and negligence
when the party entitled to such final judgment had no valid reason for such
delay." [Italics added.] (Citing: Overby v. Overby, 154 Cal.App.2d 813 [317 P.2d
91]; and Hamrick v. Hamrick, supra.)

   In the present case, a party did not seek entry of a final judgment. There
were valid reasons, i.e., her physical and mental illness, which prevented the
wife from acting.  One of the declarations on file herein states, in substance,
that the deceased had stated that her family kept talking to her about getting a
divorce but that she was not in a condition to be making such a decision.

     Section 133 of the Civil Code does not specifically set out whose
negligence, mistake or inadvertence the relief must be founded upon.  In Hamrick
v. Hamrick, supra, 119 Cal.App.2d 839, a second wife sought a final decree of
divorce nunc pro tunc to end the deceased husband's prior marriage. The first
wife argued that there was insufficient showing of negligence, mistake or
inadvertence, and presented an affidavit of the first wife's attorney that he
had informed the husband not to remarry until he was notified that the final
decree of divorce had been obtained.  The appellate court held that since the
husband was deceased and could not speak, the attorney's affidavit stood
unchallenged.  However, because of the presumption of the validity of the second
marriage the lower court could have concluded that the husband might have
mistaken or misunderstood what was said by the attorney, and this mistake itself
would come within the statutory language.  (See Comment in 6 U.C.L.A. L.Rev., "
Nunc Pro Tunc -- A Cure for Bastardy and Bigamy in California," pp. 298, 306,
307.) In the Berry case, supra, there was no second marriage, and the court
refused to imply negligence, mistake,  or inadvertence from the single fact that
the final decree had not been entered as soon as it could have been.  However,
in the Berry case the appellate court stressed the point that there was no
showing that the final decree had not been entered because of mistake,
negligence or inadvertence.

   The authors of the comment mentioned above in 6 U.C.L.A. L.Rev. at page 307,
after discussing the cases of Hull v. Hull, supra; Hamrick v. Hamrick, supra;
and Berry v. Berry, supra; make the following pertinent comment: "Thus, in the
light of the cases, it appears that though negligence, mistake, or inadvertence
must always be shown, the amount of proof required differs, depending upon
whether or not there has been a subsequent marriage after the final decree could
have been entered.   If there has been a second marriage this is a circumstance
in which the failure to obtain a final decree is clearly indicative of mistake,
negligence, or inadvertence. The presumptions in favor of the validity of the
second marriage are thus invoked, lessening the amount of direct evidence
required to show mistake, negligence, or inadvertence. On the other hand, where
there has been no second marriage the failure to obtain a final decree is
equivocal and thus gives rise to no presumptions."

   In essence, then, this present case condenses into the inquiry: Was there a
failure to seek a final decree of divorce because  of some mistake, negligence
or inadvertence on the part of the conservator? We thus limit the issue because,
as we have stated, the wife was in no condition to seek such final decree and it
seems clear that the administrator of her estate was in no position to claim
that he was mistaken, inadvertent or negligent in not filing for a final decree
since he could not have been appointed until after her death.  Further, the
administrator did not file any declaration in this matter.

   The trial court had before it the declarations which we have mentioned, as
well as others which have not been quoted.  The declarations are sketchy.  The
husband and others aver that there was a reconciliation. Others deny such
reconciliation.

   Under the circumstances of this case, the granting or denial of a motion to
enter a final decree of divorce nunc pro tunc, heard on affidavits, rested in
the sound discretion of the trial court, and its order should not be disturbed
on appeal unless it clearly appears that the trial court was guilty of an abuse
of discretion. The burden is on appellant-husband to show that there was an
abuse of the trial court's discretion.  The trial court impliedly found that
there was inadvertence on the part of the conservator in failing to seek the
final decree when  the same could have been entered.  In those cases where the
issues are tried on affidavits, the rule on appeal is that the affidavits which
favor the contentions of the prevailing party establish the facts stated
therein, and all facts which reasonably may be inferred therefrom.  ( Wolfson v.
Haddan, 105 Cal.App.2d 147, 149 [233 P.2d 145].) When there is a conflict in the
facts presented by affidavits, the determination of those facts by the trial
court will not be disturbed on appeal.  ( Deyl v. Deyl, 88 Cal.App.2d 536, 543
[199 P.2d 424]; Aldrich v. Aldrich, 203 Cal. 433 [264 P. 754]; Patterson v.
Keeney, 165 Cal. 465 [132 P. 1043, Ann.Cas. 1914D 232].)   We do not find an
abuse of discretion in the ruling made by the trial court.

   The trial court made proper orders on the two motions.  The failure to
substitute a personal representative for the decedent, particularly under these
circumstances where appellant-husband accepted a favorable ruling on his motion,
is not a jurisdictional defect. The motion for a final decree of divorce nunc
pro tunc was supported by conflicting but substantial evidence, and the court
had the power to grant a final decree of divorce nunc pro tunc even though Mrs.
Kern was deceased.

   The order of the superior court granting the motion for entry of the final
decree of divorce nunc pro tunc is affirmed.


                              76 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              MARCELLA JEAN HART, as Guardian, etc., Appellant, v.
                        ELIZABETH RICHARDSON, Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 4886

            Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District

            134 Cal. App. 2d 242; 285 P.2d 685; 1955 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      1748


                                  July 1, 1955

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of San Diego
County.  Robert B. Burch, Judge.

   Action for cancellation of note and trust deed.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Judgments--Default Judgments--Relief Granted.  --Generally, by default
judgment no relief can be given in excess of that demanded in complaint.

(2) Stipulations--Construction--Stipulation of Facts.  --A written stipulation
of facts authorizing rendering of judgment accordingly should be construed with
and is controlling over pleadings.

(3) Id.--Effect--Estoppel.  --Generally, one may be estopped by agreement or
stipulation made in judicial proceeding, especially where stipulation has been
acted on and adverse party would be injured if it were not given effect.

(4) Id.--Effect--Estoppel.  --Where former husband, in action against former
wife for cancellation of note and trust deed, furnished stipulation filed in
divorce action that there was no community property and that note in question
was wife's separate property, and he in effect consented to judgment which was
entered in divorce case, he is estopped from questioning effect of his
stipulation.

(5) Appeal--Objections--Adherence to Theory of Case.  --Alleged fraud on part of
former wife in procuring divorce decree may not be urged by former husband on
his appeal from adverse judgment in action to cancel note and trust deed, where
such issue was not raised in pleadings or at trial of action.

(6) Divorce--Judgments--Equitable Relief--Fraud.  --Validity of marriage is
matter which is necessarily intrinsic in divorce decree.

(7) Judgments--Equitable Relief--Fraud--Extrinsic Fraud.  --To constitute
extrinsic fraud there must have been some representation or concealment which
prevented plaintiff from having his day in court.

(8) Divorce--Judgments--Equitable Relief--Fraud.  --A finding that no extrinsic
fraud was used by wife in procuring divorce decree, and that she did not know
that husband was incompetent when she secured execution of note and trust deed
in order to obtain reconveyance of a joint tenancy interest in realty, was
sustained by evidence showing, among other things, that the husband had talked
about matter to several persons between time he was served with summons in
divorce action and time papers were signed, that he was advised to see a lawyer,
but refused to do so, and by wife's testimony that he gave her this interest in
property and that he then said that everybody wanted to take place away from him
so he wanted her to have interest in it for his own protection.

COUNSEL: White & Condra and Francis J. Maher for Appellant.

Edwin M. Campbell for Respondent.

JUDGES: Barnard, P. J.  Griffin, J., and Mussell, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: BARNARD

OPINION

     Alva E. Richardson, who will be referred to as the plaintiff, owned four
lots in National City on which he operated a motel. On March 25, 1951, he and
the defendant were married in Yuma, Arizona.  On November 15, 1951, he deeded
the motel property to the defendant and himself as joint tenants.  On April 11,
1952, the defendant filed an action for divorce, and another action for a
partition of the motel property.  The complaint in the divorce action alleged
that the community property consisted of the furniture in the motel, and that
the parties owned a motel business situated on property held by them in joint
tenancy. The  prayer was for a divorce, for all of the community property, and
for such other relief as the court deemed proper.  Summons and a copy of the
divorce complaint were served on this plaintiff on April 14, 1952.

   On May 23, 1952, this defendant signed a deed reconveying her interest in the
motel property to this plaintiff, and he executed and delivered to her a note
for $ 13,375, secured by a trust deed on the property.  This deed and trust deed
were recorded on June 4, 1952.  On the same day (May 23) this plaintiff also
signed a stipulation, entitled in the divorce case, stating that said action
might be heard on the complaint as a default matter and without notice to him,
and further stipulating that a certain 1950 automobile and a certain note for $
13,375 secured by trust deed on the motel property were this defendant's
separate property, and that there was no community property of the parties.
This stipulation was filed in the divorce action on June 6, 1952.  This
defendant also dismissed her action for partition.

   An interlocutory decree of divorce was entered on June 16, 1952, in which the
court also found and adjudged that there was no community property, and that the
1950 automobile and this note for $ 13,375, secured by a trust deed, were the
separate property of this defendant.

   On November 21, 1952, this plaintiff was adjudicated an incompetent person,
and a guardian was appointed.  On February 11, 1953, this action was filed.  The
complaint alleged that on May 23, 1952, the plaintiff owned this real estate as
his separate property; that he was then, and for more than a year had been,
incompetent; that on April 11, 1952, the defendant filed an action to partition
said property, and an action for divorce; that on May 23, 1952, the defendant
threatened to place a receiver on this property, and supplied the plaintiff with
liquor; that while the plaintiff was in an intoxicated and incompetent
condition, which was known to the defendant, she caused him to sign a
stipulation stating that the $ 13,375 note and trust deed, and the 1950
automobile, were her separate property; and that at the same time she
fraudulently induced him to sign this note and trust deed. The prayer was for a
cancellation of this note and trust deed, and this written stipulation.

   The answer denied the material allegations of the complaint and alleged that
on November 15, 1951, the parties became the owners of the real property as
joint tenants; that on April 11, 1952, the defendant filed an action for
divorce, and another action for partition of the real property; that summons was
served on April 14, 1952; that, thereafter, the defendant deeded her interest in
the real property to the plaintiff in consideration of his assigning to her the
automobile, and his execution and delivery to her of the note for $ 13,375
secured by a trust deed on the real property; that this consideration was
reasonable and just; and that no offer has been made by anyone to restore to the
defendant her interest in the real property. The answer further alleged the
entry of the divorce decree in the other action decreeing that the automobile
and note were her separate property; that said decree had become final; that
said decree has become res judicata as to any issue in this action; and that the
plaintiff is estopped from seeking any cancellation of the documents mentioned
in the complaint.

   After a trial the court found that all of the material allegations of the
complaint are untrue; that all of the denials and allegations in the answer are
true; that the same issue of property rights as that here involved was presented
and determined by the court in the divorce proceeding; that the court had
jurisdiction in the divorce action to determine the right and title to the note
and trust deed; that the plaintiff had due notice of said divorce action and the
opportunity to be heard therein, and was then and there competent so to do; that
he was not prevented in any manner from a full participation in said divorce
action; and that no extrinsic fraud was used or practiced in the procurement of
said divorce decree. A judgment was entered  in favor of the defendant, from
which the plaintiff has appealed.

   It is first contended that the court erred in holding that the judgment of
divorce was res judicata as to the issue in this action.  It is argued that the
issue of fraud was not a necessary issue in the other action, and that the
adjudication in the divorce decree that the $ 13,375 note was the separate
property of the wife exceeded the prayer of the complaint with respect to
property rights, which was only that the court award her all of the community
property.  The general rule is that by a default judgment no relief can be given
in excess of that demanded by the complaint.  ( Burtnett v. King, 33 Cal.2d 805
[205 P.2d 657, 12 A.L.R.2d 333].) In that case, it was stated that "The essence
of the policy underlying section 580 of the Code of Civil Procedure, supra, is
that in default cases, defendant must be given notice of what judgment may be
taken against him . . ." In that case it was  further pointed out that no
contention of estoppel had been made, and that there was nothing in the record
from which it could be said that the doctrine of estoppel was applicable to the
situation there involved.  In the instant case, this plaintiff furnished a
stipulation to the effect that there was no community property and that this
note was the separate property of this respondent, which stipulation was used in
the case.   In Capital Nat. Bank v. Smith, 62 Cal.App.2d 328 [144 P.2d 655], the
court said: "When a written stipulation of facts authorizes the rendering of
judgment accordingly, that agreement should be construed with and it becomes
controlling over the pleadings.  It has been held the stipulation merges with
the pleadings and is controlling with respect to the agreed facts therein
contained."  In Morrow v. Morrow, 40 Cal.App.2d 474 [105 P.2d 129], it is said:
"As a general rule, however, one may be estopped by an agreement or stipulation
made in a judicial proceeding . . .  The case for estoppel by stipulation is
greatly strengthened, of course, where the stipulation has been acted upon and
the adverse party would be injured if it were not given effect."  In accordance
with the stipulation the court here found that there was no community property,
for which the wife had prayed, and found that the note in question was her
separate property. The situation was changed by the stipulation, and this
plaintiff was not without notice of the form of judgment that might be expected.
In effect, he consented to the judgment which was entered.  He should be
estopped from questioning the effect of his stipulation, and the court so found.

     It is further contended that the court erred in adjudging that no extrinsic
fraud was used in the procurement of the judgment of divorce. It is first argued
that the respondent's joint tenancy interest in the real property was conveyed
to her in November, 1951, for a fiduciary purpose only, that she thereby became
a trustee for this plaintiff, and that her conduct in exacting the execution of
the note and trust deed in order to obtain a reconveyance of the trust corpus
must, as a matter of law, be held to have been fraudulent.  The respondent
testified that this plaintiff gave her this interest in the property in
November, and that he said at the time that everybody wanted to take the place
away from him so he wanted her to have an interest in it for his own protection.
While there was some evidence justifying a conflicting inference, not only was
the question one of fact but this matter  could, and should if relied on, have
been raised in the prior action.  Moreover, this contention was not raised in
the pleadings or at the trial of this action and is raised for the first time on
appeal.  The respondent had this interest in the real property, and was asking
for some community property when this stipulation was signed.  By way of a
partial settlement of the controversy this plaintiff entered into an agreement
with the respondent, and executed papers accordingly.  The facts support the
estoppel which was found by the court.

   It is also argued that the court refused to permit this plaintiff to
introduce evidence to prove that at the time these parties were married the
respondent had another husband living in New York.  In that connection, the
respondent was asked by this plaintiff's counsel "Did you disclose  to the court
at the time of obtaining your divorce decree that you had a husband living in
New York?" An objection to this question was sustained.  No other evidence of
such a prior marriage was offered.   The validity of a marriage is a matter
which is necessarily intrinsic in a divorce decree. ( Mumma v. Mumma, 86
Cal.App.2d 133 [194 P.2d 24].)   To constitute extrinsic fraud there must have
been some representation or concealment which prevented the plaintiff from
having his day in court.  ( Gale v. Witt, 31 Cal.2d 362 [188 P.2d 755].) If
error be assumed in this connection, no extrinsic fraud appears.

     It is also contended that the finding that no extrinsic fraud was used in
procuring the divorce decree is unsupported by the evidence; and that the
evidence "indicates" that the respondent knew that this plaintiff was
incompetent when she procured his signature to the waiver and to the note and
trust deed. The court found against the appellant in both of these respects, and
these findings are amply supported by the evidence.  This plaintiff was called
to the stand by appellant's counsel and his testimony takes up 50 pages of the
transcript.  He testified that he did not remember being married to the
respondent; that he was told the next day that he was married, but he did not
believe it; that he did not remember anything about the deed conveying to her a
joint tenancy in the property; that he remembered nothing about the divorce
except that he was told that she was getting a divorce; that he remembered
signing the stipulation and trust deed and note in the lawyer's office, but that
he did not know what he was signing; and in general, that he could remember
nothing about any business transaction during the  15 months in question.  He
could not remember anything about the conversation in the lawyer's office at the
time the papers were signed, or what the lawyer had said to him about the
agreement and the effect of the papers, although these things had been taken
down in shorthand at the time and were read to him.  A reading of his testimony
discloses why it was not believed by the trial judge.  There was also evidence
that he talked about the matter to his brother-in-law, to a friend, and to a
justice of the peace between the time he was served with summons in the divorce
action and the time the papers were signed on May 23; that he was advised to see
a lawyer; and that he refused to do so.  The findings in question are also
supported by the testimony of the respondent.

   If it be assumed that the decree in the divorce action was not res judicata
with respect to the note here in question, and that there was extrinsic fraud in
procuring that decree the plaintiff, or someone in his behalf, would of course
be entitled to bring this action.  However, it was still incumbent upon the
appellant to prove that this note was obtained by undue influence or fraud.
This burden was not met, and the court's findings to the contrary are sustained
by the evidence.

   The judgment is affirmed.


                              77 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             In the Matter of the Estate of JAMES McNEIL, Deceased.
          EDWARD WHITE, Appellant, v. FRANK McLAUGHLIN, Administrator,
                                   Respondent

                                 S. F. No. 4915

                  Supreme Court of California, Department One

                 155 Cal. 333; 100 P. 1086; 1900 Cal. LEXIS 533


                                 March 16, 1900

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Hearing In Bank Denied.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from an order of the Superior Court of Santa Cruz
County granting letters of administration and from an order denying a new trial.
Lucas F. Smith, Judge.

COUNSEL: Sullivan & Sullivan, Theo. J. Roche, and Cassin & Lucas, for Appellant.


D. M. Delmas, Wm. T. Jeter, Henry C. McPike, and Benj. K. Knight, for
Respondent.

JUDGES: Angellotti, J.  Shaw, J., and Sloss, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: ANGELLOTTI

OPINION

     Edward White, a petitioner for letters of administration of the estate of
James McNeil, deceased,  appeals from an order granting letters of
administration to Frank McLaughlin, and also from an order denying his motion
for a new trial.  We shall not consider various objections made by respondent to
the consideration of these appeals, but will proceed with a discussion on the
merits of the appeal from the order appointing McLaughlin administrator.

   James McNeil died intestate on April 1, 1906.  Margaret McNeil, claiming to
be his surviving wife, requested the superior court of Santa Cruz County to
appoint Edward White as administrator, and White filed his petition for letters,
accompanied by Margaret's written request.  Louise R. McNeil, also claiming to
be the surviving wife of deceased, requested said court to appoint Frank
McLaughlin as administrator, and McLaughlin filed his petition for letters,
accompanied by the written request of Louise.  The petitions were heard
together, the court impaneling a jury to determine the question which of the two
claimants was the surviving wife. Petitioner McLaughlin made his proof in
support of Louise, and rested.  Thereupon petitioner White, through his counsel,
made his opening statement as to what he would prove in support of Margaret.
Counsel for McLaughlin then moved for a nonsuit as to White, on such opening
statement, and this motion, after argument, was granted by the trial court.
White was not allowed to offer any evidence.  The court then directed the jury
to find a verdict in favor of Louise, and such a verdict was rendered.  The
court then made its order appointing McLaughlin as administrator.

   It is essential to an understanding of the legal questions presented that a
brief statement should be made of certain material facts shown by the evidence
in support of the claim of Louise, none of which was proposed to be controverted
by Margaret, according to the opening statement of her counsel.  Margaret and
the deceased intermarried in the state of Pennsylvania on July 4, 1865, and
there lived together as husband and wife until about the year 1890.  Some time
during the year 1890 deceased came to California, and continued to reside in
this state until his death.  Margaret never left the state of Pennsylvania.  On
November 19, 1891, deceased instituted an action in the superior court of the
city and county of San Francisco against Margaret for a divorce on the ground of
extreme cruelty alleged to have occurred  during the years 1889, 1890, and 1891.
The judgment-roll in this action was introduced in evidence, showing service of
summons by publication, the entry of Margaret's default on February 24, 1892,
for failure to appear and answer, the findings of the court to the effect that
all of the allegations of the complaint are true, and a judgment given on
February 24, 1892, dissolving the marriage theretofore existing between Margaret
and deceased. On March 1, 1902, deceased and Louise were united in marriage in
San Rafael,  California, by a regularly ordained minister of the gospel, and
thenceforth lived together as husband and wife until the death  of deceased. The
decree of divorce given by the San Francisco superior court has never been
vacated or annulled.  An attempt was made by Margaret to have it decreed null
and void for want of jurisdiction and fraud, by an action in equity instituted
in the United States circuit court for the ninth circuit, the amended bill of
the complainant therein being filed therein December 6, 1895.  A demurrer to
this bill was sustained January 11, 1897, with leave to the complainant therein
to amend her bill within ten days.  No amendment was made, and subsequent to the
death of deceased, -- viz. on July 5, 1906, judgment was given therein that the
action be dismissed.  This judgment was received in evidence over the objection
of White that, as the time for appeal therefrom had not expired, it was not
admissible. Counsel have elaborately argued the question of the effect of this
judgment pending the time within which an appeal might be taken, but, in our
view of the case, we regard it as entirely immaterial.  It was not a judgment
purporting to annul or vacate the superior court judgment, and the most that can
be said for Margaret in the matter is that she has an action pending looking to
the annulment of the superior court judgment.  The mere pendency of such an
action could not impair the force of such judgment in the slightest degree.

   Learned counsel for White earnestly assert that it was gross error for the
trial court to refuse to allow them to introduce evidence in support of
Margaret's claim, in view of their statement that they proposed to prove "that
Louise R. McNeil is not the surviving wife of James McNeil deceased, but that
Margaret McNeil is the widow, and entitled to succeed to the widow's share of
the decedent's estate." If this were all, undoubtedly  their claim would be well
based.  But it is apparent from the record that this was simply a statement by
counsel of a legal conclusion upon the specific facts which they expected to
prove and which they detailed at great length.  After the motion for a nonsuit
had been made, counsel amplified the statement previously made, and there was no
intimation in the court below and there has been no intimation in any of the
briefs that counsel had any evidence to offer other than such evidence as was
detailed in the statements made before the trial court.  Regardless of the
question whether it is a proper or commendable practice to grant a nonsuit on
the opening statement of counsel, or whether there is any such thing known to
our law as a motion for nonsuit on the hearing of rival applications for letters
of administration, it is apparent that the order appealed from should not be
reversed merely for the purpose of allowing the appellant to offer evidence that
would not be admissible to impair the effect of the case made by the other
applicant.  The case is practically simply one where certain evidence has been
offered and excluded by the trial court.

   We are thus brought to a consideration of the matters which White sought to
prove in support of Margaret's claim that she was the surviving wife of
deceased. There was and is no pretense that she again became his wife after the
judgment of divorce given on February 24, 1892.  Her claim is based entirely on
the marriage of July 4, 1865, which she contends has never been dissolved.  If
the divorce judgment is to be given full effect as a valid judgment between the
parties thereto, it is apparent that her contention must fail, for by its terms
the marriage relation theretofore existing between her and deceased was thereby
terminated.  It was therefore essential for her, in order to prevail, to show
that this judgment was for some reason void or inapplicable.  Unless she could
do this, the judgment must necessarily stand as an insuperable obstacle to the
establishment by her of any claim that she continued to be the wife of deceased.

   Any attack in this proceeding upon the divorce judgment is of course
essentially a collateral attack. It is thoroughly settled in this state that a
judgment of one of our superior courts cannot be held void upon collateral
attack unless it is void upon its face, i. e., unless its invalidity is apparent
upon an inspection of the judgment-roll. If it is valid on its face, extrinsic
evidence is not admissible on a collateral attack for the purpose of impeaching
it.

   In the case at bar it was claimed the divorce judgment was void upon its
face, but it was not necessary for appellant to introduce any evidence in
support of this claim, as it was stated he proposed to do.  The judgment-roll in
that action had been introduced in evidence by respondent,  and its correctness
was not questioned.  It was not proposed to show that the papers so introduced
in evidence by respondent were not true and full copies of the original papers
in the action attached together by the clerk of the superior court as the
judgment-roll therein.  Whether or not the judgment was void on its face was to
be determined solely upon an inspection of such of those papers as, under the
law, constituted the judgment-roll in the action.

   The contention that the judgment is void on its face is based on the claim
that the complaint for divorce was fatally defective in two particulars.  At the
time the action was brought, section 128 of the Civil Code provided, as it does
now, that "a divorce must not be granted unless the plaintiff has been a
resident of the state for one year, and of the county in which the action is
brought three months next preceding the commencement of the action," and the
allegations of the complaint as to plaintiff's residence were that he is and has
been a resident of the state for "more than one year preceding the commencement
of the action," and of the city and county of San Francisco  "for more than
three months preceding the commencement of the action," omitting the word
"next." The cruelty alleged consisted of abusive and slanderous statements
habitually made by the defendant of and concerning plaintiff to various persons,
occasioning him grievous mental suffering, and the making of these statements
was alleged solely on information and belief.

   If we assume that there is force in either of these objections, it is
apparent that they go solely to the question whether or not the complaint
sufficiently stated facts warranting a divorce, and that the alleged defects in
no degree affected the jurisdiction of the court to hear and determine the
action, provided the court obtained jurisdiction of the person of the defendant.
This is, of course, obvious as to any defect in the  allegations of acts of
cruelty, and, we think, equally clear as to any defects in allegations of
residence.  The superior court is by the constitution given general jurisdiction
of actions for divorce. Under this grant, when a complaint is filed asking for a
divorce the court at once acquires jurisdiction of the subject-matter of the
action regardless of whether or not the complaint states facts warranting the
granting of a divorce, and when it has obtained jurisdiction of the person of
the defendant, it has the power to hear and determine the cause.  In so hearing
and determining it is proceeding in the exercise of its lawful jurisdiction,
which involves the power to determine the sufficiency of the facts alleged as a
ground for divorce. If it errs in its conclusion in this matter it is simply
error in the exercise of its jurisdiction, which can be corrected only in the
way provided by law for a review of the action of the trial court, and which
cannot be reached on collateral attack or even reviewed in any other action.  In
Estate of James, 99 Cal. 374, [37 Am. St. Rep. 60, 33 Pac. 1122], which, like
this, was a contest for letters of administration involving the question which
of two women was the surviving wife of deceased, one relying on a decree of
divorce purporting to dissolve a former marriage between the deceased and the
other woman, this court said: "The attack here made upon the judgment in James
v. James is collateral, and it is well settled that the judgment of a court
having general jurisdiction of the subject-matter involved in the judgment
cannot be successfully attacked in a collateral proceeding, because of an
imperfect or defective complaint in the action in which it was rendered.  If the
facts stated in the complaint are not sufficient to entitle the plaintiff to the
relief demanded therein and awarded by the judgment, the action of the court in
deciding otherwise and rendering its judgment in accordance with the prayer of
the complaint can be nothing more than error (citing cases).  The complaint in
James v. James was sufficient to inform the court and the defendant therein of
the relief which the plaintiff demanded and of the facts upon which he based his
right to the relief sought, and this was all that was necessary in the way of a
statement of facts to give the court jurisdiction of the subject-matter of the
action." (See, also, LeMesnager v. Variel, 144 Cal. 463, [103 Am. St. Rep. 91,
77 Pac. 988].) Section 128 of the Civil Code, relative  to residence of the
plaintiff, does not impose any limitation on the jurisdiction of the superior
court in the matter of divorces, but simply prescribes certain facts as
essential to the making out of a case warranting a divorce, and allegations in
regard to residence stand upon the same footing as any other allegation of facts
showing the right to a divorce. If they are defective in any respect and the
court nevertheless holds them to be sufficient, we have nothing more than error
in the exercise of jurisdiction.

   It is earnestly claimed by learned counsel for appellant that by reason of
these alleged defects in the complaint, the superior court failed to acquire
jurisdiction of the person of the defendant in the divorce case and that the
judgment is therefore void. The point in this connection is that to authorize a
service by publication of summons, which was the only service attempted in that
action, it must appear either by the affidavit made on the application for an
order of publication or by the verified complaint on file, "that a cause of
action exists against the defendant in respect to whom the service is to be
made," (Code Civ. Proc., section 412), and that unless a cause of action is
shown by such affidavit or by the verified complaint on file, the order for
publication and publication are void, and the court, therefore, without
jurisdiction over the person of the party so attempted to be served.  It is
asserted that the affidavit for publication in the divorce action also wholly
failed to show a cause of action. The authorities doubtless sustain the position
taken by appellant in this regard, if the defect alleged is apparent on an
inspection of the judgment-roll. But the difficulty with his claim is that such
defect is not shown by the judgment-roll. At the time of the divorce action,
neither the affidavit for publication of summons nor the order for publication
constituted any part of the judgment-roll under our law, section 670 of the Code
of Civil Procedure, so far as material, then reading as follows: "Immediately
after entering the judgment, the clerk must attach together and file the
following papers, which constitute the judgment-roll: 1. In case the complaint
be not answered by any defendant, the summons, with the affidavit or proof of
service, and the complaint, with a memorandum indorsed thereon, that the default
of the defendant in not answering was entered, and a copy of the judgment."  It
was not until 1895 that the section was amended by making such affidavit and
order part of the judgment-roll. (Stats. 1895, p. 46; People v. Davis, 143 Cal.
673, 677, [77 Pac. 651]; People  v.  Temple, 103 Cal. 447, 453, [37 Pac. 414];
Hahn v. Kelly, 34 Cal. 391, 404, [94 Am. Dec. 742].) The cases just cited all
require us to hold that the affidavit for publication and the order therefor,
not being a part of the judgment-roll under the law, cannot on collateral attack
be examined for the purpose of ascertaining whether they were sufficient to
authorize service by publication of summons, even though improperly inserted in
the judgment-roll or contained in the bill of exceptions.  They must be
conclusively presumed to have been all that the law required to authorize such
service.  In Hahn v. Kelly, 34 Cal. 391, 404, [94 Am. Dec. 742], it was said
that two prior cases, one of which was Forbes v. Hyde, 31 Cal. 342, relied on by
appellant, was improperly decided so far as this point was concerned, on the
assumption that the affidavit was a proper part of the judgment-roll. The effect
of what we have said is, as applied to this case, that if the divorce complaint
failed to state a cause of action, it must be conclusively presumed here that
the affidavit for publication did state a cause of action, and that an order for
publication was lawfully made thereon.

   No other defect apparent on an inspection of the judgment-roll is suggested.
It must, therefore, be held that the divorce judgment is not void on its face.

   Other matters as to which it was proposed by appellant to introduce evidence,
were the following: --

   1. It was proposed by appellant to show that deceased had not been as a
matter of fact a resident of the state of California for one year next preceding
the commencement of the divorce action. Such evidence was not admissible to
impeach the divorce judgment on this collateral attack. The question whether he
had been such a resident, and, consequently, was entitled to a divorce if he
showed good ground otherwise therefor, was one to be determined solely in the
divorce action itself, and the ruling of the court thereon cannot even be
reviewed in any other action ( LeMesnager v. Variel, 144 Cal. 463, [103 Am. St.
Rep. 91, 77 Pac. 988]), much less reviewed on such an attack as we have here.
The divorce judgment is conclusive on this question.

    2. It was proposed by appellant to show that the divorce judgment was
obtained by fraud and conspiracy on the part of deceased and Louise,  whom he
subsequently married.  It is elementary that no such showing against a judgment
is allowable on a collateral attack of this character, and that the only remedy
of the aggrieved party in such a case is by motion in the original case within
such time as may be allowed by law, or by an action in equity assailing the
decree and seeking relief therefrom.

   3. It was proposed to show that in the year 1888 deceased commenced an action
in the state of Pennsylvania against Margaret to obtain an absolute divorce from
her, and that in this action he was nonsuited.  The proposed evidence would have
been immaterial for at least two reasons.  To avail a defendant of the benefit
of estoppel by former judgment, it must be pleaded in the subsequent action, and
in no case can the second judgment be collaterally impeached by a showing
thereof.  There was no estoppel by former judgment, for the matter alleged as
constituting ground for divorce in the former action commenced in 1888 could not
be the same as the matters alleged in the California action, which were as to
alleged acts of cruelty committed in the years 1889, 1890, and 1891.

   4. It was proposed to show substantially as follows: In March,  1890,
Margaret commenced in the proper Pennsylvania court, an action to obtain a
decree of divorce from bed and board on the ground of adultery and desertion.
Under the laws of Pennsylvania, such a decree would operate simply to separate
the parties, without terminating the marriage. Deceased was personally served
with process therein and contested the action.  During its pendency, he
commenced the California action and obtained the judgment therein.  Although he
subsequently contested the Pennsylvania action by counsel, he never presented as
a defense thereto the California judgment.  In June, 1893, Margaret having
withdrawn her charge of adultery, judgment was given by the Pennsylvania court
granting Margaret a divorce from bed and board on the ground of desertion and
awarding her alimony.  This judgment was affirmed on appeal.  We are unable to
perceive any ground upon which this evidence would have been effectual to avoid
the force of the California judgment.  We have  not been able to find any
authority for the proposition that a judgment valid on its face may be
collaterally impeached by proof that there was a former action pending at the
time of the institution of the action in which it was rendered.  That is
ordinarily understood to be a matter which must be pleaded in abatement in the
second action.  The point made by learned counsel in regard to this matter is
that the validity of the California judgment was presumptively involved in the
Pennsylvania action, and that the Pennsylvania court must be held to have
determined in an action where it had power to so determine as between the
parties that the California judgment was void, and that the parties were still
husband and wife. In his statement in the lower court he expressly declared that
deceased did not in any way allege or make any claim under the California
judgment in the Pennsylvania court.  So far as the point made by counsel in this
action is concerned, the decision in Estate of James, 99 Cal. 374, 379, [37 Am.
St. Rep. 60, 33 Pac. 1122], is in point.  James had procured a divorce from his
first wife in the state of Missouri.  He subsequently returned to New York, and
his first wife there brought an action against him for a divorce from bed and
board and for alimony.  She obtained the  decree sought.  This judgment was
relied on by the first wife as establishing that James and she were husband and
wife at the time the same was given, and as avoiding the force of the Missouri
decree. This court said, through Mr. Justice De Haven: "The validity of the
decree of divorce obtained by James in the state of Missouri was not directly
put in issue in that action, and there is nothing in the record to indicate that
it was even brought to the attention of the court of New York rendering this
latter judgment.  We do not think that the judgment just referred to, although
it is necessarily based upon the fact that the parties thereto were then at its
date husband and wife, is a bar to the right of the respondent to assert in this
proceeding the binding force of the former decree rendered in the state of
Missouri in the case of James v. James, and the lawfulness of her subsequent
marriage to the deceased in this state.  The decree of divorce obtained by the
deceased in Missouri was valid, and established the status of the deceased as an
unmarried man, leaving him free to again enter into the marriage relation with
any other person  consenting thereto.  His failure to plead the judgment of
divorce in bar of the subsequent action brought by the petitioner for the
separation from bed and board, and the judgment of the court in New York
decreeing such separation, did not have the effect to change the status of
deceased from that which was given him by the decree of divorce rendered in the
state of Missouri.  After that decree, and until reversed or vacated by some
appropriate proceeding, his status as a single man could not be changed without
his consent." This fully answers the point made by appellant.

   It is unnecessary to notice here other matters which it was proposed to
prove.  Although some of them were matters which, if proved, would entitle
Margaret to relief against the divorce decree in an equitable action, they were
clearly matters which could not be shown on this collateral attack on such
decree.

   It follows from what has been said that no prejudicial error was committed by
the trial court, and that upon the admitted facts the trial court was bound to
hold that Louise was the surviving wife of deceased and that her nominee was
entitled to letters of administration.

   The orders appealed from are affirmed.


                              78 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           JOE PADGETT, Plaintiff and Appellant, v. FRANCES PADGETT,
                            Defendant and Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 6715

            Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District

            199 Cal. App. 2d 652; 18 Cal. Rptr. 789; 1962 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2879


                                January 30, 1962

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of San Diego
County.  Robert W. Conyers, Judge.

   Action to set aside a judgment of divorce and a property settlement
agreement.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Equity--Principles--Clean Hands.  --He who comes into court for equitable
relief must do so with clean hands.

(2) Id.--Principles--Clean Hands.  --The "clean hands" rule is of ancient origin
and given broad application; it is the most important rule affecting the
administration of justice. Equity denies relief for unclean or unlawful conduct
even though it thereby leaves undisturbed and in ostensible full legal effect
acts or proceedings which would affirmatively be set aside but for such
consideration.

(3) Judgments--Equitable Relief--Pleading.  --In seeking assistance from a court
of equity to set aside a judgment which would otherwise be valid, a party must
allege facts which show he is free from any negligence or fault which
contributed to or permitted the entry of the judgment he seeks to vacate.

(4) Divorce--Judgment--Relief From Fraudulent Decrees.  --The trial court
properly refused to permit plaintiff to prosecute an action against his former
wife to set aside an interlocutory and final decree of divorce and a property
settlement agreement claimed to have been obtained by his wife through fraud
where plaintiff unequivocally alleged that defendant stated to him that she did
not want a divorce or intend that a final divorce decree should be entered, that
he signed the property settlement agreement in the belief that he would not be
bound by its terms and that the parties would reconcile, and that, while
allegedly believing these representations, he allowed a divorce complaint to be
served on him, made no appearance in the action, permitted his wife to take his
default and appear in court without opposition, resulting in her obtaining an
interlocutory decree, an award of alimony and approval of a property settlement
agreement in the decree, and that the result of a contested divorce would have
been more favorable to him had he appeared in the action.

(5) Id.--Permanent Alimony--Pleading.  --The court in a divorce action had
jurisdiction to specifically order the husband to pay alimony to the wife though
a specific prayer for alimony was not made, where the complaint contained a
prayer that a property settlement agreement signed by the parties, providing for
wife support, be approved and that "both parties be ordered to carry out the
terms and provisions thereof."

COUNSEL: Bertram J. Brown for Plaintiff and Appellant.

James Edgar Hervey for Defendant and Respondent.

JUDGES: Griffin, P. J.  Shepard, J., and Coughlin, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: GRIFFIN

OPINION

     Plaintiff-appellant brought this action against defendant-respondent, his
former wife, to set aside an interlocutory and final decree of divorce and a
property settlement agreement claimed to have been obtained by his wife through
fraud.  A demurrer to the second amended complaint was sustained without leave
to amend.  A judgment of dismissal followed.

   On September 5, 1958, Frances Padgett brought an action for divorce against
her husband, Joe Padgett, on the ground of extreme mental cruelty.  A general
property settlement agreement was prepared by the wife's attorney and the
husband signed it.  It provided, among other things, that the wife  was to have
as her community property their home, a checking account in the sum of $ 1,700,
etc., and the husband was to have a Chevrolet car, a savings account in the sum
of $ 1,000, and that they would share and share alike in certain stocks and that
the husband would pay $ 100 per month for his wife's support until further order
of the court and $ 50 per month for support of the minor child, 8 years of age,
whose custody was awarded to the mother.  This agreement was to be made a part
of the decree of divorce, if any was ever obtained.  After service of the
complaint in the divorce action, defendant defaulted and the interlocutory
decree was thus entered on October 8, 1958.

    It appears from the record that the husband in the divorce action, on
December 9, 1958, sought to have the property settlement agreement which was
incorporated in the decree and the order for payment of $ 100 per month to the
wife set aside and declared void upon the grounds set forth in affidavits filed
therewith.  After a hearing upon an order to show cause, apparently based on
Code of Civil Procedure, section 473, for fraud, a signed order was made denying
the motion.  There was no appeal from that order.  On October 14,  1959, the
wife secured a final decree of divorce.

   On May 9, 1960, the husband, plaintiff here, filed this amended complaint in
a separate action alleging fraud generally in that the wife told him she had
consulted her doctor and he advised her that she was going through the change of
life and she ought to separate from her husband; that the rules of propriety
demanded that such a separation be formal and made legal by divorce; that she
still loved him and that if the divorce was granted she would never obtain the
final decree upon her application; that a reconciliation was inevitable and that
long before the interlocutory decree expired a reconciliation would be effected
and they would again be living together as man and wife; that she wanted
assurance that her husband trusted her implicitly, and said that her mind would
be at ease and her confidence complete if he would execute a property settlement
agreement and not oppose the interlocutory judgment of divorce; that when the
parties reconciled, the property settlement agreement would be cancelled and it
was not her intention to hold him to the terms of the agreement, either before
or subsequent to the anticipated reconciliation;  that, as a result, he executed
the property settlement agreement and refrained from opposing her action for
divorce. He also alleged that if he had opposed her  action, the result of that
lawsuit would unquestionably have been more favorable to him.  He further
alleged that she obtained the decree of divorce with no intention of reconciling
in the future and that when he signed the property settlement agreement and
permitted her to take his default, he understood that he would suffer no
financial loss and would be deprived of none of his property.  In a second cause
of action, he asserted that the trial court was without jurisdiction to order
him to pay alimony, since there was no prayer for such relief in her complaint.
He then prayed for an order setting aside the property settlement agreement and
for general relief in his first complaint.

   Defendant interposed a general demurrer and a plea in abatement alleging
generally another action pending (the divorce action); that plaintiff's remedy,
if any, was in that action by a motion to set aside the decree or to modify its
provisions in reference to the property settlement agreement incorporated into
the decree; that plaintiff did file such a motion pursuant to Code of Civil
Procedure, section 473, supra, upon the same grounds here pleaded, and the court
denied the motion and there was no appeal taken from that order, and accordingly
that judgment became res judicata. (Citing Hanrahan v. Superior Court, 81
Cal.App.2d 432 [184 P.2d 157]; Code Civ. Proc., § 430, subd. 3; 1 Cal.Jur.2d §
13, p. 39.)

   The record before us is not too clear.  In a pretrial order, dated September
11, 1959, it is stated that an answer was filed by defendant denying generally
the allegations of the complaint as to fraud, and that the issues to be
determined are whether the proceeding to set aside the decree and the order
denying it in the divorce action was a bar to the present action; whether or not
the property settlement agreement was valid; and whether or not it was obtained
by fraud.  It recited that the case was ready for trial.

   At some stage of the proceedings, defendant moved for judgment on the
pleadings and the court signed an order "sustaining" the motion "with leave
granted to file an amended complaint . . ." Just how the court can grant a
motion for judgment on the pleadings and then allow time  to amend the complaint
is not understandable.  However, since the appeal is from the order dismissing
the complaint or action, we will not inquire further.

   Plaintiff husband then filed a second amended complaint alleging fraud in
more particular terms and prayed that the court set aside the interlocutory and
final judgments of divorce  as well as the property settlement agreement. (It
should be noted in the first complaint the prayer for relief was only to set
aside the property settlement agreement.) The motion under Code of Civil
Procedure, section 473, supra, in the divorce action was to set aside the
property settlement agreement and to declare void the provisions in the
interlocutory decree requiring defendant to pay $ 100 per month for support of
plaintiff and awarding custody of the child.  We will confine our discussions to
the merits of the court's ruling sustaining the demurrer to the second amended
complaint without leave to amend.

   We have heretofore set forth the allegations contained in plaintiff's second
amended complaint.  It should be here noted that plaintiff husband fully
discussed the contemplated divorce with his wife and her attorney.  It was
agreed that one should be obtained under the conditions represented and that the
wife could obtain it with the understanding that it was not to be actually
effective but was, in effect, a mere sham and was filed for the purpose of
defrauding the court into believing that the plaintiff wife did in fact have
legitimate grounds for a divorce and that the bonds of matrimony were to be
legitimately and in good faith severed, when in fact each knew, at the time of
the signing of the property settlement agreement, that this was not true.

     This was an action for equitable relief. He who comes into court must do so
with clean hands.

     "The 'clean hands' rule is of ancient origin and given broad application.
It is the most important rule affecting the administration of justice.  'Equity
denies affirmative relief for such conduct even though it thereby leaves
undisturbed and in ostensible full legal effect acts or proceedings which would
affirmatively be set aside but for such consideration.'" ( Katz v. Karlsson, 84
Cal.App.2d 469, 474 [191 P.2d 541].)

   (See also 30 C.J.S. § 93, pp. 476-477; 19 Am.Jur. § 476, p. 330.)

     If plaintiff husband and his wife chose to misrepresent the facts to the
trial court in seeking assistance from a court of equity to set aside a judgment
which would otherwise be valid, a party must allege facts which show he is free
from any negligence or fault which contributed to or permitted the entry of the
judgment he seeks to vacate.  See Civil Code, sections 3515, 3517 and 3524.
These rules, when applied to the facts in the case at bar, make it apparent that
the trial court properly refused to permit appellant to prosecute his  action.
In his second amended complaint, plaintiff unequivocally alleges that defendant
stated to him that she did not want a divorce nor did she intend that a final
decree of divorce should be entered; that he signed the property settlement
agreement in the belief that he would not be bound by the terms thereof and that
the parties would reconcile.  While allegedly believing these representations,
plaintiff allowed a complaint for divorce to be served upon him and made no
appearance in the action.  He permitted his wife to take his default, to appear
in court without opposition.  She there obtained an interlocutory judgment of
divorce, an award of alimony and the approval of a property settlement agreement
in the interlocutory decree. Furthermore, it is alleged by him that the result
of a contested divorce would have been more favorable to him had he appeared in
the action and that she would not legally have been entitled to such relief had
all the facts been known.

    Ettlinger v. Ettlinger, 46 Cal.App.2d 628 [116 P.2d 482], was a suit in
equity to set  aside a decree of divorce on the grounds that the property
settlement agreement was contrary to good morals.  A judgment of nonsuit was
affirmed on the ground that where a decree is obtained through the collusion of
the parties, or they are in pari delicto, a court of equity will deny relief.
(See also Taliaferro v. Taliaferro, 171 Cal.App.2d 1, 7 [339 P.2d 594]; Wilson
v. Wilson, 55 Cal.App.2d 421, 427 [130 P.2d 782]; Godfrey v. Godfrey, 30
Cal.App.2d 370, 379 [86 P.2d 357].)

    Bancroft v. Bancroft, 178 Cal. 359, 364 [173 P. 579, L.R.A. 1918F 1029], was
decided on facts quite similar to those in the instant action.  It was there
said that:

   "There is a distinction to be drawn, however, between cases where the
application for relief from a decree collusively obtained is made in the action
itself and within the time prescribed by section 473 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, or before the period passes within which the interlocutory decree may
be assailed upon appeal, and cases where relief is sought in an independent
action. For the period of six months the trial court has full control over the
case and may grant relief within the action itself to either party; but after
the expiration of that period, the rights of the parties have become fixed
beyond the power of the court to grant relief under section 473 of the Code of
Civil Procedure and also beyond remedy by appeal; and the party who has allowed
this period to expire without any effort to obtain relief within the action
itself and who  thereafter seeks the aid of another tribunal in an independent
action should be required to make an affirmative showing of some equitable
consideration or of some good reason sounding in public policy sufficient to
justify the interference of equity with the crystallized status of the parties
in the particular case. On the other hand, the authorities are numerous to the
effect that in the absence of such equitable considerations or of any showing
that the public interest or policy in preserving the marriage relation in the
particular case would be subserved, the general rule will prevail in divorce as
in other cases, and courts of equity will not interfere with judgments in such
cases obtained solely through the collusive connivance of the parties to the
proceeding."

   In the instant case, plaintiff here did make a motion under Code of Civil
Procedure, section 473, supra, and it was denied.  There was no appeal from that
order.

   We conclude that the trial court was authorized to sustain the demurrer
without leave to amend without further consideration of the claim of res
judicata or whether or not the complaint showed extrinsic fraud.

     It is also claimed that the court lacked jurisdiction in the divorce action
to specifically order the husband to pay alimony to the wife because the
complaint did not contain a specific prayer for alimony. It did contain a prayer
that the property settlement agreement signed by the parties be approved and
that "both parties be ordered to carry out the terms and provisions thereof."
The trial court had jurisdiction to order the parties to perform specific
portions of the property settlement agreement. ( Miller v. Superior Court, 9
Cal.2d 733, 740 [72 P.2d 868]; Cohen v. Cohen, 150 Cal. 99 [88 P. 267, 11
Ann.Cas. 520].)

   Judgment affirmed.


                              79 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             CALIFORNIA BANK (a Corporation), Plaintiff, v. RUTH B.
           SCHLESINGER, Appellant; HERBERT SHULTZ et al., Respondents

                                Civ. A. No. 9433

            Appellate Department, Superior Court of California, Los
                                    Angeles

            159 Cal. App. 2d Supp. 854; 324 P.2d 119; 1958 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2080


                                 March 26, 1958

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Municipal Court for the Los
Angeles Judicial District.  May Lahey, Judge.  *

*   Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

   Action in interpleader.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Homesteads -- Property Subject -- Estates in Cotenancy.  --A homestead can
be declared on property held in joint tenancy or tenancy in common. (Civ. Code,
§ 1238.)

(2) Id.--Property Subject--Title.  --As between a creditor and the claimant of a
homestead exemption, the state of the claimant's title is immaterial.

(3) Id.--Remedies--Partition.  --By declaring a homestead on a joint tenancy,
each party waives the right to set aside his separate interest by partition.

(4) Id.--Alienation and Encumbrance.  --By declaring a homestead on a joint
tenancy, each party loses the right to convey the property unilaterally (Civ.
Code, § 1242), or to bind it for debts.

(5) Id.--Termination.  --The only way to terminate a homestead in a joint
tenancy is by the mode prescribed in Civ. Code, §§ 146, 1243, 1244, 1265.

(6) Id.--Exemption.  --The homesteading of a joint tenancy gives exemption from
forced sale under Civ. Code, § 1243; thereafter this exemption is a continuing
right until there is an abandonment by the parties or by the sole party
continuing it, and on any sale by the claimant the exemption attaches to the
proceeds. (Civ. Code, § 1265.)

(7) Id.--Divorce--Assignment of Homestead.  --In a pending divorce action, the
court may make a temporary assignment of the homestead of a joint tenancy at any
stage of the proceeding, and on dissolution is required to make certain
assignments of the homestead.

(8) Id.--Divorce--Assignment of Homestead.  --Where the interest of each joint
tenant is separate property, the applicable provision for disposition of a
homestead on divorce is Civ. Code, § 146, subpar. Four, "If . . . selected from
the separate property of either, . . . it shall be assigned to the former owner
of such property, subject to the power of the court to assign it for a limited
period to the [innocent party]."

(9) Id.--Divorce--Effect.  --The homestead exemption of an ex-wife may continue
after divorce, after the ex-husband's relinquishment of his property interest to
her, and after the claimant ceases to have a family.

(10) Id.--Divorce--Effect.  --Where a homestead can be assigned (Civ. Code, §
146), it continues as a homestead after divorce.

(11) Id.--Divorce--Effect: Decree Silent as to Homestead.  --To the extent that
the property interest of each ex-spouse in joint tenancy property homesteaded by
both was separate, it was mandatory under Civ. Code, §§ 146, 1265, that the
court assign the homestead on such interest to each separate property owner on
divorce; but the court's failure specifically to assign the homestead back to
the former owner was immaterial, since that which is required to be done is
considered done (Civ. Code, § 3529) in such instances.

(12) Id.--Divorce--Decree Silent as to Homestead.  --Under Civ. Code, § 146, the
right of one spouse on divorce to secure an assignment in the property rights of
the other, created by a homestead, perishes by failure to secure an assignment
of that homestead right in the property of the other ex-spouse in the divorce
decree.

(13) Id.--Divorce--Effect.  --A divorce does not terminate the homestead
exemption merely because it terminates the family relationship.

(14) Id.--Death or Dissolution of Family.  --The effect of Civ. Code, §§ 146,
1265, is to maintain a declared homestead as an estate in land that can be
abandoned or relinquished only in the statutory mode, not by cessation or change
of the status of the personal relationships on which the homestead was declared.


(15) Id.--Death.  --Death does not destroy a homestead or the exemption.

(16) Id.--Death--Continuance of Exemption.  --A childless widower is entitled to
maintain the homestead exemption.

(17) Id. -- Nonresidence or Temporary Absence.  -- Nonresidence does not destroy
the homestead exemption; temporary absence does not constitute an abandonment of
the exemption, nor does removal to another state and acquisition of residence
there.

(18) Id.--Persons Entitled--Joint Tenant or Tenant in Common.  --Even if a
homestead on the interest of one party should cease, a homestead exemption may
be held by one joint tenant or tenant in common, though the homestead may not
extend to the other tenant's interest.

(19) Courts--Decisions--Opinions--Construction.  --Language used in an opinion
is to be understood in the light of the facts and the issue then before the
court.

(20) Id.--Decisions--Opinions--Construction.  --The language "no family, no
homestead" in a Supreme Court decision is not stare decisis as to subsequent
decisions when such application will be plainly inconsistent with the statute.

(21) Id.--Decisions--As Precedents.  --Where code provisions are plain and
unequivocal on the point in controversy it is not necessary to cite adjudicated
cases to support them; the statute law must control whether such cases are in
harmony therewith or not.

(22) Id.--Decisions--Obiter Dicta.  --Obiter dicta are not binding in later
controversies; an oft repeated dictum does not overrule a prior decision
specifically determining the question.

(23) Id.--Decisions--As Precedents.  --Conformity to a prior decision is not
required if it would perpetuate a manifest error or absurdity.

(24) Id. -- Decisions -- As Precedents.  --A single decision, made without
taking notice of a statute and in fact setting aside the statute, cannot be
invoked as authority under the rule of stare decisis.

COUNSEL: Albert Weiner for Appellant.

I. R. Shultz, Bertram S. Harris and Frank Alef for Respondents.

JUDGES: David, J.  Swain, J., concurred.  Bishop, P. J., concurs.

OPINION BY: DAVID

OPINION

     In this case, title to certain joint tenancy property was homesteaded by
husband and wife. Thereafter on March 2, 1948, the wife, the defendant here,
secured a final decree of divorce which did not assign the homestead as it could
have done under Civil Code, section 146.  On September 18, 1950, the defendant's
former husband quitclaimed his joint tenancy interest to her.  After the divorce
, she continued to reside alone upon the property, and executed a trust deed
upon it to secure a note.  The creditors hold judgments upon debts of the
defendant Schlesinger, incurred after the divorce, and are given judgment herein
against the net proceeds held by the interpleading plaintiff for the defendant
after foreclosure of the trust deed and payment of the note.  The foreclosure
occurred on January 15, 1957.  This action in interpleader was commenced
February 14, 1957.  We conclude that the homestead exemption from execution
existed following the divorce, and defendant is entitled to all of the funds
interpleaded, since they are less than the exemption ( Civ. Code, § 1260, subds.
1, 2) and their exempt character continued  following the foreclosure sale to
the time of this action ( Civ. Code, § 1265).

     It is now established that a homestead can be declared upon property held
in joint tenancy or tenancy in common.  ( Civ. Code, § 1238; Estate of Kachigian
(1942), 20 Cal.2d 787, 790 [128 P.2d 865].)   As between a creditor and the
claimant of a homestead exemption, the state of the latter's title is
immaterial.  ( Brooks v. Hyde (1869), 37 Cal. 366.)

     What were the incidents to a homestead on a joint tenancy? (1) By
homesteading, each party waives the right to set aside his separate interest by
partition ( Walton v. Walton (1943), 59 Cal.App.2d 26, 31 et seq. [138 P.2d 54];
Kaupe v.  Kaupe (1955), 131 Cal.App.2d 511 [280 P.2d 856]; see Barber v. Babel
(1868), 36 Cal. 11, 17, and Hannon v. Southern Pac. R. R. Co. (1909), 12
Cal.App. 350, 358 [107 P. 335]).  (2) Each party loses the right to unilaterally
convey the property ( Civ. Code, § 1242; Swan v. Walden (1909), 156 Cal. 195
[103 P. 931, 134 Am.St.Rep. 118, 20 Ann.Cas. 194]) or to bind it for debts (cf.
Bartholomew v. Hook (1863), 23 Cal. 277);  (3) the only way to terminate the
homestead is by the mode provided in Civil Code, §§ 1243- 1244, 1265 and 146.
(Consult: Tipton v. Martin (1886), 71 Cal. 325, 328 [12 P. 244]; Lubbock v.
McMann (1889), 82 Cal. 226 [22 P. 1145, 16 Am.St.Rep. 108]; see Mills v. Stump
(1912), 20 Cal.App. 84, 88-89 [128 P. 349].)   (4) The homesteading gives
exemption from forced sale under Civil Code, section 1243.  Thereafter, this
exemption is a continuing right, until there is an abandonment by the parties,
or by the sole party claiming it.  Upon any sale by the claimant, the exemption
attaches to the proceeds ( Civ. Code, § 1265).   (5) In a pending divorce
action, the court may make a temporary assignment of the homestead at any stage
of the proceeding; and upon dissolution is to make certain assignments of the
homestead.

     The disposition of a homestead upon divorce is now regulated by Civil Code,
section 146.  Since the interest of each joint tenant is separate property, (
Kaupe v. Kaupe, supra (1955), 131 Cal.App.2d 511, 513) the applicable provision
for disposition on divorce is subparagraph Four: "If . . . selected from the
separate property of either, . . . it shall be assigned to the former owner of
such property, subject to the power of the court to assign it for a limited
period to the [innocent party]."  Civil Code, section 1265, is general in its
terms: "From and after the time the [homestead] declaration is filed for record,
the premises therein described constitute a homestead." There then is a
statement as to survivorship when the homestead has been established by a
married person, and when "in other cases"; and then provides: "in no case
[emphasis added] shall it, or the products, rents, issues or profits thereof be
held liable for the debts of the owner, except as provided in this title; and
should the homestead be sold by the owner, the proceeds arising from such sale
to the extent of the value allowed for a homestead exemption as provided in this
title shall be exempt to the owner of the homestead for a period of six months
next following such sale."  In a case, such as this, the homestead exemption of
the ex-wife continued after divorce and after the ex-husband's  relinquishment
of his property interest to her ( City Store v. Cofer (1896), 111 Cal. 482 [44
P. 168]; Brandon v. Faria (1929), 99 Cal.App. 594, 597 [279 P. 192]; Estate of
Teel (1949), 34 Cal.2d 349, 352, 354 [210 P.2d 1]; continues after claimant
ceases to have a family: Roth v. Insley (1890), 86 Cal. 134 [24 P. 853]).  If a
homestead can be assigned ( Civ. Code, § 146), it obviously continues as a
homestead after divorce. It would defeat Civil Code, sections 146 and 1265, if
it were held that "since divorce terminated the family, there was no homestead
to assign" to the former owner.

     To the extent that the property interest of each of the ex-spouses was
separate, it was mandatory under Civil Code, sections 146 and 1265, that the
court assign the homestead upon such interest to each separate property owner
upon divorce. As they were already joint tenants, it was unnecessary to make any
order as  to title.  The statute is mandatory, as to the homestead. A failure of
the court specifically to assign the homestead back to the former owner,
however, is immaterial.  That which is required to be done is considered done (
Civ. Code, § 3529) in such instances.  This was the implied holding under like
circumstances in City Store v. Cofer (1896), 111 Cal. 482 [44 P. 168]. In this
case, the entire title was vested in the ex-wife before the creditors' claims
were reduced to judgments, but remained subject to the homestead exemption. (
City Store v. Cofer, supra (1896), 111 Cal. 482; Zanone v. Sprague (1911), 16
Cal.App. 333, 342 [116 P. 989]; Roth v. Insley, supra (1890), 86 Cal. 134; cf.
Walton v. Walton, supra (1943), 59 Cal.App.2d 26; Dougherty v. White (1924), 112
Neb. 675 [200 N.W. 884, 885; 36 A.L.R. 425].) In City Store v. Cofer, supra
(1896), 111 Cal. 482, it was unsuccessfully contended that the divorce ipso
facto terminated the homestead exemption, citing Shoemake v. Chalfant (1874), 47
Cal. 432, 435, and Burkett v. Burkett (1889), 78 Cal. 310 [20 P. 715, 12
Am.St.Rep. 58, 3 L.R.A.  781].

     Under Civil Code, section 146, the right of one spouse upon divorce to
secure an assignment in the property rights of the other, created by the
homestead, perishes by failure to secure an assignment of that homestead right
in the property of the other ex-spouse in the divorce decree. ( Zanone v.
Sprague, supra (1911), 16 Cal.App. 333; Lang v. Lang (1920), 182 Cal. 765 [190
P. 181].)

     Claimants rest their case upon the general statement made as dicta in some
cases and merely recited in others,  usually in relation to title, that divorce
terminates the homestead exemption rights because it terminates the family
relationship.  ( Remley v. Remley (1920), 49 Cal.App. 489, 490 [193 P. 604];
Lang v. Lang, supra (1920), 182 Cal. 765; passim, Walton v. Walton, supra
(1943), 59 Cal.App.2d 26, 29.) The incongruity of such dicta with Civil Code,
sections 146 and 1265, has not gone unnoticed by the profession.  (Consult: 26
Cal. L. Rev. 475 (1938); Healey, Disposition of Homestead on Divorce and Death
(1954), 29 Los Angeles Bar Assn. Bulletin 131, 151.)

   Any such unqualified statement, as applied to all incidents of a homestead,
is certainly not the law in California, since the adoption of the code sections
in question.  The termination of the family by the majority of children, the
death of one of the spouses, or a change in residence, continued residence once
having been considered essential, have been abrogated as controlling factors.
Superseding early statutes (Stats. 1860, p. 311; 1862, p. 519, § 5) and court
decisions based upon them to the contrary (such as Santa Cruz Bank v. Cooper
(1880), 56 Cal. 339; Revalk v. Kraemer (1857), 8 Cal. 66 [68 Am.Dec. 304], cited
in Lang v. Lang, supra (1920), 182 Cal. 765; cf.  Estate of Boland (1872), 43
Cal. 640), Civ. Code, §§ 1266- 1269, make available to "any person other than
the head of a family" a homestead exemption against creditors' claims.  ( Hohn
v. Pauly (1909), 11 Cal.App. 724 [106 P. 266]; cf. Stat. 1860 p. 87 § 1; Gary v.
Estabrook (1856), 6 Cal. 457.) Under the specific terms of the earlier statutes
and prior to enactment of Civil Code, sections 1263, 1265, 1266- 1269, it had
been held that "no family, no homestead." (Change was noted in 29 C.J. p. 932,
note 86, citing Watson v. His Creditors (1881), 58 Cal. 556 and Santa Cruz Bank
v. Cooper, supra (1880), 56 Cal. 339, both under the 1862 statute; Gee v. Moore
(1859), 14 Cal. 472 and Revalk v. Kraemer, supra (1857), 8 Cal. 66, under the
1851 statute.  This is no longer the rule, under Roth v. Insley, supra (1890),
86 Cal. 134, citing Civ. Code, § 1265.)

   Confusing and contradictory statements are found in many homestead cases.
There are instances in which later cases have cited earlier ones, which have
been overruled in the interim, or which have been superseded by later statutes
or code sections.  Case law dependent upon the terms  of early statutes has been
applied, though such statutes have long since been repealed and superseded, or
amended to overcome the previous case law.  Under the early homestead acts by
which  only husband or wife, or head of the family, could declare a homestead,
the homestead was held to be abandoned or dissolved, upon a variety of
circumstances.  Some cases announced, as do the present code sections, that once
a homestead, always a homestead, unless abandoned as provided by the code, (
Taylor v. Hargous (1854), 4 Cal. 268, 273 [60 Am.Dec. 606]; Tipton v. Martin,
supra (1886), 71 Cal. 325 [12 P. 244]), and that a transfer of property rights
in which both husband and wife joined did not terminate the homestead ( Bowman
v. Norton (1860), 16 Cal. 213). Hence, the parties could not seek partition (
Barber v. Babel, supra (1868), 36 Cal. 11, 17). Under the specific terms of
early acts, the homestead was held to terminate when a family ceased to exist
because of death of one of the parties ( Revalk v. Kraemer, supra (1857), 8 Cal.
66, 74; Shafter, J. in McQuade v. Whaley (1867), 31 Cal. 526, 535; Gee v. Moore,
supra (1859), 14 Cal. 472, 476-477; Johnston v. Bush (1874), 49 Cal. 198); or
when minor children composing the family reached their majority so that one
parent ceased to be head of a family (as required by Stats. 1860 p. 311;
Gambette v. Brock (1871), 41 Cal. 78, 79); or by desertion by one of the spouses
(cf. 29 C.J. p. 933 § 345 and notes 89-99) though this would not work an
abandonment of the homestead exemption as to the other spouse ( Lies v.
DeDiablar (1859), 12 Cal. 327); or by nonresidence of a claimant ( Gregg v.
Bostwick (1867), 33 Cal. 220 [91 Am.Dec. 637]; cf.  Mann v. Rogers (1866), 35
Cal. 316); or by cessation of residence on the homestead thereafter.  (Cf.
Dawley v. Ayers (1863), 23 Cal. 108; Barber v. Babel, supra (1868), 36 Cal. 11,
20); contra: ( Holden v. Pinney (1856), 6 Cal. 234); or by nonpossession by a
claimant ( In re Crowey (1886), 71 Cal. 300); or when a widow remarried ( Estate
of Boland, supra (1872), 43 Cal. 640.)

   The act of 1867-1868, page 117, section 3, specifically provided that
homesteads declared by joint tenants or tenants in common were subject to
partition by the parties.  ( Higgins v. Higgins (1873), 46 Cal. 259.)

     In contrast to previous California homestead laws, the effect of Civil
Code, sections 1265 and 146, was to maintain the declared homestead as an estate
in land, which only could be abandoned or relinquished in the statutory mode,
not by cessation or change of the status of the personal relationships upon
which the homestead was declared ( Roth v. Insley, supra (1890), 86 Cal. 134).
Death does not destroy the  homestead nor the exemption ( Watson v. Peyton
(1937), 10 Cal.2d 156 [73 P.2d 906]; Dickey v. Gibson (1896), 113 Cal. 26 [45 P.
15, 54 Am.St.Rep. 321]; Ions v. Harbison (1896), 112 Cal. 260 [44 P. 572];
Sanders v. Russell (1890), 86 Cal. 119, 120 [24 P. 852, 21 Am.St.Rep. 26]; In re
Ackerman (1889), 80 Cal. 208 [22 P. 141, 13 Am.St.Rep. 116]; Tyrrell v.  Baldwin
(1889), 78 Cal. 470, 475 [21 P. 116]; Estate of Ronayne (1951), 104 Cal.App.2d
53 [231 P.2d 105]).  A childless widower is entitled to maintain the homestead
exemption. ( Robinson v. Dougherty (1897), 118 Cal. 299 [50 P. 649].)
Nonresidence does not destroy the exemption ( Tipton v. Martin, supra (1886), 71
Cal. 325, 327, and discussion; cf.  Bowman v. Norton, supra (1860), 16 Cal. 213;
Barber v. Babel, supra (1868), 36 Cal. 11, 18; Herrold v. Reen (1881), 58 Cal.
443; Porter v. Chapman (1884), 65 Cal. 365 [4 P. 237]). Temporary absence does
not constitute an abandonment ( Thatcher v. Van Bever (1934), 139 Cal.App. 658);
nor removal to another state and acquisition of residence there ( Tipton v.
Martin, supra (1886), 71 Cal. 325; Lubbock v. McMann, supra (1889), 82 Cal. 226,
229).

   In Zanone v. Sprague, supra (1911), 16 Cal.App. 333, a homestead was declared
on the separate property of the husband by his declaration.  In a divorce
proceeding, there was no assignment of the homestead under Civil Code, section
146, but it was held the property reverted to the husband,  the former owner,
when the decree was silent; and though indicating (p. 338) that the homestead as
a separate estate in the wife was destroyed by divorce, still recognized that
the husband, as former owner, was entitled to the homestead exemption of his
estate (p. 342) citing City Store v. Cofer, supra (1896), 111 Cal. 482. It
perhaps is important to note that Brady v. Kreuger (1896), 8 S.D. 464 [66 N.W.
1083, 1085, 59 Am.St.Rep. 771], and Rosholt v. Mehus (1894), 3 N.D. 513 [57 N.W.
783, 23 L.R.A. 239], were cited.  These cases hold no more than that where the
divorced wife holds no interest, even as dower, in the husband's separate
property, and no longer being a wife could never be a widow, all of her claims
upon the husband's property ceased upon divorce. In other words, the qualified
joint tenancy during marriage that she had in her husband's property was no
more.  This was the contention of the appellant in Lang v. Lang, supra (1920),
182 Cal. 765, supported by the single citation of Zanone v. Sprague, supra
(1911), 16 Cal.App. 333, as disclosed in the briefs on file.  Zanone v. Sprague
did not hold  that as to creditors, her own interest was no longer protected by
the homestead; since Civil Code, section 1265, specifically provides that as to
property assigned to its former owner upon dissolution of the marriage, the
exemption extends to "the debts of the owner."

   In Lang v. Lang, supra (1920), 182 Cal. 765, neither Civil Code, section 146,
nor Civil Code, section 1265, was cited to the court, nor was City Store v.
Cofer, supra (1896), 111 Cal. 482, though its rule was expressly recognized in
Zanone v. Sprague, supra (1911), 16 Cal.App. 333, which was argued to the court.
As disclosed by the opinion, and the briefs filed upon the appeal, Lang v. Lang,
supra (1920), 182 Cal. 765, was an appeal from an interlocutory judgment in
partition under Code of Civil Procedure, section 752, brought by an ex-wife
against her former spouse, to divide the homesteaded community property. The
record on appeal indicates that record title to the property homesteaded was in
the husband alone.  Although the pleadings in the divorce action did not put the
disposition of property in issue (separate property would not be an issue) nor
disposition of the homestead, it was assigned to the plaintiff husband, by the
final decree. Perhaps, the trial court believed at that juncture that under
Civil Code, section 146, such assignment was automatic and mandatory as to
homesteaded property formerly belonging to the husband, as evidenced by the
record title.  The ground of divorce was the desertion of the wife, which at
least prior to Civil Code, section 1265, and 1243 was by some authorities held
to be an abandonment of the homestead upon her part but not on the part of the
innocent spouse. (29 C.J. p. 933 § 345, note 99.)

   The final decree of divorce secured by Lang, assigning the homestead to him,
became a final judgment.  Thereafter, the former wife instituted a suit to
partition the homesteaded property under Code of Civil Procedure, section 752,
claiming that in fact it was community property. Mr. Lang interposed a general
demurrer, claiming (a) the divorce decree was final and conclusive as to his
property rights, (b) that if not, the homestead had not been abandoned; and
could only be abandoned as provided in Civil Code, section 1243; and that while
the homestead continued, no action for partition could be entertained.  ( Hannon
v. Southern Pac. R. R. Co., supra (1909), 12 Cal.App. 350, 358.) His demurrer
having been overruled, he failed to answer; and upon his default the  trial
court upheld the wife's claim that the property was community and entered an
interlocutory judgment to partition the property.  The appeal was brought to the
Supreme Court after decision by the District Court of Appeal.  The District
Court of Appeal held that since the division of property was not placed in issue
in the divorce action, the trial court's judgment assigning the husband all the
homestead rights was not conclusive upon the ex-wife, plaintiff therein; and
partition of the community  property was appropriate.  (Cases cited in that
court were Coats v. Coats (1911), 160 Cal. 671 [118 P. 441, 36 L.R.A.N.S. 844]
which did not relate to divorce, but annulment; De Godey v. Godey (1870), 39
Cal. 157; Biggi  v. Biggi (1893), 98 Cal. 35 [32 P. 803, 35 Am.St.Rep. 141];
Kirschner v. Dietrich (1895), 110 Cal. 502 [42 P. 1064]; Brown v. Brown (1915),
170 Cal. 1 [147 P. 1168].)

   The Supreme Court reached the same conclusion on this point.

   In Lang v. Lang, supra (1920), 182 Cal. 765, the term "homestead" is used in
the sense of the property right imposed by the homestead upon the legal title,
rather than as the homestead exemption from claims of creditors.  Where the
homestead is placed on community property by husband and wife, it restricts the
right of disposition by the husband or wife of their several interests.  There
is a mutual encumbrance against severance or disposition, reciprocally against
the other's interest.  In holding that dissolution of the marriage terminated
the "homestead," the precise point was that partition was no longer inhibited by
the reciprocal interest of each in the community property interest of the other.
( Estate of Winslow (1898), 121 Cal. 92 [53 P. 362].) Partition of the property
might have proceeded under Civil Code, section 147, if properly claimed in the
divorce action. Since it was not, the court held partition was available under
Code of Civil Procedure, section 752.  The case of Zanone v. Sprague, supra
(1911), 16 Cal.App. 333, upon which the Supreme Court relied, cited the case of
City Store v. Cofer, supra (1896), 111 Cal. 482, but indicated that it was not
necessary to decide any question as to the continuance of the homestead
exemption. City Store v. Cofer, supra, was neither cited nor negatived by the
Supreme Court (p. 771) as it referred to Zanone v. Sprague, supra (1911), 16
Cal.App. 333.  Even if the homestead as to the interest of one party should
cease, a homestead exemption may be held by one  joint tenant or tenant in
common, though the homestead may not extend to the other tenant's interest.  (
Estate of Kachigian, supra (1942), 20 Cal.2d 787; Walton v. Walton, supra
(1943), 59 Cal.App.2d 26.)

     Language used in an opinion is to be understood in the light of the facts
and the issue then before the court.  ( Porter v. Bakersfield & Kern Elec. Ry.
Co. (1950), 36 Cal.2d 582, 590 [225 P.2d 223], on the proposition no claim, no
lawsuit.)

    Lang v. Lang, supra (1920), 182 Cal. 765, did not determine the rule when
joint tenancy property was concerned.  The court did not consider the mandatory
language of Civil Code, sections 146- 147, that upon divorce the homestead
selected from the separate property of the parties "shall be assigned" to the
former owner. As authority, the opinion should be confined to the facts therein
under consideration (chief of which was defendant's default and admission of the
allegations of the complaint in partition).   The language "no family, no
homestead" is not stare decisis as to subsequent decisions when such application
will be plainly inconsistent with the statute.  ( Cardenas v. Miller (1895), 108
Cal. 250 [39 P. 783, 41 P. 472, 49 Am.St.Rep. 84]; Wood v. Roach (1932), 125
Cal.App. 631, 638 [14 P.2d 170].)   "But where, as in this case, the code
provisions are plain and unequivocal upon the point in controversy it is hardly
necessary to cite adjudicated cases to support the same, as the statute law must
control whether such cases are in harmony therewith or not." ( Dover v.
Pittsburg Oil Co. (1904), 143 Cal. 501, 505 [77 P. 405].)   Obiter dicta is not
binding in later controversies ( Greenfield v. Mather (1948),  32 Cal.2d 23 [194
P.2d 1]; cf.  Mix v. Ingersoll Candy Co. (1936), 6 Cal.2d 674, 679 [59 P.2d 144]
); and an oft repeated dictum does not overrule a prior decision specifically
determining the question.  ( Cohn v. Central Pac. R. R. Co. (1886), 71 Cal. 488
[12 P. 498].)   Conformity never is required if it would perpetuate a manifest
error or absurdity.  ( Childers v. Childers (1946), 74 Cal.App.2d 56, 61-62
[168 P.2d 218].)   A single decision, made without taking notice of a statute
and in fact, setting aside the statute, cannot be invoked as authority under the
rule of stare decisis.  (Field, C.J. in Duff v. Fisher (1860), 15 Cal. 375, 382
.)

   We cannot presume that Lang v. Lang, supra (1920), 182 Cal. 765, determines
more than Zanone v. Sprague, supra  (1911), 16 Cal.App. 333, respecting the
rights of one ex-spouse in the separate property of the other.  We cannot accept
the assumption that "no family, no homestead" was meant to apply to any other
rights of the parties.  We cannot presume the Supreme Court meant to subvert the
legislative intent that the homestead exemption should continue as to the
separate property of the parties after divorce ( Civ. Code, §§ 146 and 1265) by
the sophistry that upon divorce, there were no homestead exemption rights to
continue.  The Supreme Court had declared its intention otherwise in City Store
v. Cofer, supra (1896), 111 Cal. 482. It seems clear that there is no conflict
between City Store v. Cofer, supra, and Lang v. Lang, supra, but that they in
fact complement each other, if Lang v. Lang is held to the precise holding,
which was, as in Zanone v. Sprague, supra, that one who did not secure an
assignment of the homestead interest in the property of the other spouse, or in
the property interest of the other spouse in the divorce decree, had no further
rights in such property of the other owner; and City Store v. Cofer, supra,
declares that in the possession of the former owner of the separate property,
pursuant to Civil Code, sections 146 and 1265, that owner's several interest
still is covered by a homestead exemption from creditors.

   That the Supreme Court in Lang v. Lang, supra (1920), 182 Cal. 765, intended
this construction, and that the language that the termination of the family
terminated the homestead, related only to the precise situation before the
court, is supported by the citation of Rosholt v. Mehus, supra, 3 N.D. 513 [57
N.W. 783, 23 L.R.A. 239], and Bahn v. Starcke (1896), 89 Tex. 203 [34 S.W. 103].
The Texas statute made the continuance of the homestead dependent upon the
family relationship.  (Consult: 29 C.J. p. 934, § 346, text and note 19.) In
California, Civil Code, sections 146 and 1265, provide otherwise.  The Texas
statute did not provide for assignment of the homestead, but only for division
of the property on divorce. ( Bahn v. Starcke, supra.) As cited in Lang v. Lang,
supra, and Zanone v. Sprague, supra (1911), 16 Cal.App. 333, the cases of Brady
v. Kreuger, supra, 8 S.D. 464 [66 N.W. 1083, 59 Am.St.Rep. 771], Rosholt v.
Mehus, supra, 3 N.D. 513 [57 N.W. 783, 23 L.R.A. 239], and Bahn v. Starcke,
supra, 89 Tex. 203 [34 S.W. 103], go no further than to support the rule
announced in Civil Code, section 146, that dissolution of a marriage terminates
the wife's homestead  interest in what had been her husband's separate property,
unless assigned to her.

   As of 1920,  the date of Lang v. Lang, supra, a homestead could not be
created in joint tenancy property. The relations attending such a homestead, now
valid, were beyond its purview.  (Cf.  Estate of Kachigian, supra (1942), 20
Cal.2d 787, 790.)

   Likewise, it should be noted that in 1920, when Lang v. Lang was decided, the
wife's interest in the community property interest of the husband was stated to
be a mere expectancy ( McKay v. Lauriston (1928), 204 Cal. 557, 565 [269 P. 519]
), which logically could be defeated when she ceased to be such, unless some
interest was assigned her in a divorce decree. It became a "present, existing
and equal interest" in 1927 by adoption of Civil Code, section 161a.  This
negatives the effect of any present analogy with the South Dakota and Texas
cases.  (Cf. 27 C.J.S. Divorce, p. 837, § 180; Cassas v. Cassas (1954), 73 Wyo.
147 [276 P.2d 456, 464].) Lang v. Lang did not decide that Mr. Lang was not
entitled to a homestead exemption as against creditors as to property
partitioned to him; "he was no longer entitled to a homestead exemption of the
character here involved" so as to prevent partition. The   "character here
involved" did not concern any exemption from execution, but only the reciprocal
rights of each of the ex-spouses in the property interests of the other in the
former community property, after the divorce.

    Grupe v. Byers (1887), 73 Cal. 271 [14 P. 863], superficially resembles the
factual situation in the instant case.  The decision supports the validity of
the trust deed executed by the defendant herein, after marriage was dissolved.
Since 1951 this result would follow under Civil Code, sections 1242 and 1265.
Later cases, such as Estate of Teel, supra (1949), 34 Cal.2d 349, which held the
homestead is not abandoned, are inconsistent with Grupe v. Byers.

   In Shoemake v. Chalfant, supra (1874), 47 Cal. 432, it clearly appears from
the reported argument for respondent (p. 434) that the divorce decree provided
that upon dividing the property between the spouses that each held his or her
interest "free of all claims on the part of the other, or those claiming by,
through or under him or her" and "We do not argue that merely because Shoemake
was divorced from his wife the homestead was destroyed, but that the decree
splitting up the property destroyed it.  And we cannot now inquire  whether the
Court ought to have so decreed or not." The court apparently adopted this view
and stated as to the exemption claimed to exist on the property partitioned to
one, from a levy made by the other, (p. 435) "The decree was as effectual in its
results as would have been a declaration of abandonment."

   The case is not authority, therefore, for the view that upon divorce, the
homestead exemption ceases. This is made quite apparent by considering the
legislative history of Civil Code, section 146.  As effective at the time the
Chalfant case was tried, Civil Code, section 146, required that the community
property be equally divided, "and the Court granting the decree must make such
order for the division of the community property, or the sale and the equal
distribution of the proceeds thereof, as the nature of the case may require." No
other option was given.  However, by the provisions of code amendments 1873-74,
chapter 612, page 191, section 33, the entire section was rewritten, and the
provisions for assignment of the homestead were added.  Such a fundamental
change was unnoticed in later cases which erroneously stated, "no family, no
homestead."

    Remley v. Remley (1920), 49 Cal.App. 489, 490 [193 P. 604], held that upon
assignment of the homestead pursuant to Civil Code, section 146, its character
as such was destroyed, citing Shoemake v. Chalfant, supra (1874), 47 Cal. 432,
which did not so hold; Grupe v. Byers, supra (1887), 73 Cal. 271, which is now
overruled; and Simpson v. Simpson (1889), 80 Cal. 237. This latter case did not
so hold.  It held that in a purported assignment of a homestead, the attempt to
limit an estate and attempt to create a trust were bad; and hence that the
ex-husband had no remaining estate which he could claim against the wife.  Its
principal authority was the dicta of Lang v. Lang, supra (1920), 182 Cal. 765.

   We are satisfied that Civil Code, sections 146 and 1265, continued the
homestead protection to defendant, ( Johnson v. Brauner (1955), 131 Cal.App.2d
713, 717-718, 722 [281 P.2d 50]); and in her alone after quitclaim from her
husband, while she occupied the premises as a home ( Roth v. Insley, supra
(1890), 86 Cal. 134; Hall v. Fields (1891), 81 Tex. 553 [17 S.W. 82]; Philbrick
v.  Andrews (1894), 8 Wash. 7 [35 P. 358]; Dougherty v. White (1924), supra, 112
Neb. 675 [200 N.W. 884, 36 A.L.R. 425]; Blandy v. Asher (1880), 72 Mo. 27).
Treating the foreclosure sale as a sale authorized by her, the excess proceeds
are exempt.  ( Civ. Code, § 1265.)

    The judgment is reversed with directions to enter judgment for appellant
Schlesinger.

CONCUR BY: BISHOP

CONCUR

   BISHOP, P. J.   I concur.  It is apparent that the cases are not all
consistent, and I do not join in the endeavor to save the face of Lang v. Lang
(1920), 182 Cal. 765 [190 P. 181], by an attempt to differentiate it.  It, with
its "no family, no homestead," is so at odds with other cases, and with the
provisions of sections 146 and 1265.  Civil Code, that I cannot accept its
conclusion that with the divorce decree the homestead is at an end, without
failing to follow those cases that find the homestead still survives.  While I
adhere to the principle that this court should follow, not disregard, decisions
of our higher courts, even should they seem to me to be in error, I cannot
govern my action by this principle when the decisions lead in two different
directions.


                              80 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              Estate of NORRIS L. COLEMAN, Deceased.  MARGARET R.
               RICHARDSON, Appellant, v. ADELE COLEMAN PARMENTER,
                                   Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 20719

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

            132 Cal. App. 2d 137; 281 P.2d 567; 1955 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      2166


                                 April 6, 1955

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court
was Denied June 2, 1955.  Carter, J., was of the Opinion that the Petition
Should be Granted.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County granting petition for letters of administration to decedent's second wife
and denying similar petition by decedent's former wife.  John Gee Clark, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Judgment--Estoppel to Attack.  --Validity of divorce decree cannot
be contested by party who procured decree or who remarried in reliance thereon,
or by one who aided another to procure decree so that the latter would be free
to remarry.

(2) Id. -- Foreign Divorces -- Estoppel to Question Validity of Decree.  --Where
evidence justifies inference that decedent took married woman to Nevada for
purpose of securing divorce so that she would be free to marry him and that he
financed, at least partially, expense of divorce suit, it supports holding that
he would have been estopped to deny validity of her Nevada divorce decree or his
subsequent marriage to her.

(3) Id. -- Foreign Divorces -- Estoppel to Question Validity of Decree.
--Decedent could not have contested validity of Nevada divorce decree where he
knew circumstances under which married woman secured her divorce, knew that
decree had been granted and in reliance on such decree married her.

(4) Id. -- Foreign Divorces -- Estoppel to Question Validity of Decree.  --In
view of rule that an heir, being in privity with ancestor, is bound by estoppel
which was binding on ancestor, children of decedent by former marriage are
estopped to deny validity of his marriage to second wife where he participated
in assisting his second wife in securing Nevada divorce decree.

(5) Decedents' Estates -- Administrators -- Appointment -- Persons Entitled.
--Evidence supports trial court's determination that decedent's second wife was
his surviving spouse and as such entitled to administer his estate where it
shows that he and she went through a ceremonial marriage after she obtained a
divorce in Nevada, that they thereafter lived together as husband and wife, that
he filed an answer in her divorce suit against him in California admitting the
marriage, that in granting her an interlocutory decree the court found they were
husband and wife, that such decree has not been reversed or set aside, and that
he died before decree became final.

COUNSEL: Thomas A. Wood and Herbert C. Meade for Appellant.

Maurice J. Hindin for Respondent.

JUDGES: Fox, J.  Moore, P. J., and McComb, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: FOX

OPINION

     The crucial question on this appeal is whether the trial court erred in
finding that petitioner Parmenter was the surviving spouse of the decedent
Norris L. Coleman.  Procedurally, the question arose by the filing of petitions
for letters of administration by both parties to these proceedings.  The
Richardson petition is based on the fact that petitioner (who is a former wife
of decedent) is the guardian of the persons and estates of their two minor
sons.  The Parmenter petition is on the theory that she is the widow; since,
however, remarried to her former husband. The court granted the latter petition
and denied the former.  Mrs. Richardson appeals from the ensuing judgment.

   During the holiday season of 1948, respondent, who was married and had
resided in Los Angeles County for many years, went to Reno, Nevada, for the
purpose of getting a divorce. She stayed at the home of her sister, who lived in
Reno.  She also had a daughter living in that city who was then enceinte.
Respondent testified she intended to remain there indefinitely.  She took her
personal belongings with her, including her silverware and linens.  She left no
property in California and had no family ties remaining here.

   Mr. Coleman, who was on temporary military leave, accompanied respondent to
Reno.  He asked her at that time to marry him.  After remaining in Reno a few
days, he returned to his military post.  He frequently communicated with her in
Reno, and again asked her to marry him.  He requested her "to institute an
action for divorce" and wired her $ 200 during the latter part of March, 1949,
"with which to secure" the divorce. She was granted a divorce on April 1, 1949.
Coleman was aware of that fact.  She and Coleman were married in Reno 10 days
later.  They lived together as husband and wife. Mrs.  Coleman returned to Los
Angeles in May.  Mr. Coleman resumed his military duties.

   On February 20, 1950, respondent filed suit in Los Angeles County for divorce
from Mr. Coleman.  He filed an answer  in which he admitted the marriage. An
interlocutory decree was granted to the plaintiff in July, 1950.  That decree
has not been reversed, vacated or set aside.  At that hearing Mrs. Coleman
testified she had resided in Los Angeles County continuously for about 23 years.
In April, 1951, Mr. Coleman, while still on active duty as a member of the armed
forces, died in Korea as a prisoner of war.

   The trial court's decision is based primarily on the theory that the decedent
would have been estopped to attack the validity of his marriage to respondent
and that his minor children are thus also estopped. The facts justify and
support the application of that doctrine.

     The law is settled that "The validity of a divorce decree cannot be
contested by a party who has procured the decree or a party who has remarried in
reliance thereon, or by one who has aided another to procure the decree so that
the latter will be free to remarry." ( Rediker v. Rediker, 35 Cal.2d 796, 805
[221 P.2d 1, 20 A.L.R.2d 1152], and cases there cited.) The instant case falls
within both the second and third segments of this rule.   We shall first
consider the application of the last portion of the rule to facts at hand.  The
evidence justifies the inference that decedent took respondent to Nevada for the
purpose of securing a divorce so that she would be free to marry him and that he
financed the expense thereof, at least to the extent of $ 200.  These facts
closely parallel those in Harlan v. Harlan, 70 Cal.App.2d 657 [161 P.2d 490].
There Harlan took a married woman to a Mexican attorney in Los Angeles and made
arrangements with him to secure a Mexican divorce for her so that she might
marry him.  Harlan paid the attorney's fee.  The parties then married. Later,
Harlan brought an action for an annulment charging the Mexican decree was void.
The court held he "was estopped from asserting its invalidity because he had
aided and counseled the defendant in procuring it so that she might marry him."
(See Rediker v. Rediker, supra, p. 806, where the Harlan case is discussed with
approval.) The Estate of Davis, 38 Cal.App.2d 579 [101 P.2d 761, 102 P.2d 545],
also closely parallels the case at bar, factually.  There the deceased urged the
respondent to go to Nevada, establish a residence for the sole purpose of
securing a divorce so that she could then marry him.  He agreed to take care of
her expenses and the costs of the divorce. He went to Reno, assisted in the
preparation of  the case, and married the lady on the day the divorce was
granted.  They then returned to California where they lived together until his
death.  The court said "the deceased . . . would  have been foreclosed from
denying the validity of the divorce or the subsequent marriage under the
doctrine of quasi estoppel." (P. 585.) In Margulies v. Margulies, 109 N.J.Eq.
391 [157 A. 676], it is said that "One who induces a defendant to obtain a
foreign divorce and pays the expenses thereof, and afterwards marries her, is
precluded from attacking the validity of the decree." Other cases to the same
effect where similar aid had been rendered are Goodloe v. Hawk, 113 F.2d 753 [72
App.D.C. 287]; Saul v. Saul, 122 F.2d 64 [74 App.D.C. 287]; and Van Slyke v. Van
Slyke, 186 Mich. 324 [152 N.W. 921].

   From these authorities it is clear that the deceased would have been estopped
to deny the validity of respondent's Nevada divorce or his subsequent marriage
to her.

     The facts also bring the case within the second portion of the rule on
estoppel, quoted, supra, from the Rediker case.  Coleman knew the circumstances
under which respondent secured her divorce, knew the decree had been granted and
in reliance on such decree married respondent.  Thus the case comes squarely
within the principle of estoppel as applied in Dietrich v. Dietrich, 41 Cal.2d
497 [261 P.2d 269]. It was there pointed out (p. 505), as the foundation for the
application of the doctrine, that Noah had "full knowledge of the circumstances"
under which Carol had obtained a Nevada divorce from her husband, and "in
reliance on such divorce" he "went through a marriage ceremony and lived with
Carol as her husband for many years." This statement is precisely applicable to
the case at bar except for the period of time the Colemans lived together as
husband and wife after their marriage.

     This brings us to the question whether such estoppel should be applied to
Coleman's minor sons by his previous marriage. In the Davis case,  supra, the
court said (p. 585): "As a general rule, an heir, being in privity with the
ancestor, is bound by an estoppel which was binding upon the ancestor." In that
case the factual setting, as previously noted, is strikingly similar to the
instant case.  It was there held, in an heirship proceeding, that the children
of the decedent by a former marriage were estopped to deny the validity of his
marriage to a second wife, where he participated in assisting his second wife in
getting a Nevada decree. See also Union  Bank & Tr. Co. v. Gordon, 116
Cal.App.2d 681, at page 690 [254 P.2d 644], where, in discussing the Estate of
Krone, 83 Cal.App.2d 766 [189 P.2d 741], the court observed, citing the Davis
case, supra, that "The children in the Krone case were estopped because as heirs
of their ancestor, the first wife, they were in privity with her, and were thus
bound by an estoppel which bound the ancestor." Under the principle and
authority of the Davis case it is clear that the minor children of Coleman are
bound by the estoppel which was binding upon him.  Of course appellant, as their
guardian, is in no better position than the children.

     With the complication of the Nevada decree of respondent disposed of, it
becomes apparent that the evidence is ample to support the trial court's
determination that respondent was the surviving spouse of Coleman and as such
was entitled to administer his estate.  This evidence is that respondent and
Coleman went through a ceremonial marriage in Reno; that they thereafter lived
together as husband and wife; that he filed an answer in her divorce suit
against him in California admitting the marriage; that in granting her an
interlocutory decree on July 21, 1950, the court found as of that date that they
were husband and wife; that such decree has not been reversed, vacated or set
aside, and remains in full force and effect, and that Coleman died on or about
April 30, 1951.

   Appellant attempts to challenge the validity of the California interlocutory
decree of respondent from Coleman on the theory that respondent could not have
been continuously a bona fide resident of this state for one year prior to
February 20, 1950, the date on which she filed her complaint, since she had
received a Nevada decree from her former husband which required  residence there
on April 1, 1949.  The difficulty with this argument is that the trial court may
well have believed respondent's testimony that she had resided here for more
than 20 years, and that the imposition, if such there was, had been upon the
Nevada court, the validity of whose decree Coleman would have been, and,
therefore, his children were, estopped to question.

   Appellant relies on Bernhard v. Bank of America, 19 Cal.2d 807 [122 P.2d 892]
; Dillard v. McKnight, 34 Cal.2d 209 [209 P.2d 387, 11 A.L.R.2d 835], and
McManus v. Bendlage, 82 Cal.App.2d 916 [187 P.2d 854]. An examination of these
cases reveals that none of them is pertinent to the issues in  the instant
matter.  They deal with the application of res judicata rather than quasi
estoppel.

   The judgment is affirmed.


                              81 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              THOMAS F. ANDERSON, Appellant, v. DELLA C. ANDERSON,
                                   Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 16074

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Three

          87 Cal. App. 2d 329; 197 P.2d 66; 1948 Cal. App. LEXIS 1332


                                August 31, 1948

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from an order of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County declaring that neither party to an action take anything and dismissing
the cause without prejudice.  Warren Steel, Judge assigned.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Judgment--Res Judicata--Property Rights.  --An interlocutory
divorce decree stating that realty which had been conveyed to the husband and
wife "be held in joint tenancy," that the value of their equity in the property
was a stated sum, and that the property was awarded to the wife subject to her
payment of half of that sum to the husband, was res judicata as to property
rights and in a subsequent action by the husband to partition the realty after
the decree had become final, the court did not err in ordering that neither
party take anything. Although it could not be ascertained from the quoted words
what the status of the property was at the commencement of the divorce action,
where there was sufficient evidence therein to support a finding that the
property was purchased with community funds and with separate funds of the wife,
it was assumed, in the absence of written findings, that the court found that
the parties had agreed and intended that the property should be community
property.

COUNSEL: Elbert E. Hensley for Appellant.

Francis R. McKenna for Respondent.

JUDGES: Wood, J.  Shinn, P. J., and McComb, J., assigned, concurred.

OPINION BY: WOOD

OPINION

     This is an action to partition certain real property (a house and lot)
which had been conveyed to the plaintiff and defendant, husband and wife, as
joint tenants, and which had been involved in a divorce action between them.
Prior to the commencement of this action the defendant herein had commenced an
action for divorce, wherein she had alleged that the property was community
property, and wherein the plaintiff herein (as defendant therein) had denied
that allegation.  This action and the divorce action came on for trial at the
same time.  The divorce action was tried first, and then the present action was
placed off calendar.

    In the divorce case, the court awarded plaintiff therein (defendant herein)
an interlocutory decree of divorce and the real property involved herein.  That
decree stated that it is ordered that the real property "be held in joint
tenancy"; that the value of the equity of the parties in said property is $
3,000; that said real property is awarded to plaintiff (therein) subject to the
payment by her to the defendant (therein) of $ 1,500 payable $ 150 per month;
and that defendant (therein) pay to plaintiff (therein) $ 1,500 alimony payable
$ 150 per month.  The defendant therein did not file a notice of intention to
move for a new trial until 10 months after the entry of the judgment, and did
not appeal until more than a year after the entry of the judgment.  (That
appeal, not having been taken within the time allowed by law, was dismissed as
shown by an opinion of this court filed this day, ante, p. 327 [197 P.2d 65].)
Findings therein were waived. The evidence therein was sufficient to support a
finding that the property was purchased with community funds, and with the
separate funds of plaintiff therein.  Also the evidence  therein would have
supported a finding that defendant therein was guilty of extreme cruelty to an
extent which would have justified the court in awarding all the community
property to plaintiff therein.  The trial judge in that case stated at the time
of his oral decision that the court had "a right to strip him [defendant
therein] of everything under this kind of conduct, and he is lucky to get the
Ford"; that as far as the court was concerned the real property "is never going
to be divided up in such a way that he [defendant therein] will get it"; that "I
am going to make an award of alimony herein which will take care of it in such a
way that Mrs. Anderson is going to get all the property; she is entitled to it."
The trial judge also said at that time that he would award the automobile to
defendant (therein) "because, in the first place, he needs it, and, in the
second place, it is not worth anything."

   Thereafter, the court, on its own motion, set the present action for trial on
September 27, 1946 -- nine months after the entry of the interlocutory decree in
the divorce action. At the time of the trial herein on said September 27th,
counsel for defendant objected to the introduction of any evidence on the ground
that the issue as to the property herein had been decided in the divorce action,
and that no appeal or motion had been filed therein.  He argued,  in effect,
that by  reason of the provisions of the interlocutory decree in the divorce
action, and by reason of the fact that said decree had become final, the issue
as to the property herein was res judicata. That objection was overruled without
prejudice.  Evidence was then introduced on behalf of plaintiff and defendant.
When the case was submitted for decision, the trial court made a minute order
that "Judgment is ordered that neither party is to take anything and that the
cause be dismissed without prejudice." Plaintiff appeals from that order.  No
formal signed judgment was entered, and there were no written findings of fact.
By reason of the words "Judgment is ordered," appearing in the minute order from
which this appeal is taken, that order might be interpreted to be a memorandum
for a final judgment, rather than a final judgment. That order, however, will be
regarded as a final judgment.

   At the time of his oral decision herein the trial judge said that he was not
going to trespass on the business of the judge who decided the divorce action,
and he would not make a ruling that might in any way be adverse to whatever the
judgment in the divorce case purported to be; that his judgment would be that
neither party take anything, and that the action be dismissed without prejudice,
and that he would relegate the parties to the judge who tried the divorce case
for such motions as they might see fit to make; that if the plaintiff herein
wanted a ruling in this case, the court would hold that the evidence herein
shows that the property is community property and that the divorce decree
purported to award it to plaintiff therein as community property; that it would
be presumptuous on the part of the trial judge herein to adjudicate something
that had already been adjudicated; that the property had been awarded to the
plaintiff in the divorce action, but whether the judge in that action had in
mind community property or joint tenancy property was not specifically stated in
the decree therein.

   Appellant contends herein that the court should have decided this case on the
merits, and should not have dismissed it.  He argues that the divorce decree
shows upon its face that it is erroneous, in that, it specifically holds
(according to his argument) that the property is joint tenancy property, and
that the court awarded it to the plaintiff therein.  He asserts, in effect, that
the trial court should have proceeded to partition the property, irrespective of
the divorce decree, because the divorce decree shows on its face that there was
no proper and legal disposition of the property, that the award of the property
to plaintiff therein was a legal defect -- the court having found that the
property was joint tenancy property, and the court having power to award only
community property.

     The trial court herein did not err in ordering that neither party take
anything, it appearing, as hereinafter shown,  that the issues as to the
property had been adjudicated in the divorce action. It therefore appears that
the further part of the order dismissing the case without prejudice was
unnecessary and served no useful purpose. It is to be noted, however, in
connection with the making of the order of dismissal, that appellant did not ask
for a ruling on the merits after the trial judge stated what his ruling would be
if plaintiff wanted a ruling on the merits.  The judgment in the divorce case
had been final for several months when this case was tried.  The issue as to the
rights of the parties in the property here involved had been submitted for
determination in the divorce case. The provision in the decree therein that the
equity of the parties in the property was of the value of $ 3,000, and that the
property was awarded to plaintiff subject to the payment of $ 1,500 by plaintiff
to defendant, is clear.  The other provision therein regarding the property,
that is, that the property "be held in joint tenancy," is uncertain.  The
material question, regarding the property, is what the status of the property
was at the commencement of the divorce action, rather than how it should be held
after the decision therein.  It cannot be ascertained from that last mentioned
provision, that the property "be held in joint tenancy," whether the court found
that, at the commencement of the divorce action, the parties held the property
in joint tenancy, or whether the court found that the parties had agreed and
intended that the property, which stood of record in their names as joint
tenants, should be community property. It cannot be ascertained from said
provision, that the property "be held in joint tenancy," whether the property
should be held in joint tenancy for an unlimited period of time or only until
the plaintiff therein had paid the $ 1,500 to the defendant therein.  The
divorce decree does not state, as appellant asserts, that the property was joint
tenancy property. As above stated, findings therein were waived, but the
evidence was amply sufficient to support a finding that the property was
purchased with community funds and with separate funds of the wife.  It is true
that the trial judge in the divorce case said at the time of his oral decision
that he  was going to hold that the property "is joint tenancy"; however, since
all intendments are in favor of the judgment, it is to be assumed, in the
absence of written findings, that the court thereafter and at the time of
signing the decree found that the parties had agreed and intended that the
property should be community property, even though the property stood of record
in the names of the parties as joint tenants. It cannot properly be concluded
that the divorce decree shows on its face that error was committed in awarding
the property to plaintiff therein.  As above shown, the decree in the divorce
case had long since become final when this partition case was tried, and
therefore, irrespective of whether the court erred or did not err in awarding
the property to plaintiff in that case, the issues between the parties as to the
property are, by reason of the divorce decree, res judicata.

   As above stated, the order of the court in the present case that neither
party take anything was correct, it appearing that the issues as to the property
were res judicata. The further part of the order dismissing the cause without
prejudice was, as above stated, unnecessary and served no useful purpose, and
therefore the order should be modified by striking therefrom the words "and that
the cause be dismissed without prejudice."

   The order is modified by striking therefrom the words "and that the cause be
dismissed without prejudice," and as so modified the order is affirmed.


                              82 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           JANE EVANS, Plaintiff and Respondent, v. SAMUEL E. EVANS,
                            Defendant and Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 25801

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                  Division One

            275 Cal. App. 2d 423; 79 Cal. Rptr. 862; 1969 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1932


                                 August 5, 1969

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from an order of the Superior Court of Alameda County
denying a motion to terminate support payments provided for in a separate
maintenance decree.  William J. McGuiness, Judge.

COUNSEL: Newman, Marsh & Furtado and Edward F. Newman for Defendant and
Appellant.

Caldecott, Peck & Phillips and Thomas N. Stewart for Plaintiff and Respondent.

JUDGES: Elkington, J.  Molinari, P. J., and Sims, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: ELKINGTON

OPINION

     Defendant Samuel E. Evans has appealed from an order denying his motion to
terminate support payments provided for in a separate maintenance decree
obtained by respondent Jane Evans.

   The issue before us is a question of law; there is no factual conflict.

   The parties were married March 3, 1950.  On May 29, 1964, Jane secured a
default separate maintenance decree by which her husband Samuel was ordered to
pay $ 175 each month for her support.  A year later, on Samuel's motion, the
amount was reduced to $ 75 per month.  On November 29, 1966, Samuel filed a
separate action against Jane for divorce based upon her alleged extreme cruelty.
Jane, represented by counsel, generally denied the material allegations of the
complaint and affirmatively pleaded the separate maintenance decree in her
favor.  Following a trial, interlocutory and final judgments of divorce, based
on Jane's extreme cruelty, were entered in Samuel's favor.  These judgments are
now final.  Neither made provision for Jane's support.

   Following the entry of the final judgment of divorce on December 18, 1967,
Samuel moved to terminate the support provision of Jane's separate maintenance
decree. The court made an order denying the motion; it is from that order that
the instant appeal was taken.

   Jane's separate maintenance decree was, of course, res judicata as to the
conduct of the parties prior to its entry.  As the record before us does not
contain the trial court's findings in the divorce action, we must assume that
the judgments in  that case were based on Jane's extreme cruelty following the
entry of the separate maintenance decree.  It is now settled law in California
that a separate maintenance decree is not a bar to a subsequent action for
divorce upon grounds of cruelty committed after the final separation of the
parties.  ( Griffith v. Griffith, 129 Cal.App.2d 803, 809 [277 P.2d 850];
Jenkins v. Jenkins , 125 Cal.App.2d 109, 114 [269 P.2d 908].)

     The question before us is whether the support provisions of a decree of
separate maintenance continue in effect even though the marriage is thereafter
terminated by divorce.

     In Monroe v. Superior Court, 28 Cal.2d 427, 429 [170 P.2d 473], it is
stated: "The right to support arises out of the marriage relationship. ( Civ.
Code, § 155.) A separate maintenance decree does not end the marriage, and
therefore does not end the obligation to support; it only regulates the extent
of that support.  . . .  [para. ] When a divorce has been granted and the
marital relation has ceased to exist, the jurisdiction that the court had over
matters of support is exhausted unless the court has reserved it in an
authorized manner."  In the case at bench there was no such reservation as to
Jane's support.

   Other cases have discussed the nature of separate maintenance.  It "differs
from alimony  in that it presupposes a continuing marital status." ( DeYoung v.
DeYoung, 27 Cal.2d 521, 528 [165 P.2d 457], concurring opinion of Schauer, J.)
Jenkins v. Jenkins, 125 Cal.App.2d 109, 114 [269 P.2d 908], states: "The purpose
of a suit for separate maintenance is to specifically enforce the general duty
of the husband by directing certain definite payments to be made at regular
intervals for the wife's support."  And in Goetting v. Goetting, 80 Cal.App.
363, 368 [252 P. 656], it is said: "A husband contracts toward his wife the
obligation to furnish support ( sec. 155, Civ. Code).  This duty is a continuing
one, upon which the action for separate maintenance is based, . . ." A husband
does not contract to support his wife after termination of the marriage; such
rights as the wife might have to post-marriage alimony or support are statute
and court determined.

   In Smith v. Superior Court, 136 Cal. 17, 18 [78 P. 100], the wife obtained an
order for maintenance and the husband thereafter obtained a divorce. A new trial
was granted in the divorce action and the question arose whether the divorce was
final such as to relieve the husband from the duty to support under the prior
separate maintenance decree. The court noted  that "It is conceded that a
complete divorce will relieve petitioner from the judgment for alimony, because
the plaintiff in the first suit would no longer be his wife."

    Chirgwin v. Chirgwin, 26 Cal.App.2d 506, 508-509 [79 P.2d 772], 1 citing
authorities, held: "The right to separate maintenance without applying for a
divorce 'rests on the fact that the relation of husband and wife exists and a
decree awarding such maintenance contemplates the existence of the marital
relation not only when the decree is made but also during its life.  It would
seem to follow therefore, that if the wife or husband should thereafter bring an
action for divorce, the decree in that action would be conclusive of the rights
of the parties, and if it contained no provision for support, it would
necessarily terminate the allowance therefor made in the action for separate
maintenance.' "

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1
Disapproved in Lewis v. Lewis, 49 Cal.2d 389, 394 [317 P.2d 987], insofar as the
subsequent divorce was obtained ex parte without personal jurisdiction over the
defendant spouse.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Douglas v. Douglas, 164 Cal.App.2d 230 [330 P.2d 659], also concerned a
husband's foreign divorce decree which followed a separate maintenance decree to
the wife in California.  The appellate court (p. 236) recited with approval the
following language of the trial court's opinion: " 'The Nevada judgment, if
valid, terminated eo instante the award of temporary maintenance herein.  (
Chirgwin v. Chirgwin, 26 Cal.App.2d 506 [79 P.2d 772]; 28 A.L.R.2d 1402; 42
C.J.S. 274.) Mrs. Douglas attacked the jurisdiction of the Nevada Court in that
forum.  She is thus foreclosed from attacking it here.  ( Tomkins v. Tomkins, 89
Cal.App.2d 243, 247-248 [200 P.2d 821], and state and federal cases there
cited.) Additionally, as heretofore stated, the Nevada decree was found valid by
a final order of this court on November 10, 1954.  Accordingly, any recovery
herein must be based on amounts accruing prior to June 10, 1949, the date of the
Nevada judgment.' "

   Respondent Jane Evans places much reliance on Salvato v. Salvato, 195
Cal.App.2d 869 [16 Cal.Rptr. 263], Barton v. Barton, 230 Cal.App.2d 43 [40
Cal.Rptr. 676], and Rethorst v. Rethorst, 261 Cal.App.2d 713 [68 Cal.Rptr. 263].
In each of these cases the husband sought a divorce while the wife,  by
complaint or cross-complaint asked for separate maintenance. In each, the court,
finding that both parties had furnished grounds for divorce, granted the husband
a divorce while entering a separate maintenance decree with a monthly support
allowance to the wife.  It is obvious that in each of these  cases the wife,
although entitled to a divorce, declined such relief for moral or religious
reasons.  It is equally clear that the court, wishing to  avoid the strict rule
of Civil Code section 139, Lampson v. Lampson, 171 Cal. 332 [153 P. 238], and In
re McKenna, 116 Cal.App. 232 [2 P.2d 429], denying alimony to a party against
whom a divorce decree is granted, resorted to the fiction of a separate
maintenance decree -- thus doing equity and effecting substantial justice.

   Resolving a dilemma, the court in Salvato, supra, 195 Cal.App.2d 869, stated
(pp. 871-872): "We are persuaded that the rule in Lampson and McKenna ought not
to be here applied.  The action here was not a mere 'application for divorce.'
Respondent having, as the court found, a cause of action for divorce against
appellant, elected, perhaps because of personal or religious scruples, to prove
the facts in support of a cross-complaint for separate maintenance. This she had
a statutory right to do.  And this right should not be circumscribed and limited
by slavish adherence to a rule obtaining in a simple action for divorce where
the fault of the defendant alone is in issue.  Had defendant sued for divorce
the court could, and no doubt would, have granted a divorce to both parties in
order to escape from the rule declared in Lampson and McKenna and do justice.
But is the rule so rigid that in a situation such as this record presents gross
injustice must be done or a wronged wife must seek an unwanted divorce? We think
not."

   In the exercise of their general equity powers the courts in Salvato, Barton
and Rethorst had power to award support to the wife without the necessity of
granting separate maintenance and divorce, remedies which are mutually exclusive
in reason and by definition.  For a discussion of such equitable power, see
Hudson v. Hudson, 52 Cal.2d 735, 744 [344 P.2d 295]; Galland v. Galland, 38 Cal.
265; 50 Cal.L.Rev. 353.  In any event we do not consider that Salvato, Barton
and Rethorst support a rule that a wife's previously granted separate
maintenance decree continues in effect after a dissolution of the marriage by
divorce. Here respondent Jane Evans was not without a remedy.  She was permitted
to resist her husband's divorce action, and failing in that, to seek an award of
support by cross-complaint for divorce, or under the Salvato, Barton, Rethorst
theory, or under the court's basic equitable powers.

   The order is reversed.


                              83 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           JOAN WILSON HAAS, Plaintiff and Appellant, v. EDWARD HAAS,
                            Defendant and Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 27990

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division One

            227 Cal. App. 2d 615; 38 Cal. Rptr. 811; 1964 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1218


                                  June 3, 1964

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court
was Denied July 29, 1964.  Peters, J., was of the Opinion that the Petition
Should be Granted.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  Otto J. Emme, Judge.

   Action for separate maintenance, cross-action for divorce and amended
complaint for divorce.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Public Policy.  --The formation and dissolution of the marriage of
domiciliaries are matters of public concern.

(2) Id.--Legislative Control.  --Marriage is regulated solely by the
Legislature, subject to constitutional restrictions.

(3) Id.--Proceedings--Residence.  --As required for divorce, residence is
synonymous with domicile. (Civ. Code, § 128.)

(4) Id.--Proceedings--Residence.  --The court can grant a divorce to either
party, where one party has satisfied the residency requirement of Civ. Code, §
128.

(5) Id.--Proceedings--Residence.  --Plaintiff in a separate maintenance action,
although not a resident, could amend her complaint to seek a divorce where
defendant, who satisfied the residence requirements of Civ. Code, § 128, filed a
cross-complaint for divorce.

(6) Id.--Proceedings--Review--Harmless Error.  --Where cruelty served as the
basis for both plaintiff's complaint for separate maintenance and amended
complaint for divorce, and the court found, on substantial evidence, against
plaintiff on the issue of cruelty, although the court erred in striking the
amended complaint, after hearing all of the evidence, the error was not
prejudicial, as the original complaint remained before the court.

COUNSEL: Kenny, Morris & Ibanez, Robert W. Kenny and Eleanor Jackson Piel for
Plaintiff and Appellant.

Spencer Brandeis and Ellis J. Horvitz for Defendant and Respondent.

JUDGES: Fourt, Acting P. J.  Lillie, J., and Kincaid, J. pro tem., * concurred.

*   Retired judge of the superior court sitting pro tempore under assignment by
the Chairman of the Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: FOURT

OPINION

     Plaintiff appeals from an interlocutory judgment of divorce entered "in
favor of  defendant and cross complaint and against plaintiff and cross
defendant and from the whole thereof."

   The chronology of significant events is as follows:

   On August 3, 1962, plaintiff filed a complaint for separate maintenance.
Therein she alleged that defendant had treated her with extreme cruelty and had
wrongfully inflicted grievous mental suffering.

   On August 28, 1962, defendant filed his answer to plaintiff's complaint.
Among other things he denied the alleged cruelty. In addition to his answer,
defendant filed a cross-complaint for divorce. Therein defendant alleged that he
"is now and for more than one year last past has been a resident of the State of
California, and for more than three months last past has been and now is a
resident of the county of Los Angeles." Defendant charged cruelty as a ground
for divorce.

   On September 4, 1962, plaintiff filed her answer to defendant's
cross-complaint.

   On May 22, 1963, plaintiff filed a "First Amended Complaint For Divorce
(Cruelty)" wherein she alleged that defendant "and cross complainant is now and
for more than one year last past has been a resident of the County of Los
Angeles, State of California."

   The cause was called for trial on May 22, 1963.  The minute order of that
date provides in pertinent part as follows: ". . . an opening statement is made
by plaintiff and defendant.  Joan Haas is sworn and testifies on behalf of the
plaintiff.  Plaintiff's motion that the 1st Amended Complaint for Divorce be
amended to include in the prayer the request that plaintiff be restored her
maiden name of Joan Wilson is granted.  Defendant's motion to strike plaintiff's
1st amended complaint for divorce is argued and submitted upon the filing of the
last points and authorities, 5 -- 5, plaintiff to open.  . . .  The plaintiff
rests.  Marilyn Liebmann is sworn and testifies on behalf of the defendant.  The
defendant rests.  . . .  Both sides rest.  Cause will stand submitted upon the
filing of the last points and authorities, 10 -- 10 -- 5, plaintiff to open."
(Italics added.)

   The minute order dated June 19, 1963, provides in pertinent part as follows:
". . . the court now renders its decision as follows: Plaintiff's first Amended
Complaint for Divorce is ordered striken [sic].  . . .  A decree of separate
maintenance is denied to the plaintiff.  An Interlocutory Judgment of  Divorce
Is Granted To The Defendant and Cross-Complainant. . . ." (Italics added.)

   On July 3, 1963, the findings of fact, conclusions of law, and judgment were
filed.  Judgment was entered July 5, 1963, and this appeal followed.

    Plaintiff's first contention is that the trial court erred in striking her
amended complaint for divorce. The question presented may be stated as follows:

   Where the party who first asserts a cause of action for divorce (in this case
it was defendant by his cross-complaint) has satisfied the residence
requirements set forth in Civil Code, section 128, may the party against whom
the divorce is sought (in this case it was plaintiff in the action for separate
maintenance) also then attempt to obtain a divorce even though the latter party
has not satisfied the residence requirements?

   It would appear that the question presented is one of first impression in
this state.  We believe that the answer thereto is in the affirmative for the
reasons hereinafter set forth.

     Marriage is a matter of public concern.  The public, through the state, has
interest in both its formation and dissolution. The state which has that
interest is the state of domicile. ( Aldabe v. Aldabe, 209 Cal.App.2d 453 [26
Cal.Rptr. 208].)   The  regulation of marriage and divorce is solely within the
province of the Legislature except as the same might be restricted by the
Constitution.  ( McClure  v. Donovan, 33 Cal.2d 717 [205 P.2d 17]; Beeler v.
Beeler, 124 Cal.App.2d 679 [268 P.2d 1074].)   The requirement of residence set
forth in Civil Code, section 128, 1 is synonymous with domicile. ( Smith v.
Smith, 45 Cal.2d 235 [288 P.2d 497]; Ungemach v. Ungemach, 61 Cal.App.2d 29 [142
P.2d 99].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Civil
Code, section 128, provides in part as follows:

   "A divorce must not be granted unless the plaintiff has been a resident of
the state one year, and of the county in which the action is brought three
months, next preceding the commencement of the action; provided, that a
cross-complainant in an action for divorce need not be or have been a resident
of the state or of the county in which the action is brought or pending in order
to entitle such cross-complainant to a divorce in said action; . . ." (Italics
shown.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     The court cannot grant a divorce to either party without proof that at
least one of the parties satisfies the residence mandate of Civil Code, section
128.  ( Coleman v. Coleman, 23 Cal.App. 423 [138 P. 362].) The mandate is
satisfied if either the original plaintiff or cross-complainant has been a
resident for the period required.  ( Rethers v. Rethers, 140 Cal.App.2d 28 [294
P.2d 968].)

     When defendant, who satisfied the residence requirements, filed his
cross-complaint for divorce, the court was vested with jurisdiction to dissolve
the marriage. Once jurisdiction has attached there is no logical reason for
holding that the jurisdiction is limited solely to granting a divorce to
defendant on his cross-complaint. To so hold would be to place form above
substance.

   The question of whether a person who is not a resident could, in the first
instance, file a complaint for divorce based upon defendant's residence is not
before us.

     The trial court erred in striking plaintiff's amended complaint for divorce
. However, under the circumstances of this case the error was not prejudicial.

   Even though the trial court struck the amended complaint for divorce, the
complaint for separate maintenance was still before it.  The trial court found
(Finding of Fact VII) that "defendant did not treat plaintiff with extreme
cruelty,  nor did he wrongfully inflict upon her grievous mental suffering."
Substantial evidence supports this determination.

   Since alleged mental cruelty served as the basis for both plaintiff's
complaint for separate maintenance and her amended complaint for divorce, and
since the trial court found against plaintiff on the issue of cruelty, plaintiff
sustained no prejudice from the trial court's striking the amended complaint for
divorce.

   The judgment is affirmed.


                              84 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           SADIE JEAN BLACKMAN, Plaintiff and Appellant, v. BALDO M.
             KRISTOVICH, as Public Administrator, etc., Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 26728

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

            216 Cal. App. 2d 792; 31 Cal. Rptr. 413; 1963 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2084


                                  June 3, 1963

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied June 27, 1963, and
Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court was Denied July 31,
1963.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from orders of the Superior Court of Los Angeles County
denying motion to vacate a final divorce judgment and denying motion to
reconsider previous motion.  Brodie Ahlport, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Appeal--Briefs--Pointing Out Errors--Abandonment of Points not Presented.
--The reviewing court may assume that an appellant has abandoned assertion of a
ground urged in the court below but not argued in the brief on appeal.

(2) Divorce--Relief From Fraudulent Decrees--Motion to Vacate.  --On a motion to
vacate a final decree of divorce on the ground that the husband had acted
fraudulently in filing plaintiff wife's affidavit for entry of final judgment,
the basic element of fraud, misrepresentation or concealment of facts, was
missing where it was shown that plaintiff signed the affidavit knowing it to be
a condition precedent to obtaining the decree, that defendant represented to her
that he intended to file the affidavit and obtain such a degree, and that
defendant did just as he had represented he would do.

(3) Id.--Relief From Fraudulent Decrees--Motion to Vacate.  --On a motion to
vacate a final decree of divorce on the ground that it had been fraudulently
procured by defendant husband, the husband's alleged misrepresentation that he
had not and would not file plaintiff wife's affidavit for entry of final
judgment could not have been instrumental in procuring the divorce; a case of
fraud could be based on such misrepresentation only on a showing that the wife
had been prevented by the misrepresentation from acting to have the decree
vacated on some other ground.

(4) Id.--Relief From Fraudulent Decrees--Motion to Vacate.  --On a motion to
vacate a final decree of divorce, plaintiff wife failed to make out a case that
such decree had been obtained by defendant husband's fraud where plaintiff's
declaration did not allege that defendant's alleged misrepresentations occurred
prior to the procurement of the decree.

(5a) (5b) Id.--Relief From Fraudulent Decrees--Motion to Vacate.  --On a motion
to vacate a final decree of divorce, plaintiff wife could not urge as a fraud on
the court the fact that she and defendant had continued to live together as
husband and wife for a full year following the entry of the interlocutory decree
where she had herself participated in the fraud through filing for divorce,
obtaining the divorce by default, and signing the affidavit for entry of final
judgment with the understanding that it would be filed and a final decree
thereby obtained.

(6) Id.--Causes for Denying Divorce--Condonation.  --The court's duty, normally,
is to deny a divorce if there has been a reconciliation and restoration of all
marital rights to the offending party.

(7) Id.--Relief From Fraudulent Decrees.  --If, without the knowledge of the
court granting a final decree of divorce, there has been a reconciliation and
restoration of all marital rights to the offending party, the court may exert
its inherent power to correct its own records and purge them of judgments
fraudulently obtained.

(8) Id.--Relief From Fraudulent Decrees.  --If both parties were equally at
fault in perpetrating a fraud on a court granting a final decree of divorce,
neither can urge vacation of the decree on such ground, since equity does not
adjust differences between wrongdoers.

COUNSEL: Tendler, Cruce & Friedman and Thomas P. Cruce for Plaintiff and
Appellant.

Harold Kennedy, County Counsel, and Henry W. Gardett, Deputy County Counsel, for
Respondent.

JUDGES: Fox, P. J.  Ashburn, J., and Herndon, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: FOX

OPINION

     Mrs. Sadie Jean Blackman has appealed from (1) an order denying her motion
to vacate a final decree of divorce granted her, and (2) a subsequent order
denying her motion for reconsideration of her previous motion.

   Appellant's original motion to vacate was based upon the ground that the
final decree of divorce previously granted her was procured by extrinsic fraud,
assertedly practiced on her and on the court, by her husband, Aviv Blackman, now
deceased, and by duress of Blackman exercised on her.

   The facts before the court below are contained in two declarations in support
of the original motion: (1) one by appellant, and (2) the other by appellant's
attorney, Meyer Litenberg; and (3) a declaration by appellant's daughter, Betty
Jane Swales, submitted in addition to the first two in support of the motion for
reconsideration. The fact picture presented by these three declarations and by
the official records and filings in the divorce action which are contained in
the clerk's transcript on this appeal may be summarized as follows:

   On February 25, 1957, appellant filed a divorce complaint alleging, inter
alia, that her husband had committed numerous acts of extreme physical and
mental cruelty toward her, resulting in grievous mental and physical suffering.
The filing date was less than five months following the date of the marriage of
appellant and Blackman.

   The divorce case was heard as a default, and an interlocutory judgment of
divorce was entered on April 9, 1957.  According to plaintiff's affidavit, from
the time the husband had been served with the summons to the date of the
interlocutory judgment, she and defendant resided together in the same house.
She further says that after the entry of the interlocutory decree, for a period
of approximately one year, she and defendant continued to live together as
husband and wife; that during the latter part of this period, defendant went to
the office of her attorney to inquire about the entry of a final decree; and
that on being informed that an affidavit would be required, defendant requested
the attorney to send such an affidavit to her.

   Exactly one year after the entry of the interlocutory decree, appellant
received by mail the affidavit for entry of the final judgment. She further
avers that defendant threatened  her with violence, beat his own head against a
wall and the floor, and threatened to commit further acts of violence against
himself unless she signed the affidavit.  Appellant agreed to sign it, and on
the following day, she and defendant went to the attorney's office, where she
signed the affidavit.

   The attorney prepared the proposed final decree of divorce. Defendant told
appellant  and her attorney that he would file the affidavit and final decree,
saving the attorney a special trip.

   On that same day, April 10, 1958, defendant removed himself from the
apartment he had been sharing with appellant.  The final judgment of divorce was
entered in the judgment book on April 23, having been signed by the judge on
April 22.  The affidavit bears a filing date of April 21.

   Between April 11 and April 23, defendant telephoned appellant, saying he was
sick, worried, disabled, and unable to take care of himself.  He asked appellant
to come to his residence and bring him back to the apartment they had previously
shared.  Appellant complied with defendant's request.

   When appellant inquired of defendant as to the status of the affidavit and
final decree, defendant told her that neither had been filed and both had been
destroyed. He told her that if she would take him back and care for him, they
would resume their marital status.  They lived together until December 27, 1961,
when defendant died.

   Appellant believed that she and defendant were still married until one day
before the latter's death.  On that day, appellant's daughter went to the county
clerk's office and inspected the records there; she found the final decree and
advised her mother.  Defendant died the next day, after having been ill for a
little more than a month.

   In the court below, appellant gave three separate grounds upon which she
urged that the final decree of divorce be vacated: (1) duress allegedly
practiced against appellant by defendant; (2) fraud allegedly practiced against
appellant by defendant; and (3) fraud allegedly practiced by defendant upon the
court.   In her brief, appellant does not argue the first ground urged below.
We may therefore assume that appellant has abandoned assertion of the question
of duress. ( People v. Scott, 24 Cal.2d 774, 783 [151 P.2d 517].) The only
questions remaining for us to determine, therefore, are (1) whether defendant
obtained the final decree of divorce  by fraud, practiced either on the court or
on appellant or both; and (2) if so, was the court below in error in denying
appellant's motion to vacate?

     It is difficult to see how appellant can assert that the final decree was
procured by fraud on the part of defendant.  The fact picture reveals that
appellant signed the affidavit she knew to be the condition precedent for
obtaining a final divorce decree, that defendant represented to her that he
intended to file the affidavit and obtain such a decree, and that defendant did
just as he had represented he would do.  The basic element of fraud,
misrepresentation or concealment of facts ( Belden v. Henriques, 8 Cal. 87;
Kallgren v. Steele, 131 Cal.App.2d 43 [279 P.2d 1027]) is missing.   The only
act on defendant's part which could be placed in this category occurred when he
informed appellant falsely that he had not filed the papers but had destroyed
them.  However, to urge that this misrepresentation was instrumental in the
procurement of the divorce is to stretch credulity to the breaking point.  Only
if it be said that appellant might have acted to have the decree vacated
(assuming other grounds existed, such as the duress she originally claimed) had
it not been for defendant's representations, might appellant make out a case for
vacation of the decree. Her remedy in that event, however, would be to urge
those other grounds, basing excuse for her delay on belief of the
misrepresentations of defendant.  Appellant did in fact do this in the court
below, but has abandoned the claim of duress on this appeal.

     Finally, if it were alleged that defendant told appellant he had destroyed
the affidavit prior to the date on which he filed it and then subsequently
obtained the final decree, there might be good reason to say that the decree was
obtained by defendant's fraud, even though it does not fit the situation usually
encountered in the cases.  (See, e.g., Raps v. Raps, 20 Cal.2d 382 [125 P.2d
826], where the spouse who was plaintiff in  the divorce action and who signed
the affidavit was the one charged with fraud.) The only material before the
court below with reference to this question, however, is contained in
appellant's declaration. She states that defendant made the representations
concerning destruction of the affidavit "between April 11, 1958, and April 23,
1958.  . . ." The clerk's transcript shows that the affidavit was filed on April
21 and that the judge signed the final decree and it was filed on April 22.
Since appellant has failed to declare that defendant's representations occurred
prior to the procurement  of the final decree, she has not, therefore, made out
a case for such decree being obtained by defendant's fraud.  Similarly, there is
no case of fraud on the court made out on the basis of the misrepresentations of
the husband.

     There remains but one final question: Since the appellant and the defendant
continued to live together "as husband and wife" for a full year following the
entry of the interlocutory decree, may appellant now have the final decree
vacated because of fraud on the court?   Normally, it is the duty of a court to
deny a divorce if there has been, inter alia, a reconciliation and restoration
of all marital rights to the offending party.  ( Civ. Code, § 116; Hamburger v.
Hamburger, 60 Cal.App.2d 530 [141 P.2d 453].)   If these things occurred without
the knowledge of the court which granted a final decree, then the court has an
inherent power to "correct its own records and purge them of judgments
fraudulently obtained." (16 Cal.Jur.2d, Divorce, § 145.)   But, it would seem
that appellant is hardly in a position to urge this be done in the instant case.
It was she who filed for divorce; it was she who obtained the divorce by
default; it was she who signed the affidavit; 1 it was she who understood that
the affidavit would be filed and a final decree thereby obtained.  It ill
behooves her now to say to this court that the final decree should be vacated
because of fraud -- since it was she who was, at least in part, guilty of the
perpetration of that fraud.  2 In Katz v. Karlsson, 84 Cal.App.2d 469 [191 P.2d
541], vacation of a final decree of divorce was denied where the defendant
husband sought to show that the plaintiff wife had perpetrated a fraud upon the
court in obtaining the final decree upon an affidavit stating there had been no
reconciliation since the issuance of the interlocutory decree. But, observed the
court, "By his own affidavit the husband had practiced a fraud in obtaining the
interlocutory decree. . . ." ( Katz v. Karlsson, supra, at p. 472.) If a party
to a divorce proceeding cannot urge the fraud of the other spouse because the
former committed a different fraud, it would seem that a fortiori the same
result must obtain where the party now before the court urges a fraud in which
she herself  participated.   Even if the parties were ". . . equally at fault in
filing the affidavit requesting the final decree, then the answer to the problem
is that equity does not adjust differences between wrongdoers." ( Katz v.
Karlsson, supra, at p. 476.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   The
affidavit reads, in part: ". . . since the granting of said interlocutory
judgment, (a) said parties have not become reconciled; (b) said parties have not
lived or cohabited together.  . . .'
2   Since appellant has abandoned her claim that the final decree was obtained
by the duress of defendant, we must treat appellant's acts as done of her own
volition absent a claim to the contrary.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Affirmed.


                              85 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          MARY B. NICOLAI, Appellant, v. ALBERT F. NICOLAI, Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 17083

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Three

          96 Cal. App. 2d 951; 216 P.2d 913; 1950 Cal. App. LEXIS 1468


                                 April 13, 1950

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court
was Denied June 8, 1950.  Carter, J., Voted for a Hearing.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Santa Barbara
County and from orders denying alimony pending appeal, granting counsel fees,
and denying inspection of accounts.  Ernest D. Wagner, Judge.

   Action for divorce.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Appeal--Appealable Orders.  --An order granting a motion to enter a
final decree in a divorce proceeding nunc pro tunc as of the date prior to the
second marriage between the parties when they became entitled to such decree was
not appealable, since it was an intermediate ruling of the court. (Civ. Code, §
133.)

(2) Id.--Judgment.  --A second marriage between the parties suing for divorce
was not invalidated by the fact that a final decree in a prior divorce action
had not been filed at the date of such marriage, though the parties were
entitled to it, where such decree was later filed nunc pro tunc as of the date
it was entitled to be filed.

(3) Id.--Extreme Cruelty--Evidence.  --A finding that the plaintiff in a divorce
action was guilty of extreme cruelty was substantiated by evidence that
plaintiff constantly cursed defendant, threw dishes at him, clawed his face,
refused to cook for him, nagged at him about money matters, and repeatedly
stated that she was "really going to clean him this time."

(4) Id.--Appeal--Review of Sufficiency of Evidence.  --In a divorce action,
where the evidence as to the cruelty of the parties was conflicting, the
determination of the trial judge in favor of the defendant was not disturbed on
appeal.

(5) Id.--Evidence.  --In a divorce action, there was no error in excluding
evidence of the allegedly fraudulent circumstances surrounding a property
settlement between the parties made prior to a previous divorce action, where in
the interlocutory decree and final decree in such previous action the property
settlement was approved and there was no appeal taken, since the present divorce
action was not one to set aside any agreement.

(6) Id.--Appeal--Review of Sufficiency of Evidence.  --In a divorce action, a
finding by the trial court that a property settlement made prior to a former
divorce action was still in effect was not disturbed on appeal, though such
finding was contrary to plaintiff's evidence, where the court had an opportunity
to observe the demeanor of the plaintiff at the trial and its determination was
one of fact.

(7) Id.--Disposition of Property--Community Property.  --In a divorce action,
findings that the community property of the parties to the action consisted of
furniture, two automobiles, and cash were supported by evidence to that effect,
and the distribution of less than half of such property to plaintiff was within
the discretion of the court, where the divorce was granted to defendant on the
ground of plaintiff's extreme cruelty.

(8) Husband and Wife--Fraud--Evidence.  --In a divorce action, a finding that a
deed executed by defendant purporting to convey his separate property to
plaintiff and himself as joint tenants was procured through the fraud of the
plaintiff was supported by evidence that plaintiff had represented to defendant
that if he would make such conveyance she would reconvey to him if she ever left
him, that such representation was false and that defendant relied on it, and
that he did not discover the falsity of the representation until after the
separation.

(9) Deeds--Evidence--Delivery.  --In a divorce action, a finding that a joint
tenancy deed made by defendant to himself and plaintiff was not delivered was
supported by evidence that plaintiff told defendant that she wanted him to make
the deed to take the place of a will and would deed the property back if she
left him, that defendant did not intend to give up the property but only
intended to have the deed effective if he died and so told the plaintiff, and
that he did not deliver the deed to plaintiff but left it with an attorney who
had had it recorded but had never given it to plaintiff.

(10) Divorce--Temporary Alimony--Discretion of Court.  --In a divorce action,
the trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying plaintiff's motion for
alimony pending appeal, where, at the time of hearing the motion, plaintiff had
$ 600 and was receiving $ 25 a month plus board and lodging for services as a
housekeeper, and where such motion was denied without prejudice.

(11) Id.--Counsel Fees--Amount of Attorney's Fees.  --In a divorce action, the
court did not abuse its discretion in allowing $ 400 as counsel fees on appeal.

(12) Id.--Trial.  --In a divorce action, it was not error for the trial court to
deny a motion to direct the officers of a building and loan association to
permit plaintiff to inspect any deposit accounts in the name of defendant's
brother on the supposition that defendant kept some money in his brother's name,
where the brother was not a party to the action, and where the only reason for
concluding that money was kept in the brother's name was that, 14 years before,
defendant had placed an amount in his brother's name when he was involved in an
automobile accident.

(13) Id.--Appeal--Time to Appeal.  --In a divorce action, the court properly
allowed a notice of appeal by plaintiff to be filed nunc pro tunc as of a date
within the time allowed for such notice to be filed, where there was evidence
that such notice had been filed with the clerk within the allowed time but was
lost, and where it was admitted that notice was served on the attorney for
defendant on the same day that the notice was allegedly left with the clerk.

COUNSEL: Charles K. Flint and Gene M. Harris for Appellant.

W. P. Butcher and T. A. Twitchell for Respondent.

JUDGES: Wood, J.  Shinn, P. J., and Vallee, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: WOOD

OPINION

     Plaintiff and defendant intermarried in 1935.  An interlocutory decree of
divorce in favor of plaintiff was entered on July 13, 1940.  The parties
intermarried again on July 24, 1941, but at that time a final decree of divorce
had not been entered.  After the second marriage they lived together until
October 9, 1947.  On October 15, 1947, plaintiff commenced an action for divorce
, based upon the second marriage. Defendant answered and filed a cross-complaint
for divorce. When the action came on for trial on May 28, 1948, the final decree
in the first action had not been entered.  Counsel for plaintiff did not know,
prior to the day of trial, that the final decree had not been entered.  Counsel
for defendant had ascertained, the day before the trial, that the final decree
had not been entered.  The plaintiff and defendant (who had remarried one year
and ten days after the interlocutory decree in the first action had been
entered) believed  that they were divorced after the expiration of one year from
the time the interlocutory decree was granted.  When the second action was
called for trial, counsel for defendant made a motion that a final decree in the
first action be entered nunc pro tunc as of July 14, 1941.  That motion was
granted and the final decree was entered accordingly.

   Upon the trial of the second action, the defendant obtained an interlocutory
decree of divorce on his cross-complaint.

   Plaintiff, after having given notice of appeal in the second action, made a
motion that the court order defendant to pay alimony pending the appeal and to
pay counsel fees and costs on appeal.  The court denied, without prejudice, the
motion regarding alimony, and ordered that defendant pay $ 400 as counsel fees
and that he pay the actual costs incurred on appeal.

   Plaintiff also made a motion that the court make an order directing the
officers of a building and loan association to permit plaintiff or her counsel
to inspect any deposit accounts in the association in the name of Alfred Nicolai
(defendant's brother).  That motion was denied.

   Plaintiff filed a notice of appeal in the first action (No. 31861 in the
superior court) stating that she appeals from the order therein granting a
motion for entry of final decree of divorce nunc pro tunc as of July 14, 1941.
Plaintiff appeals, in the second action (No. 40425), from (1) the interlocutory
judgment of divorce in the second action; (2) the order therein denying her
motion for alimony; (3) the order therein granting counsel fees to her; and (4)
the order therein denying her motion for inspection of accounts.

     An order granting a motion to enter a judgment nunc pro tunc, being an
intermediate ruling of the court, is not appealable. ( Mather v. Mather, 22
Cal.2d 713, 720 [140 P.2d 808].) Plaintiff did not appeal from the final
judgment. The court had jurisdiction under the provisions of section 133 of the
Civil Code to cause the final decree to be entered nunc pro tunc.  Said section
133 provides that "Whenever either of the parties in a divorce action is, under
the law, entitled to a final judgment,  but by mistake, negligence or
inadvertence the same was not signed, filed or entered, if no appeal has been
taken from the interlocutory judgment or motion for a new trial made, the court,
on the motion of either party thereto or upon its own motion, may cause a final
judgment to be signed, dated, filed and entered therein granting the divorce as
of the date when the same could have been  given or made by the court if applied
for.  . . .  Upon the filing of such final judgment, the parties to such action
shall be deemed to have been restored to the status of single persons as of the
date affixed to such judgment, and any marriage of either of such parties
subsequent to one year after the granting of the interlocutory judgment . . .
shall be valid for all purposes as of the date affixed to such final judgment,
upon the filing thereof."

   Since the order granting the motion to enter the final decree nunc pro tunc
is not appealable and the court had jurisdiction to make the order, and since
there is no appeal from the final decree, it is not necessary to determine
whether the court properly exercised its discretion in making the order.  The
attempted appeal from said order should be dismissed.

     Upon the appeal from the interlocutory judgment of divorce in the second
action, plaintiff asserts that the finding that the parties intermarried on July
24, 1941, is not supported by the evidence.  Her argument in support of this
assertion is that since the final decree in the first divorce action had not
been entered the parties were not single persons at the time of the alleged
second marriage on July 24, 1941, and since the court erred (according to
plaintiff's argument) in entering the final decree in that action, the parties
did not marry on July 24, 1941.  As above stated, the final decree in the first
divorce action was entered nunc pro tunc as of July 14, 1941, and there was no
appeal from that judgment.  It has been established therefore that the parties
were single persons on July 24, 1941.  The finding that the parties intermarried
on said date is supported by the evidence.

     Plaintiff asserts further that the findings that she was guilty of extreme
cruelty, and that defendant was not guilty of extreme cruelty, are not supported
by the evidence.  The court found the allegations of paragraph V of defendant's
cross-complaint were true.  In that paragraph the defendant alleged, among other
things, that: plaintiff constantly cursed defendant, and on numerous occasions
called him vile and abusive names (the names were specifically stated); on
numerous occasions she threw dishes at him, and on one occasion she threw a
chair at him; she clawed his face; she refused to cook meals for him; she
threatened to break all the windows in his automobile; she tore up the marriage
license and stated "It doesn't mean a thing"; she always nagged him about money
matters; she repeatedly stated that she was "really  going to clean him this
time." The defendant testified that the plaintiff said and did the things
alleged in said paragraph; he did not testify that she said she was "really
going to clean him this time." Some of the testimony of defendant was
corroborated by other witnesses.  A witness, called by defendant, testified that
plaintiff said that she was "really going to clean him this time." Plaintiff
testified that she did curse defendant and call him vile names, but she also
testified that when she cursed him and called him those names she was then
repeating "right back" to him everything he called her.

   The court also found that the allegations of paragraph V of the second
amended complaint were untrue.  In that paragraph the plaintiff alleged, among
other things, that the defendant never gave plaintiff money to buy clothes; he
would not permit her to use the automobile; he never took her to a dinner or
show; when they went to a certain dance he refused to enter the hall until after
midnight so they could gain admission for half price; he continually quarreled
with her about money that had been spent for household needs; he refused to pay
plaintiff's hospital bill and thereby forced her to borrow money and pay the
bill in order to be released from the hospital; he was always cursing plaintiff
and calling her vile and abusive names;  and every payday he used physical
violence upon her.  Plaintiff testified that defendant said and did the things
alleged therein.  Some of her testimony was corroborated by other witnesses.

     It is not necessary to state specifically herein the vile names and curse
words referred to by the parties.  The evidence as to extreme cruelty was
conflicting, and the trial judge resolved the conflict in favor of the
defendant.  In his memorandum of opinion the trial judge stated that the
"evidence preponderates overwhelmingly in favor of the defendant." The findings
regarding extreme cruelty are supported by the evidence.

     Plaintiff asserts also that the court erred in excluding evidence offered
by plaintiff to show fraud and undue influence on the part of defendant in
inducing plaintiff to execute the property settlement agreements of July 22,
1938, and June 18, 1940.  In February, 1938, the parties built a house, which
cost $ 2,800, on land which was the separate property of defendant.  (The land
was inherited by defendant.) The cost of the house was paid with community funds
and with $ 1,700 of defendant's separate funds.  About June 1, 1938, the parties
separated and remained separated about six weeks.  About July 20, 1938, the
parties became reconciled, and she executed a quitclaim deed in favor of the
defendant whereby she quitclaimed any interest she might have in said real
property.  On July 22, 1938, they entered into a property settlement agreement
which stated, among other things, that the real property was defendant's
separate property, and that defendant should pay $ 1,000 to plaintiff in
settlement of her claims against the defendant.  The parties separated again on
June 1, 1940.

   The parties entered into a property settlement agreement on June 18, 1940,
whereby plaintiff transferred all her interest in certain furniture and an
automobile to defendant and the defendant transferred all his interest in
certain furniture and an automobile to plaintiff.  That agreement also provided
that defendant "may pay the wife the said sum of $ 1,000.00," referred to in the
agreement of July 22, 1938, by paying $ 500 on the execution of said agreement
of June 18, 1940, and the balance at the rate of $ 40 per month; that the
plaintiff released the defendant from all obligations to make a will as provided
in the agreement of July 22, 1938; that each party released the other from all
obligations and claims; and that plaintiff waived any claim for alimony.

   Plaintiff commenced an action for divorce on June 26, 1940.  She obtained an
interlocutory decree of divorce on July 13,  1940, which approved the property
settlement agreement of June 18, 1940.  One of the recitals in that decree was
that said property settlement agreement of June 18, 1940, wherein a complete
disposition of all the property of the parties was made, was fair and equitable.
There was no appeal from that interlocutory decree, and there was no appeal, as
above stated, from the final decree of divorce which was entered nunc pro tunc.
Plaintiff did not plead fraud or undue influence with respect to the agreement
of July 22, 1938, or the agreement of June 18, 1940.  She did allege, however,
that the community property of the parties consisted of real property (which was
the same as that described in said agreements) "and other property the exact
nature of which the defendant has concealed from the plaintiff." At the trial
herein (second divorce action) plaintiff's counsel, in referring to the
reconciliation in 1938, asked the plaintiff as follows: "Under what
circumstances did you reconcile?" Counsel for defendant objected to the question
upon the ground that the "contract  speaks for itself." In reply to the
objection counsel for plaintiff stated there was a question "of undue influence
and statements by the husband." The judge stated that the action was not one to
set aside any agreement.  The objection was sustained.  It appears that this was
the only offer that was made regarding fraud or undue influence. The
interlocutory decree, where the agreement of 1940 was approved, became final
many years before the present divorce action was tried.  That agreement of 1940
referred to certain provisions in the agreement of 1938.  The  court did not err
in sustaining said objection.

     Plaintiff also asserts that the finding that the property settlement
agreement of June 18, 1940, was still in effect is not supported by the
evidence.  She argues that her uncontradicted testimony shows that said
agreement was rescinded by the parties.  In support of her argument she refers
to her testimony that after the second marriage she took the furniture back and
she returned to the defendant about $ 600 of the $ 1,000 which she had received
in the settlement, and that the money returned by her was used to pay part of
the expenses of drilling a well on the real property. She argues further that
the defendant did not introduce any evidence that the property divided between
the parties under said agreement was not returned and commingled after the
second marriage ceremony.  Whether or not there was a rescission by the conduct
of the parties was a question of fact for the determination of the trial court.
An important factor in the determination of such a question is the demeanor of
the witnesses while testifying.  The trial judge was not required to find, under
the evidence here, that the conduct of the parties effected a rescission of the
written agreement which had been approved in the former action.  The trial
judge, in his written opinion, stated that after observing the demeanor of the
plaintiff on the witness stand and in the courtroom he concluded that the
remarriage "was consummated with but one thought in mind -- that she would
clean" the defendant.  The court did not err in finding that said agreement was
still in effect.  Plaintiff also asserts that said agreement was rescinded by
the remarriage of the parties.  That was also a question of fact for the trial
court and its finding thereon cannot be disturbed under the evidence here.

     Plaintiff also asserts that the findings defining the community property
are not supported by the evidence.  The court found that the community property
consisted of furniture,  two automobiles, $ 1,000 in the possession of plaintiff
(which was withdrawn by her from a joint bank account before the separation) and
$ 2,077.22 in the joint bank account (which amount the parties had divided
equally between themselves).  The court found that the defendant had separate
property as follows: $ 3,647.88 in a building and loan association; $ 2,500 in a
postal savings account; a $ 5,000 life insurance policy; certain furniture; and
certain real property. The portion of the community property awarded to the
plaintiff consisted of the furniture in her possession, the automobile in her
possession, and $ 500.  The portion of the community property awarded to the
defendant consisted of the furniture in his possession and the automobile in his
possession.  The court also awarded to each party the amount he or she had
withdrawn from the bank account.  The court also adjudged that the defendant was
the sole owner of the real property; that the defendant was the owner of certain
oil royalties and that plaintiff had no interest therein.  The matter of
determining the amounts of community and separate property was also a question
of fact for the trial court.  The evidence supports the findings upon that
issue.

   Plaintiff asserts also that the awards of community property are not
supported by the evidence.  It seems that such property was divided about evenly
between the parties.  The court was not required, however, to make an even
division of the property, since the interlocutory decree was granted to
defendant (cross-complainant) upon the ground of extreme cruelty of plaintiff.
The evidence supports the award of community property.

     Plaintiff asserts also that the court erred in finding that a deed,
executed by defendant purporting to convey said real property (defendant's
separate property) to himself and plaintiff as joint tenants, was procured
through fraud of plaintiff.  The court found that prior to the signing of the
deed the plaintiff fraudulently represented to the defendant that if the
defendant would deed said real property to himself and plaintiff as joint
tenants, and if she should leave the defendant, she would  immediately reconvey
the real property to him; that said representation was false and was made
without any intention on the part of plaintiff to perform it, and was made to
induce defendant to execute said joint tenancy deed; that defendant relied on
said representation; and that defendant did not discover the falsity of said
representation  until after the separation (which was on Oct. 9, 1947).
Defendant testified that plaintiff promised to reconvey the property to him if
she left him.  As above stated, a witness, called by defendant, testified that
plaintiff said that she was really "going to clean" defendant this time.  The
judge stated in his memorandum opinion, as above shown, that he concluded that
plaintiff intended to "clean" the defendant, and that in his opinion the deed
was secured by fraud on the part of plaintiff.  The evidence was legally
sufficient to support said finding.

     Plaintiff also asserts that the court erred in finding that the joint
tenancy deed was not delivered.  In regard to making the joint tenancy deed,
defendant testified that plaintiff told him that in case of his death she wanted
to be protected so that she would get the real property, that a will did not
mean anything, that the property would be his separate property, and if she left
him she would deed it back to him.  He also testified that he never intended to
give up his title to the property; that it was his intention that the deed would
be effective only in case he died, and he so advised plaintiff; that he did not
deliver the deed to plaintiff; that he made it in an attorney's office where it
has been ever since; and that the attorney had it recorded. The attorney
testified that he prepared the deed, caused it to be recorded, and has had it in
his possession since it was recorded. Plaintiff testified that the deed never
was handed to her, that on one occasion the deed was on the kitchen table, that
the deed was "folded up," that she did not read it, and she never saw it
thereafter.  Although the recording of a deed at the request of the grantor
creates a presumption of delivery of the deed, that presumption may be rebutted.
Whether or not the deed was delivered was a question of fact for the trial
court.  The evidence was legally sufficient to support said finding.

     Upon plaintiff's appeal from the order denying her motion for alimony
pending appeal, she contends that the court abused its discretion in denying
said motion.  The trial judge, in ruling upon said motion, stated that he could
not in good conscience order the payment of further alimony. At the time the
motion was heard, plaintiff had $ 600 and she was receiving $ 25 per month and
her board and lodging for services she was rendering as a housekeeper.  Since
the plaintiff was apprehensive about her ability to continue with such work, the
motion was denied without prejudice.  The trial judge did not abuse his
discretion.

     Upon plaintiff's appeal from the order granting $ 400 as counsel fees on
appeal, she contends that said amount was not reasonable, and that the court
abused its discretion in not allowing a larger sum.  This contention is not
sustainable.

     As above stated, plaintiff also appeals from the order denying her motion
that the court direct the officers of a building and loan association to permit
her or her counsel to inspect any deposit accounts in the name of defendant's
brother, Alfred Nicolai.  She asserts that the court erred in denying the motion
since "it is probable" that defendant had money on deposit there in the name of
his brother.  Defendant had testified that in 1933, before his marriage, he had
placed $ 1,700 in a savings account in the name of his brother because he
(defendant)  had been in an automobile accident.  The brother was not a party to
the action herein.  There was no prima facie showing that any account in the
building and loan association was that of defendant.  The court did not err in
denying the motion.

     Defendant (respondent) asserts that the appeal from the interlocutory
judgment of divorce should be dismissed for the reason the appeal was not taken
within proper time.  The said judgment was entered August 7, 1948.  A motion for
a new trial, which was made within proper time, was denied October 7, 1948.  On
March 9, 1949, plaintiff filed a notice stating that on March 14, 1949, she
would apply to the trial court for an order directing the clerk to enter and
place in the file of said action, nunc pro tunc as of October 12, 1948, a copy
of the notice of appeal which was filed with the clerk on October 12, 1948, and
which notice was lost, misplaced or improperly filed in the office of said
clerk. When the motion came on for hearing defendant objected to the hearing on
the ground that the court did not have jurisdiction to entertain it for the
reason no notice of appeal was filed within the time prescribed by law.  It was
stipulated that the register of actions and the file in the action did not show
that the notice had been filed.  It was also stipulated that a copy of a notice
of appeal was served on Mr. Twitchell on October 12, 1948.  The record shows
that a copy of the notice of appeal and notice to prepare clerk's and reporter's
transcripts was filed March 16, 1949, nunc pro tunc as of October 12, 1948.  The
record, however, does not show the ruling of the court upon said motion.  It is
stated in appellant's reply brief that the court made an order on  March 16,
1949, directing that "a copy be placed in the files in place of the lost
original Notice of Appeal." The parties have discussed the matter of said
motion, in their briefs, on the basis that the motion had been granted.  It will
be assumed that the court granted the motion.  If the original notice of appeal
was in fact delivered to the office of the clerk on October 12, 1948, and was
lost in said office, the trial court was empowered to order that a copy of the
notice be filed and used instead of the original.  (Code Civ. Proc., § 1045; and
see Davis v. Schneider, 91 Cal.App. 187 [266 P. 959], and Knowlton v. Mackenzie
, 110 Cal. 183, 189 [42 P. 580], and Industrial Indem. Co. v. Industrial Acc.
Com., 95 Cal.App.2d 449, 458 [213 P.2d 11].) The evidence was sufficient to
support a finding that the notice was delivered to the office of the clerk on
October 12, 1948, and was lost therein.  The court was justified in ordering
that the copy of the notice of appeal be filed nunc pro tunc as of October 12,
1948.  Respondent's motion to dismiss the appeal from the interlocutory judgment
of divorce should be denied.

   The purported appeal from the order, in action No. 31861, granting
defendant's motion to enter the final decree of divorce nunc pro tunc as of July
14, 1941, is dismissed.  The interlocutory judgment of divorce, in action No.
40425, and the order in said action denying plaintiff's motion for alimony
pending appeal, and the order in said action granting counsel fees to plaintiff,
and the order in said action denying plaintiff's motion for inspection of
accounts, are affirmed.  Respondent's (defendant's) motion to dismiss the appeal
from the interlocutory judgment of divorce is denied.


                              86 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          LILLIAN R. DANDINI, Respondent, v. A. O. DANDINI, Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 13653

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                  Division One

          86 Cal. App. 2d 478; 195 P.2d 871; 1948 Cal. App. LEXIS 1642


                                 June 30, 1948

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court
was Denied August 26, 1948.  Carter, J., and Schauer, J., Voted for a Hearing.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from an order of the Superior Court of the City and
County of San Francisco refusing to vacate a default judgment.  I. L. Harris,
Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Foreign Divorces--Collateral Attack.  --When a decree of divorce
rendered in a sister state is offered in evidence, either as the foundation of a
right or as a bar or estoppel against an asserted right, the court, in
determining the value of such decree as evidence, may inquire into the
jurisdiction of the court rendering the decree.

(2) Judgments--Sister State Judgments--Collateral Attack.  --The courts of one
state have no legal right to "annul," "vacate" or "set aside" a judgment of a
court of a sister state; but a determination by a court that a judgment of
another state was rendered without jurisdiction does not have the effect of
vacating it in the state where it was rendered.

(3) Divorce--Foreign Divorce--Collateral Attack.  --Where a wife who had been
awarded support money by a judgment for separate maintenance sought to restrain
the husband, who was in arrears in the payments for support, from remarrying
after obtaining a Nevada divorce decree subsequent to the separate maintenance
judgment, the wife's interest in the protection of the husband's ability to make
the support payments was sufficient to justify a collateral attack on the
validity of the Nevada divorce decree.

(4) Injunctions--Matters Controllable--Personal Rights.  --There is no rigid
requirement that a property right must be adversely affected before an
injunction will issue.

(5) Id.--Matters Controllable--Commission of Crime.  --Equity has no
jurisdiction to enjoin the commission of acts merely because when committed they
will constitute a crime (Civ. Code, § 3369); but an injunction may issue to
restrain the commission of acts which are violative of public policy and which
assail the rights of property, although they are also punishable as crimes.

(6) Judgment--Opening and Vacating--Discretion.  --Where a wife who had been
awarded a judgment for separate maintenance obtained an order restraining the
husband from remarrying after procuring a Nevada divorce while in arrears on the
support payments, the husband having been personally served and having defaulted
in the hearing upon the injunction, and having remarried in direct violation of
that order, the trial court did not abuse discretion in denying the husband's
motion to vacate the default made over two months after judgment.

COUNSEL: Leo R. Friedman for Appellant.

Johnson, Harmon & Stirrat and William H. Henderson for Respondent.

JUDGES: Peters, P. J.  Ward, J., and Bray, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: PETERS

OPINION

     The plaintiff, Lillian R. Dandini, and the defendant, A. O. Dandini, were
married in 1932.  In 1946, plaintiff secured a decree of separate maintenance,
and an award of $ 150 per month.  Subsequently, defendant, while in arrears in
his payments on this award, secured a Nevada divorce from plaintiff, and was
contemplating remarriage.  Plaintiff thereupon secured a default judgment
against defendant, determining that the Nevada divorce was void and of no legal
effect, and enjoining defendant from marrying any other person.  Over two months
after such judgment had been secured, the defendant moved to vacate and set
aside his default. The trial court denied the motion, and from the order of
denial the defendant appeals.

   The complaint which forms the basis of the default judgment is entitled
"Complaint for Injunction," and was filed June 27, 1946.  It alleges that
plaintiff and defendant were married in August, 1932; that in September, 1942,
plaintiff commenced, in California, an action for separate maintenance against
defendant, and secured personal service on defendant, and he appeared in said
action; that on February 13, 1946, plaintiff secured a decree of separate
maintenance and an award of $ 150 per month for her support; that said decree of
separate maintenance and award is in full force and effect; that defendant has
never paid one cent pursuant to that decree; that defendant, for over 15 years
prior to that decree and since that date, has been, and is now, a resident and
domiciliary of California; that on March 11, 1946, defendant went to Nevada for
the  purpose of setting up a pretended residence in that state in order to there
secure a divorce from plaintiff; that he lived at a designated dude ranch for
six weeks, and, on April 23, 1946, filed, in Nevada, a complaint for divorce;
that plaintiff is now, and for all her past life has been, a resident of
California; that defendant "now is a resident of the State of California and has
his domicile in said state; . . . that defendant A. O. Dandini is not now and
never has been a resident of Nevada and has never had and does not now have his
domicile in the State of Nevada"; that plaintiff was not personally served in
the Nevada divorce action, nor did she ever submit herself to the jurisdiction
of the Nevada court; that the Nevada court at no time had jurisdiction over
plaintiff; that on June 3, 1946, defendant was granted a pretended divorce from
plaintiff; "that said pretended divorce is void and of no effect"; that
immediately after the pretended divorce was granted, and on June 4, 1946,
defendant returned to San Francisco, where he has since remained; that defendant
has "no property or employment in Nevada"; that defendant now is about to enter
"a pretended marriage" with one Juliana Sesenna on June 29, 1946; that such
marriage ceremony will be held unless defendant is restrained and enjoined;
"that if said pretended marriage ceremony and contract is permitted to take
place and is not enjoined by this court, defendant A. O. Dandini will cause said
Juliana Luisa Cungi   [Sesenna] to be represented as his wife and will assume
status and relationship as that of a married person with said Juliana Luisa
Cungi [Sesenna] as aforesaid; that said actions will cause plaintiff
mortification, chagrin, worry, annoyance and public ridicule; that if said
marriage ceremony is permitted to take place the defendant will expend money for
the support of said Juliana Luisa Cungi [Sesenna] and will assume this financial
burden to the detriment of plaintiff's collecting her above mentioned award of
support and maintenance from defendant; that if said pretended ceremony is
consummated it will cause affiant the necessity of bringing litigation in an
effort to collect her said award for support and maintenance; that if said
preliminary restraining order and injunction are not issued, the said marriage
ceremony will be conducted to the irreparable damage of this plaintiff; that the
plaintiff has no adequate remedy at law."

   The prayer of the complaint was "that the pretended divorce decree in . . .
Nevada be declared void and of no effect;  that a temporary restraining order be
granted plaintiff enjoining and restraining defendant from entering into or
being a party to a contract or ceremony of marriage with said Juliana Luisa
Cungi [Sesenna], whether in the State of California or elsewhere; . . . that
upon final hearing said injunction be made perpetual"; and for other and further
relief.

   The complaint had attached affidavits of two witnesses who averred that
defendant secured his divorce in Reno on June 3, 1946, and left by train for San
Francisco on June 4, 1946.  The record shows that the court issued a temporary
restraining order enjoining defendant from entering into a marriage contract
with Juliana Sesenna in California or elsewhere, and that said restraining
order, the summons and copies of the pleadings were duly and properly served
upon defendant on the evening of June 27, 1946.  The hearing was set for July 3,
1946.  It is averred by plaintiff, and not denied by defendant, that defendant,
in direct violation of the restraining order, entered into a ceremonial marriage
with Juliana Sesenna in Nevada on June 28, 1946.

   On July 3, 1946, a hearing was had, but defendant did not appear.  The
process server testified to the fact of service upon defendant on June 27, 1946.
The trial court, on July 3, 1946, made its order for a preliminary injunction
forbidding Dandini from entering into a marriage with Juliana Sesenna, or
anyone, in California, or elsewhere, during the pendency of the action and until
its final determination or until the court should otherwise order.  Plaintiff
applied for a default judgment, which was granted on July 11, 1946.  The
judgment recited that defendant had been duly served and failed to appear; that
default was entered, and after evidence was introduced in open court in support
of the allegation of the complaint "and it appearing that all of the allegations
of plaintiff's complaint are true and that plaintiff is entitled to a judgment
and decree as prayed for," the court adjudged that the Nevada decree "is void
and of no effect" and that "defendant A. O. Dandini be and he is hereby
permanently enjoined and restrained from entering into or being a party to a
contract or ceremony of marriage with Juliana Luisa Cungi Sesenna or anyone
whatever whether in the State of California or elsewhere."

   Defendant filed his notice of motion to vacate on September 17, 1946, two
months and six days after entry of the default  judgment, alleging that the
grounds thereof were lack of jurisdiction; that the complaint did not state
sufficient facts to constitute a cause of action or support the judgment; that
no service was ever made upon him in the action, and that his default was
entered through his mistake, inadvertence, surprise and excusable neglect.  At
the same time he filed his proposed answer to the complaint in which he denied
the allegations of the complaint that he and plaintiff were still husband and
wife, alleged that he had procured a valid decree of divorce in Nevada, denied
that his residence in Nevada was only pretended, and alleged that from and after
March 11, 1946, he had been and then was domiciled in Nevada.

   The plaintiff filed an opposing affidavit and, in addition, produced at the
hearing the process server who again testified as to  serving the defendant on
June 27, 1946.  No further evidence was offered.  The court thereupon refused to
vacate the default judgment, and from that order the defendant appeals.

     The first contention of the defendant is that in this type of proceeding
the court had no jurisdiction to declare that the Nevada judgment of divorce was
void. In this connection the defendant concedes "that where a decree of divorce
rendered in the sister state is offered in evidence, either as the foundation
for a right or as a bar or estoppel against an asserted right, the court, in
determining the value of such decree as evidence, may inquire into the
jurisdiction of the court rendering such decree." (App. Op. Br., p. 12.) This
concession is undoubtedly in accord with the California law.  ( Crouch v. Crouch
, 28 Cal.2d 243 [169 P.2d 897]; Brill v. Brill, 38 Cal.App.2d 741 [102 P.2d 534]
; Kegley v. Kegley, 16 Cal.App.2d 216 [60 P.2d 482].) Indeed, it is clear that
such conceded power exists under the federal decisions.  That was the precise
holding in the "second" Williams case.  ( Williams v. North Carolina, 325 U.S.
226 [65 S.Ct. 1092, 89 L.Ed. 1577, 157 A.L.R. 1366].) But, says appellant, the
conceded rule is inapplicable in the instant case because the question as to
whether the Nevada court had jurisdiction was not raised as the foundation of a
right or a bar or estoppel of an asserted right, but was brought into issue in a
proceeding having for its sole purpose the vacating or setting aside of the
divorce decree. This, says appellant, the California courts have no power to do.
He urges that the courts of one state have no jurisdiction to consider solely
the validity of a divorce  decree of a sister state, and to enter a decree
determining its invalidity.

     It is quite true that the courts of one state have no legal right to
"annul," or "vacate," or "set aside" a foreign judgment, but it is equally clear
that a determination by a court that a judgment of a court of another state was
rendered without jurisdiction does not have the effect of vacating the judgment
or decree in the state where it was rendered.  (See many cases collected 21
C.J.S. § 552, p. 858.) The power of the courts of this state to declare a
foreign divorce involving one of its citizens who did not appear therein void in
this state because of lack of proper residence of the plaintiff in the divorce
case, is too well settled to require discussion.  We do not find it necessary to
decide whether the interest of the first wife in protecting her status as a
married woman is such that the courts of this state could make such a
determination in a case brought solely for the purpose of having the foreign
decree determined to be void in this state.  Whether the action of declaratory
relief extends to such a determination presents a most interesting problem that
is academic in this case.   The complaint for the injunction was not filed for
the "sole" purpose of having the Nevada divorce decree determined to be invalid
in this state.  That complaint alleged facts and prayed for a form of relief
that demonstrates that an actual, present dispute exists between these parties,
and that the determination of the validity of the Nevada decree is only
incidental to the determination of that issue -- namely, the right of plaintiff
to be protected in her right to the payments for support awarded her in the
prior separate maintenance action.  Thus, in a most real sense, the Nevada
decree was not under attack "solely and directly" for the purpose of having its
invalidity adjudged.  That issue was but incidentally involved in connection
with protecting her right to support.  In view of defendant's default, the
allegations of the complaint must be accepted as true, including the allegation
that after the decree of separate maintenance was entered in February, 1946,
defendant failed to pay one cent upon that award.

   There seems to be no California case directly in point on the precise issue
here involved, but plaintiff refers to two New York cases where the issue has
been discussed.  The first of these is Richman v. Richman, 148 Misc. 387 [266
N.Y.S. 513]. In this case the wife brought an action against her husband for a
separation, and also for an injunction to  restrain him from procuring a Mexican
divorce and remarrying until the further order of the court.  The wife had a
prior support award, and the husband was in arrears in his payments.  It is not
clear from the opinion  whether the Mexican divorce had been secured prior to
commencement of the injunction proceeding.  Among other things the court stated
(p. 514 [266 N.Y.S.]):

   "Assuming that such decree of divorce has been obtained, it is in no wise
binding upon this plaintiff.  The plaintiff has never submitted to the
jurisdiction of the Mexican court and has never been personally served with
process and has never appeared in said action.

   "If this alleged decree of absolute divorce has become final and the action
instituted by defendant therefor has terminated, then the order prayed for
enjoining such action will be of no avail.  Plaintiff contends that the said
decree has not become final, and has not abandoned this portion of her prayer
for relief.

   "There remains, however, the serious question of whether or not this
defendant should be restrained from going through the formality of a marriage
with a person other than the plaintiff"

   The court then discussed the case of Baumann v. Baumann, 250 N.Y. 382 [165
N.E. 819], where a husband secured a Yucatan divorce and remarried, and
thereafter the wife attempted to enjoin him from representing that he was
married to his second wife.  The first wife had received a $ 25,000 award in a
property settlement, and the husband was not in arrears in payments.  The Court
of Appeals held the Yucatan divorce null and void, the second marriage invalid,
and affirmed a declaratory judgment that the first wife was still married to the
defendant, but, by a divided court, held that the injunctive relief was beyond
the jurisdiction of the court.  In distinguishing this case, the court, in the
Richman case, stated (p. 515 [266 N.Y.S.]):

   "The instant case is readily distinguishable from the Baumann case.  There
the plaintiff and defendant entered into an agreement of separation, which
agreement secured to plaintiff $ 25,000 a year.  The said declaratory judgment
defined her matrimonial status and protected her property right. . . .  This
plaintiff has not been secured of support.  In fact, this defendant is now in
arrears in his alimony. . . .  If defendant is not now enjoined from going
through a ceremony  of marriage with a person other than the plaintiff, even
though such marriage must be held illegal, plaintiff may suffer a direct
financial damage.  While the act of this defendant and a woman other than the
plaintiff living together and representing themselves as husband and wife may
not in itself constitute a legal wrong which infringes a substantial right of
the plaintiff, such action resulting from an alleged marriage following an
invalid divorce may, and probably will, require the defendant to expend money
for the support of such woman and the support of the resultant issue of such
cohabitation, when as a matter of fact, defendant in an affidavit in this
proceeding asserts that he is now unable to pay his back alimony.

   "I am not unmindful of the numerous decisions of our courts to the effect
that equity will not by injunction restrain conduct which merely injures a
person's feelings or which causes mental anguish, but here a property right is
involved.  By an order of this court defendant is required to pay to his wife a
stated sum each week pending the determination of this action for separation.
He is now in default. . . .  If he is allowed to go through a ceremony, even
though it cannot result in a legal marriage, he will thereby assume an
additional financial burden, to the detriment of this plaintiff.

   "We are not endeavoring to remedy a social evil or a moral wrong by
injunction. That any marriage based on this Mexican divorce would be illegal
must be conceded, but if by reason of an alleged marriage ceremony the
defendant, now in default of alimony, becomes liable for the support and
maintenance of an alleged wife, a financial damage to his wife must necessarily
result.

   "A court of equity in a proper case may restrain persons within its
jurisdiction from proceeding in matrimonial actions in other states.  . . .  In
such cases the applicant must show good equitable grounds, or the injunction
will not issue.  The court in the Greenberg case [218 App.Div. 104 (218 N.Y.S.
87)] based the relief upon the fact that 'there   are many conceivable uses to
which such a judgment of divorce could be put, causing plaintiff expense,
litigation, worry, annoyance and misrepresentation.' . . .

   "The prayer of the plaintiff to enjoin the defendant from attempting to
contract a marriage is not for the purpose of assuring plaintiff of her own
matrimonial status, but to prevent a threatened legal wrong involving property
rights.  . . .  Nevertheless, under the circumstances here presented, it would
seem that this defendant should be enjoined from assuming under color of an
invalid decree of a foreign jurisdiction an additional obligation at a time when
he admits that he is unable to pay the alimony awarded by the court."

   In Gold v. Gold, 158 Misc. 570 [287 N.Y.S. 217], a complaint alleged that the
defendant husband had procured an invalid New Jersey divorce and remarried
another woman.  It prayed that the "second" wife be restrained from using the
husband's name, and that the husband be restrained from expending money for the
support of the second wife, it being alleged that the husband was in arrears in
his payments due plaintiff.  It was held that the complaint stated a cause of
action.  The court again distinguished the Baumann case on the ground that in
the Gold case "a distinct property right is involved." (P. 219 [287 N.Y.S.].) On
the same page the court stated:

   "A court of equity will not award relief by injunction except where some
legal wrong has been done or is threatened and where there exists in the moving
party some substantial legal right to be protected, but here the plaintiff has a
legal right, that is, the right to support and maintenance by her husband, and
it would seem that such right is entitled to the protection of the court.  A
legal wrong has been done and threatens to continue.  To preserve her rights she
seeks injunctive relief. In the circumstances, if she is enabled to prove the
allegations of her amended complaint, she is entitled to such relief.

   "It was pointed out in the Baumann case that equity cannot by injunction
restrain conduct which merely injures a person's feelings and causes mental
anguish and that the law does not remedy all social evils or moral wrongs, but
in the Baumann case the complaint did not allege, as is here alleged, that the
plaintiff's property rights were affected or endangered by the conduct of the
defendants.  The complaint in this action sets forth that the acts attempted to
be enjoined constitute legal wrongs which invade the legal rights of the
plaintiff."

   Defendant, while recognizing that the above two cases are directly in point,
contends that they no longer are the law of New York.  It is urged that at the
time they were decided the courts of New York had announced the policy that a
foreign divorce on substituted service against a New York citizen would be held
void, regardless of whether the person  procuring the divorce had acquired, in
good faith, a legal domicile in the foreign state.  It is contended that the
case of Matter of Holmes, 291 N.Y. 261 [52 N.E.2d 424, 150 A.L.R. 447],
"changed" the New York law in this respect.  All that that case held was that
under the "first" Williams case ( William v. North Carolina, 317 U.S. 287 [63
S.Ct. 207, 87 L.Ed. 279, 143 A.L.R. 1273]) the New York courts, under the full
faith and credit clause, must give full faith and credit to a Nevada divorce
gained on substituted service in the absence of evidence that the Nevada court
had no jurisdiction.  That is all that the Holmes case decided.  The whole tenor
of the decision is that if there had been evidence of lack of jurisdiction of
the Nevada court, the New York court would not enforce the Nevada decree. The
Holmes' case in no way discussed, because the issue was not involved, any of the
main problems involved in the Richman and Gold cases.  The reasoning of those
cases that the first wife may secure an injunction in protection of her
previously awarded support payments is sound, and should be followed.

     Apparently, under New York law, it was necessary to find that a property
right was in jeopardy before an injunction would issue, and, in the Richman and
Gold cases such was found in the adverse affect on the prior support award of
the second invalid marriage. It should be pointed out that in California there
is no such rigid requirement that a property right must be adversely affected
before an injunction will  issue.  Whatever confusion may have existed in the
prior cases was set at rest in the well-reasoned and unanimous decision of the
Supreme Court in Orloff v. Los Angeles Turf Club, 30 Cal.2d 110 [180 P.2d 321,
171 A.L.R. 913]. In that case the court held that equity will protect by
injunction not only property rights, but,  in a proper case, personal rights.
This furnishes an additional reason why the injunction properly issued in the
instant case, particularly when the direct and important interest of the
plaintiff in preserving her status as the wife of defendant is considered.

     Defendant next contends that the granting of injunctive relief prohibiting
him from marrying Juliana Sesenna, or anyone, was improper for the asserted
reason that equity has no power to enjoin the commission of a criminal act --
bigamy in this case.  That is undoubtedly the general rule.  (See Civ. Code, §
3369; International etc. Workers v. Landowitz, 20 Cal.2d 418 [126 P.2d 609];
Perrin v. Mountain View  Mausoleum Assn., 206 Cal. 669 [275 P. 787]; Monterey
Club v. Superior Court, 48 Cal.App.2d 131 [119 P.2d 349]; 4 Pomeroy, Equity
Jurisprudence (5th ed.), § 1347, p. 949.) As stated in 14 California
Jurisprudence, section 25, page 211, citing many cases: "It is beyond
controversy that equity does not interfere by injunction to prevent the mere
violation of law, and that it has no jurisdiction to enjoin the commission of
acts merely because such acts when committed will constitute a crime.  But it is
equally well settled that the writ may issue to restrain the commission of acts
which are violative of public policy -- which . . . assail the rights of
property -- although such acts are crimes and punishable as such."

   Defendant contends that the general rule applies here and not the exception,
asserting that no property rights of plaintiff were threatened by his proposed
marriage to Juliana Sesenna.  This contention has been fully discussed and
decided adversely to defendant in discussing the first point.  It has already
been held that the primary purpose of this action was to protect plaintiff's
property interest in the previously awarded support decree. That this property
right is an important one and entitled to full protection was dramatically
illustrated by two recent decisions of the United States Supreme Court -- Estin
v. Estin (June 7, 1948), 334 U.S. 541 [68 S.Ct. 1213, 92 L.Ed.   ], and Kreiger
v. Kreiger (June 7, 1948), 334 U.S. 555 [68 S.Ct. 1221, 92 L.Ed.   ). In those
two cases it was held that even a valid Nevada divorce decree could not
adversely affect the important property right involved in a prior support order
of another state, where the law of the state where the support order was granted
provides that the support order shall survive in such cases.  If the prior
support award is such an important property right that it is entitled to that
protection in the face of a valid decree of divorce, it would seem obvious that
it is of sufficient importance to protect it by injunction against the adverse
effects of an invalid remarriage.

     In this case the trial court has entered the default of defendant.  On his
motion it has refused to vacate it.  In the proceeding to vacate it was proved
that defendant was personally served with the complaint, summons, order to show
cause, temporary restraining order and accompanying documents on June 27, 1946.
He deliberately disobeyed the order of the trial court, and, in direct violation
of that order,  proceeded to Nevada and there married Juliana Sesenna.  Although
having full notice of the hearing, he failed to appear on July 3, 1946.
Judgment was entered, and became final.  Over two months later defendant sought
to have the judgment vacated.  In that connection he averred, under oath, that
he had not been served, but the process server was produced and testified to the
true facts.  There was no "mistake, inadvertence, surprise or excusable
neglect." Insofar as the denial of the motion to vacate rested in the discretion
of the trial court, far from being an abuse of discretion to deny the motion, it
would have been an abuse of discretion to have granted it.  In addition, as
already pointed out, the complaint for an injunction stated a cause of action,
and the relief granted was within the jurisdiction of the trial court.

   The order denying the motion to vacate is affirmed.


                              87 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           CLAIRE J. GLICKMAN, Plaintiff and Respondent, v. HILDA P.
                        COLLINS, Defendant and Appellant

                                 L.A. No. 30353

                          Supreme Court of California

           13 Cal. 3d 852; 533 P.2d 204; 120 Cal. Rptr. 76; 1975 Cal.
                           LEXIS 212; 93 A.L.R.3d 513


                                 April 2, 1975

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Los Angeles County, No. 962429, Thomas C.
Yager, Judge.

COUNSEL: Fagan, Klugman, Monroe & Edell and Norman Edell for Defendant and
Appellant.

Refold & Steiniger and Michael M. Steiniger for Plaintiff and Respondent.

JUDGES: In Bank. Opinion by Wright, C. J., expressing the unanimous view of the
court.  McComb, J., Tobriner, J., Mosk, J., Sullivan, J., Clark, J., and
Richardson, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: WRIGHT

OPINION

      Defendant Hilda Collins appeals from a judgment in favor of plaintiff
Claire Glickman in the sum of $ 8,852.80 plus attorneys fees and costs found by
the court to be due under an agreement wherein defendant guaranteed the
obligation of plaintiff's former husband Gerald Glickman to make alimony and
child support payments to plaintiff.  Defendant contends that the agreement is
void as against public policy because it was intended to induce plaintiff to
divorce Mr. Glickman.  Alternatively she contends that the agreement was without
consideration and that plaintiff did not proceed in accordance with applicable
suretyship law.

   We conclude that the agreement is not void as against public policy, that the
guaranty covenant was given for good and valuable consideration and that the
record fails to disclose that plaintiff has not proceeded properly against
defendant as a surety.  We conclude, however, for reasons hereinafter appearing,
that the judgment is excessive in one particular respect and modify the same
accordingly.

   Plaintiff and Gerald Glickman were married on July 27, 1948, and are the
parents of two sons.  The marriage was not entirely successful and throughout
the years there had been a number of separations and reconciliations, one of
which progressed as far as the filing of a complaint for divorce in 1963.  In
August 1966 the Glickmans separated for the last time, plaintiff remaining at
the family home in Los Angeles and Mr. Glickman moving to Portland, Oregon.  In
June of the following year he met defendant and shortly thereafter moved into
her home.  He thereupon asked plaintiff to obtain a divorce so that he would be
free to marry defendant.  Accordingly, plaintiff and Mr. Glickman met with
plaintiff's attorney in Los Angeles in August 1967 and entered into an
agreement which contemplated that plaintiff would seek to secure a divorce in
Nevada.  Provisions were also made for the Glickmans' property to be divided and
for Mr. Glickman to make monthly support payments to plaintiff over a period of
five years.

   Plaintiff then moved to Las Vegas and there retained local counsel who
prepared a second property settlement agreement which purportedly conformed to
the requirements of the Nevada law and some terms of which, including the
provisions for child support and custody, differed from those of the original
agreement.  On September 22 the new agreement was signed by Mr. Glickman in Los
Angeles and was returned to plaintiff in Las Vegas for her signature.

   While the new property settlement agreement was being drafted, plaintiff
became concerned that after the divorce Mr. Glickman would not fulfill his
obligations   under the agreement.  She was particularly concerned over the
child support payments as one of the Glickman boys had problems requiring
professional medical treatment.  She instructed her Nevada attorney to write to
defendant and to advise her that plaintiff would not sign the new property
settlement agreement or proceed to secure a divorce unless defendant agreed to
guarantee the payment of the monthly alimony and child support obligations which
would be due from Mr. Glickman.  Enclosed with the letter which counsel wrote
was an agreement of guaranty. On September 28 defendant signed the agreement and
returned it to plaintiff's counsel.

   On October 2, after receiving the executed guaranty from defendant, plaintiff
signed the property settlement agreement and proceeded to obtain a divorce in
Nevada, the same being granted on October 3.  Later that same month plaintiff
returned to Los Angeles and Mr. Glickman and defendant were married in Oregon.
For several months thereafter plaintiff received from Mr. Glickman the monthly
payments as specified in the property agreement.

   In September 1968 defendant sued Mr. Glickman for divorce which was granted
in February 1969.  Also in September 1968 Mr. Glickman ceased sending plaintiff
any of the payments required to be made under the property settlement agreement.
In August 1969 plaintiff obtained a judgment against Mr. Glickman in Los Angeles
County in the sum of $ 8,852.80 which included alimony, child support and
medical insurance payments then due under the terms of the property settlement
agreement plus attorney's fees and costs.  No part of this judgment has been
satisfied.   (See fn. 1.) In September of that year plaintiff demanded payment
from defendant of the amount of the judgment, and after receiving the latter's
refusal filed the instant action in October 1969. 1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Neither
of the parties has addressed the potential choice of law problem in this case,
nor has either of them invoked the laws of Nevada or Oregon, even though both of
those states may have an interest in the enforceability of defendant's guaranty.
Consequently, since both parties have consistently assumed that California law
governs, we likewise determine all issues relating to the enforceability of the
guaranty according to California law.  ( Hurtado v. Superior Court (1974) 11
Cal.3d 574, 581 [114 Cal. Rptr. 106, 522 P.2d 666].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   I

   Defendant first contends that the guaranty agreement is unenforceable as
being contrary to public policy because its effect was to promote the
dissolution of the Glickmans' marriage.   "Public policy seeks to foster and
protect marriage, to encourage parties to live together, and to prevent
separation." ( Hill v. Hill (1943) 23 Cal.2d 82, 93 [142 P.2d 417].) Thus we
have voided, as promotive of divorce and hence contrary to public policy, a
contingent fee agreement between the plaintiff in a divorce action and her
attorney.  ( Newman v. Freitas (1900) 129 Cal. 283, 289-293 [61 P. 907].) We
have likewise voided an agreement between a husband and wife which provided for
payment of a specified sum to the wife in release of all property rights in the
event of a future divorce if the husband should subsequently give her grounds
for such a divorce. ( Pereira v. Pereira (1909) 156 Cal. 1, 4-5 [103 P. 488].)

   Notwithstanding the foregoing we have applied a different rule where the
marriage relationship had irreparably broken down before the parties entered
into a property settlement agreement. We have upheld such an agreement even
though the husband would not have signed it absent the wife's promise to obtain
a divorce, and the wife would not have obtained the divorce absent the husband's
execution of the agreement.  ( Hill v. Hill, supra, 23 Cal.2d 82.) We held that
"public policy does not discourage divorce where the relations between husband
and wife are such that the legitimate objects of matrimony have been utterly
destroyed.  [Citation.] In the absence of fraud, collusion or imposition upon
the court, public policy   does not prevent parties who have separated from
entering into a contract disposing of their property rights which shall become
effective only in the event one of the parties obtains a divorce, even though
such a contract may be a factor in persuading a party who has a good cause for
divorce to proceed to establish it." ( Id., at p. 93.)

    A similar result has been reached not only in cases involving agreements
between the two spouses but also in cases of contracts between one of the
spouses and a third party.  In one such instance the plaintiff wife told her
aunt, the defendant, that she had decided to divorce her husband.  The
defendant, concerned about the adverse social effect of the ensuing publicity,
promised the plaintiff that if she would obtain the divorce in Nevada rather
than locally she would thereafter support the plaintiff and her children.  After
obtaining a Nevada divorce, the plaintiff returned to California, lived with her
aunt and continued to be supported by her until a quarrel arose several years
later.  We held the agreement was not contrary to public policy, noting that the
plaintiff had had a good cause of action for divorce and had determined to
procure such a legal separation prior to the time the defendant had proposed to
support the plaintiff and her children upon the condition that she would secure
the divorce in Nevada.  ( Howard v. Adams (1940) 16 Cal.2d 253 [105 P.2d 971,
130 A.L.R. 1003].)

   In a case similar to that now before the court, the defendant had promised
the plaintiff, a married woman, that if she would divorce her husband and marry
defendant, he would support her and her children and divide his property with
her.  We again held that public policy did not invalidate their agreement,
noting that the objects of the marriage had theretofore been destroyed, that the
marriage was beyond saving at the time the defendant made his offer to the
plaintiff, that there was little likelihood of reconciliation and that whatever
possibility of reconciliation existed was not barred by the offer.  ( Spellens
v. Spellens (1957) 49 Cal.2d 210, 225 [317 P.2d 613].) 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Spellens
refers to the divorce obtained in the circumstances of that case as being
"merely incidental to the agreement." The distinction between contracts deemed
"promotive of divorce" and those to which divorce is merely "incidental" is of
little practical value other than as a means of expressing the legal conclusion
that the marriage had so deteriorated prior to the agreement that public policy
against the encouragement of divorce is not applicable.  "[This] terminology is
not always accurate or descriptive.  The validity of such contracts must be
determined in the light of the factual background of each case and
considerations of public policy appropriate thereto." ( Hill v. Hill, supra, 23
Cal.2d 82, 93.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     In determining whether public policy forbids the enforcement of an
agreement "promotive" of the dissolution of a particular marriage, we must look
not solely to the terms of the agreement but also to the viability of the
marriage in question at the time the contract was entered into.  If the marriage
had so deteriorated that legitimate grounds for divorce existed and if there was
little hope of reconciliation, the  dissolution of such a marriage is not
contrary to public policy. Divorce is often, in fact, the preferred solution.  (
Hull v. Superior Court (1960) 54 Cal.2d 139, 145-147 [5 Cal. Rptr. 1, 352 P.2d
161]; De Burgh v. De Burgh (1952) 39 Cal.2d 858, 864 [250 P.2d 598]; Weil v.
Weil (1951) 37 Cal.2d 770, 777 [236 P.2d 159].) 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Although
the Family Law Act ( Civ. Code, § 4000 et seq.) had not been enacted in 1967 and
is not therefore directly relevant to this case, the results expressed herein
are consistent with the policy of that legislation.  As set forth in the
Assembly Committee Report of 1969 Divorce Reform Legislation such policy is to
permit dissolution whenever the marriage has irreparably broken down, looking at
the marriage as a whole and making the possibility of reconciliation the
important issue.  (4 Assem. J. (1969 Reg. Sess.) pp. 8054, 8058.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    There is no question that, as the trial court found on substantial evidence,
the Glickman marriage was beyond redemption in September and October 1967   when
the property settlement and the guaranty agreement were executed.  The Glickmans
had been separated for over a year and one of the parties was living in Los
Angeles, the other in Portland, Oregon.  For several months Mr. Glickman had
been living with another woman, defendant, whom he had informed plaintiff he
desired to marry. Unquestionably, plaintiff had ample grounds for divorce under
the law then existing in California.  The guaranty agreement was of no
consequence in the promotion of a legal separation, both spouses having
previously decided upon a divorce and plaintiff having already established
residence in Nevada for the purpose of initiating such a proceeding.  Moreover,
plaintiff testified that even if defendant had refused to sign the guaranty and
if plaintiff had consequently abandoned the divorce action, she did not plan to
effect a reconciliation with Mr. Glickman.  Instead she would have remained
apart from him and brought an action for separate maintenance or for divorce in
a state other than Nevada.  Reconciliation was never considered as a serious
possibility.  Under these circumstances no policy of the State of California
would have been served by maintaining this marriage, and the guaranty agreement
that facilitated its dissolution was therefore not invalid as against public
policy.

   II

   Defendant also asserts that the guaranty agreement was unenforceable because
there was no consideration for the covenant of guaranty. Although the agreement
itself recites that it was given in consideration of the execution by plaintiff
of the property settlement agreement with Mr. Glickman, defendant contends that
such alleged consideration is insufficient  on two grounds.  She argues first
that since the property settlement agreement was dated September 22 and the
guaranty agreement dated September 28, the former cannot be consideration for
the latter.  She further contends that even if the two agreements had been
executed at the same time, plaintiff was already obligated to comply with the
terms of the property settlement agreement by virtue of the prior contract
between the Glickmans.  Therefore, she concludes, there was no new consideration
for the execution of the second agreement.

     Defendant's first contention lacks merit because the dates appearing on the
property settlement and guaranty agreements do not accurately reflect the
chronology of their execution.  After receiving the final property settlement
agreement, bearing Mr. Glickman's signature and the date September 22, plaintiff
did not immediately sign it.  Instead she first instructed her Nevada counsel to
prepare and send the guaranty agreement to defendant.  Subsequently and only
after receiving the guaranty fully executed by defendant did plaintiff accept
and sign the property agreement and proceed to obtain the divorce. Thus,
contrary to the dates appearing on the faces of the two instruments, the
guaranty was actually executed before the property settlement and as part of the
same transaction with it.  Consequently the two instruments can be treated as if
entered into contemporaneously and can serve as consideration for each other.  (
Stroud v. Thomas (1903) 139 Cal. 274, 275 [72 P. 1008]; Pacific States Sav. etc.
Co. v. Stowell (1935) 7 Cal. App. 2d 280, 281 [46 P.2d 780]; Citizens Trust etc.
Bk. v. Bryant (1921) 53 Cal. App. 735, 736 [200 P. 823].) "Where a suretyship
obligation is entered into at the same time with the original obligation, or
with the acceptance of the latter by the creditor, and forms with that
obligation a part of the consideration to him, no other consideration need
exist." ( Civ. Code, § 2792; Citizens Trust etc. Bk. v. Bryant, supra, 53 Cal.
App. 735, 736.)

     Defendant further argues that execution of the second property agreement
was insufficient consideration because plaintiff was already bound by the terms
of the first property agreement, and there   was accordingly no new
consideration. This assertion is contradicted, however, by the trial court's
implied finding, adequately supported by the record, 4 that there was sufficient
new consideration. There was evidence, for example, that Mr. Glickman was
obligated in the first  agreement to care for each Glickman boy until he reached
age 21; in the second agreement this covenant was replaced by a provision that,
if either boy chose to live with plaintiff rather than with his father, Mr.
Glickman would make support payments to plaintiff in the amount of $ 200 per
month per child. 5 Also, Mr. Glickman had agreed in the original property
agreement to support plaintiff during the pendency of the Nevada divorce
proceedings; no such provision appears in the final agreement. Thus, since the
obligations of both spouses under the final agreement differed from those under
the original one, the new burdens thereby imposed upon plaintiff and the new
benefits thereby conferred upon Mr. Glickman furnished sufficient new
consideration for defendant's promise to guaranty Mr. Glickman's undertaking.  (
Civ. Code, § 1605; Bailey v. Breetwor (1962) 206 Cal. App. 2d 287, 292 [23 Cal.
Rptr. 740].) In any event, the written guaranty is itself presumptive evidence
of consideration ( Civ. Code, § 1614; Pierce v. Wright (1953) 117 Cal. App. 2d
718, 723 [256 P.2d 1049]) and defendant has failed to sustain her burden of
overcoming this presumption by showing an absence of new consideration in the
second property agreement.  ( Civ. Code, § 1615; Pierce v. Wright, supra, 117
Cal. App. 2d 718, 723.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   The first
property settlement agreement was never actually received in evidence at the
trial.  Evidence of its general contents was presented orally through the
testimony of plaintiff and of Mr. Glickman, and through the deposition of
plaintiff's Nevada attorney.
5   As noted above, it was the performance of these new support payments which
most concerned plaintiff and which prompted her to secure the guaranty.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Consideration for defendant's guaranty could also be found in plaintiff's
statement in the letter to defendant which accompanied the unexecuted guaranty
that plaintiff would sign the second property settlement agreement and proceed
with the divorce "as soon as" she received the executed guaranty. While the
first property agreement between the Glickmans did contemplate that plaintiff
would secure a Nevada divorce, it did not obligate her to do so within any
particular time limits.  Accordingly plaintiff's agreement to institute divorce
proceedings promptly upon receipt of the guaranty represented a new
consideration running both to Mr. Glickman and to defendant.  Mr. Glickman
benefited because the sooner the final property agreement was signed and the
divorce obtained the less he would have to pay for plaintiff's support pending
the divorce and the sooner his obligation to pay five years' alimony would
cease.  Both Mr. Glickman and defendant benefited because they were able to
enter immediately into a valid marriage. Thus plaintiff's prompt execution of
the final property agreement and filing for a divorce, bargained for in exchange
for the guaranty, conferred sufficient benefit to satisfy the requirements of
new consideration.

    III

     We may summarily dispose of defendant's contentions regarding the alleged
deficiencies in the manner in which plaintiff proceeded under applicable
suretyship law.  Defendant's claim that Mr. Glickman fraudulently induced her to
sign the guaranty by misrepresenting its legal effect is undermined by the trial
court's finding that she understood the "nature, contents, and effect" of the
guaranty, a finding adequately supported by the evidence.   Moreover, even if
Mr. Glickman had deceived her, his actions would not operate to discharge her
obligations to plaintiff, an innocent party, who had no notice of his actions
and did not participate therein.  ( Simon Newman Co. v. Tully (1939) 13 Cal.2d
134, 137-138 [88 P.2d 131].)

      Defendant also claims that since the guaranty agreement did not encompass
Mr. Glickman's obligation to provide medical insurance for plaintiff and the
children, plaintiff's attempt to recover such payments in the sum of $ 252.80
altered the obligation of the principal, Mr. Glickman, so as to discharge
defendant as guarantor. ( Civ. Code, § 2819.) The provision for medical
insurance payments was included, however, in the settlement agreement between
the Glickmans, and plaintiff's inclusion of this item in her complaint against
defendant in no way altered either defendant's liability or that of the
principal.  ( Ralston-Purina Co. v. Carter (1962) 210 Cal. App. 2d 372, 378 [26
Cal. Rptr. 690].) Thus, defendant is not discharged of her obligation merely by
reason of plaintiff's efforts to recover the medical insurance payments from
her.  It does appear, however, that as she never agreed to guaranty such
payments, the judgment against defendant must be reduced by that amount.

     Defendant's final contention is that plaintiff has failed to pursue her
available remedies against Mr. Glickman, the principal debtor, in accordance
with a demand made by defendant that she do so.  ( Civ. Code, § 2845.) The
demand was made on January 27, 1970, after the commencement of the instant
action.  It is clear that prior to that time plaintiff had no duty to pursue Mr.
Glickman as defendant's liability for each monthly payment became fixed and
unconditional as each payment became due, without regard to plaintiff's remedies
against Mr. Glickman.  ( Civ. Code, § 2807; Bank of America v. McRae (1947) 81
Cal. App. 2d 1, 7 [183 P.2d 385]; McDonald v. Gravenstein etc. Assn. (1941) 42
Cal. App. 2d 329, 332-333 [108 P.2d 936].) Plaintiff nevertheless did attempt to
collect from Mr. Glickman before filing the instant suit.  She  obtained a
judgment against him in 1969 but has been unable to satisfy it.  Defendant does
not indicate what other remedies she would have plaintiff pursue but in view of
Mr. Glickman's impecuniousness it appears that pursuit of any such remedies
would be futile.  Moreover, defendant remains liable on the guaranty whether or
not plaintiff has complied with defendant's demand, for plaintiff's
noncompliance would have exonerated defendant in any event only to the extent
that she has been prejudiced thereby.  ( Civ. Code, § 2845.) The record does not
demonstrate any such prejudice and defendant is not relieved of liability.  (
Ralston-Purina Co. v. Carter, supra, 210 Cal. App. 2d 372, 380-381.)

   The judgment is modified by striking therefrom the sum of $ 252.80 and as
modified is affirmed.  Plaintiff is to recover her costs on appeal.


                              88 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              ANNIE SIMPSON, Appellant v. JOHN SIMPSON, Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 1060

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, THIRD APPELLATE DISTRICT

             21 Cal. App. 150; 131 P. 99; 1913 Cal. App. LEXIS 198


                           February 10, 1913, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:      APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of the City and
County of San Francisco. George H. Cabaniss, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

   Divorce--Judgment for Maintenance of Wife--Effect of Subsequent Judgment
Granting Husband Divorce.--Where in an action for divorce instituted by the wife
a judgment was rendered in favor of the wife directing the husband to pay her a
specified sum per month, beginning with the rendition of the judgment until the
further order of the court, and further sums by way of counsel fees and costs,
and thereafter another judgment was rendered in the same action, decreeing a
dissolution of the marriage and that the wife take nothing by the action, and no
appeal was taken from either judgment, the second judgment had no effect upon
the prior judgment except to put an end to its future operation.

   Id.--Action to Enforce Prior Judgment--Statute of Limitations.--The statute
of limitations commenced to run against the right of the wife to enforce the
prior judgment for maintenance from the date of its rendition, certainly no
later than the date of the second judgment, and any action brought upon it was
barred in five years, by subdivision 1 of section 336 of the Code of Civil
Procedure.

COUNSEL: Frank Schilling, for Appellant.

T. J. Crowley, for Respondent.

JUDGES: CHIPMAN, P. J. Hart, J., and Burnett, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: CHIPMAN

OPINION

     CHIPMAN, P. J. On September 24, 1910, plaintiff filed her complaint to
enforce payment  of a judgment entered, on February 12, 1903, in an action as
above entitled, which it is alleged and admitted, was never appealed from and
that no part of the judgment has been paid. This judgment reads as follows:

   "In the Superior Court of the City and County of San Francisco, State of
California.

   "Annie Simpson, Plaintiff, vs. John Simpson, Defendant. Decree of
Maintenance.

   "This cause coming on regularly to be heard on the 12th day of February,
1903, upon the complaint on file herein, defendant having failed to appear and
answer in said action, and the default of the defendant for not answering having
been duly entered and upon proofs taken orally in open court, from which it
appears that all of the allegations of the complaint are sustained by testimony
free from all legal exceptions as to its competency, admissibility and
sufficiency; and it also appearing to the said court that said defendant was
duly and regularly served with summons and complaint herein, and all and
singular the law and the premises being by the court here understood and
considered.

   "Wherefore, it is ordered, adjudged and decreed and the court does order,
adjudge and decree, that John Simpson, the defendant herein pay to Annie
Simpson, plaintiff herein, the sum of twenty-five ($ 25.00) per month, beginning
from the rendition of this judgment until the further order of this court; the
further sum of fifty ($ 50.00) dollars counsel fees and costs of suit in the
amount of $ 44.75.

J. C. B. Hebbard, Judge of the Superior Court.

   "Dated this 12th day of February, 1903.

   "Indorsed: Filed February 12, 1903. Albert B. Mahony, Clerk, by F. J. Dugan,
Deputy Clerk.

   "Co. Clerk F. No. 15.

    "I, Albert B. Mahony County Clerk of the City and County of San Francisco,
State of California, and ex-officio Clerk of the Superior Court, in and for said
City and County, hereby certify the foregoing to be a full, true and correct
copy of the original Decree of Maintenance in the above entitled cause, filed in
my office on the 12th day of February, A. D. 1903.

   "Attest my hand and seal of said court, this 12th day of February, 1903.
Albert B. Mahony, Clerk, by A. S. Levy, Deputy Clerk.

   "Indorsed on back: No. 82991. Department 4. Superior Court, State of
California, City and County of San Francisco. Annie Simpson, Plaintiff, vs. John
Simpson, Defendant.

   "Certified copy Decree of Maintenance."

   Defendant answered and, by way of defense, pleaded the following judgment
which it is alleged and is admitted, was never appealed from:

   "In the Superior Court in and for the City and County of San Francisco, State
of California.

   "Annie Simpson, Plaintiff, vs. John Simpson, Defendant.

   "This cause having been brought on to be heard this 20th day of April, 1903,
upon the complaint of plaintiff, and the answer and cross-complaint of defendant
and answer thereto and the cause having been submitted to the court upon the
evidence taken, and the court having made and filed its decision in writing
therein; Now therefore,

   "In accordance with said decision, upon motion of Messrs, Garoutte & Goodwin,
counsel for defendant, it is ordered, adjudged and decreed that the plaintiff
take nothing by her said action.

   "It is further ordered, adjudged and decreed that the marriage between the
said plaintiff, Annie Simpson, and the said defendant, John Simpson, be
dissolved, and the same is duly dissolved accordingly, and the said parties are,
and each of them is freed and absolutely released from the bonds of matrimony
and all the obligations thereof.

J. C. B. Hebbard, Judge.

   "Dated this 25th day of April, 1903.

   "Co. Clerk F. No. 15.

    "I, Albert B. Mahony, County Clerk of the City and County of San Francisco,
State of California, and ex-officio Clerk of the Superior Court, in and for said
City and County, hereby certify the foregoing to be a full, true and correct
copy of the original Decree of Divorce in the above entitled cause, filed in my
office on the 25th day of April, A. D. 1903.

   "Attest my hand and seal of said court, this 20th day of May, 1903. Albert B.
Mahony, Clerk by F. J. Dugan, Deputy Clerk.

   "Indorsed on back: 82991. In the Superior Court of the City and County of San
Francisco, State of California. Annie Simpson, Plt., vs. John Simpson, Deft.
Certified copy of Decree of Divorce. Garoutte & Goodwin, Attorneys at Law.
Mutual Savings Bank Building, 708 Market St., San Francisco. Telephone Bush
762."

   These judgments were admitted in evidence and constitute all the evidence in
the case except as above stated. The court made the following findings:

   "1. That on the 12th day of February, 1903, this court department No. Four
thereof, in that certain action then pending therein and numbered 82991, wherein
this plaintiff was the plaintiff, and the defendant here was defendant therein,
made a Decree of Maintenance, requiring the defendant to pay to plaintiff the
sum of Twenty-five dollars per month beginning on said date and until the
further order of this court, and the further sum of fifty dollars counsel fees,
and forty-four 75-100 dollars costs of suit.

   "2. That thereafter, and on the 25th day of April, 1903, this court,
department No. Four thereof, in that certain action then pending therein and
numbered 82991, wherein this plaintiff was the plaintiff, and the defendant here
was the defendant therein, made a decree adjudging that the plaintiff take
nothing by her said action, and ordering, adjudging and decreeing that the
marriage between the said plaintiff and the said defendant be dissolved, and the
said parties there and each of them was released from the bonds of matrimony and
all the obligations thereof."

   As conclusions of law the court found that plaintiff's prayer for relief
should be denied  and that defendant is entitled to judgment in his favor and
judgment was accordingly entered, from which plaintiff appeals.

    It will be observed that the title of the cause in both decrees of 1903 is
the same; the court and number of the department and number of the action are
the same and the same judge entered the decrees. The decree of divorce followed
the decree for maintenance two months and was entered on an answer to
plaintiff's complaint and defendant's cross-complaint and answer to the
cross-complaint. We think it sufficiently appeared that both decrees were
entered in the same action.

   Appellant claims that the final decree of divorce had no effect upon the
decree for maintenance and that the liability thereby created is a valid
subsisting indebtedness of defendant and plaintiff should have had judgment for
the full amount mentioned in the decree.

   Defendant pleaded the statute of limitation, subdivision 1, section 336 of
the Code of Civil Procedure. No finding was made on this issue and respondent
makes no reference to it in his brief. Respondent contends that "there can be no
doubt but that the default decree of maintenance was set aside and defendant
permitted to file his answer and cross-complaint, to which cross-complaint
plaintiff made answer, and the case tried, resulting in a decree denying
plaintiff relief, and granting a decree of divorce upon the cross-complaint."

   We cannot doubt that defendant's default was set aside and leave given him to
answer. The subsequent decree, two months later, on his cross-complaint and the
answer thereto cannot be construed as meaning anything less. But it does not
follow that the decree for support or alimony pendente lite, or, as the counsel
claims it was, "for maintenance," was set aside. We do not know whether
plaintiff's action was for maintenance without divorce, under section 137 of the
Civil Code, or was for a divorce under the same section, and support pendente
lite. We have nothing to guide us but the two decrees. If the action was for
divorce and for support the allowance, strictly speaking, was for alimony and,
though the application for alimony cannot be considered a separate suit, it "is
a proceeding for a separate judgment which, when granted, has nothing to do with
the final judgment in the case, and will not be affected by it." ( Hite v. Hite
124 Cal. 389, [71 Am. St. Rep. 82, 45 L. R. A. 793, 57 Pac. 227]; Sharon  v.
Sharon, 75 Cal. 1, [16 Pac. 345].) It was held, in Ex parte Spencer, 83 Cal.
460, [17 Am. St. Rep. 266, 23 Pac. 395], that the legislature used the term
"alimony" in the statute in its strict legal sense when prescribing the
provision which the court might make for the support of the wife pendente lite.
And alimony in that sense proceeds only from husband to wife without which
relation there can be no alimony. In the same case it was pointed out that
allowance made to the wife after decree of divorce should be called "allowance"
or "permanent allowance" and not alimony. When the wife has a cause for divorce
she may, without applying for divorce, have an action for "support and
maintenance" ( Civ. Code, sec. 137) but this right also rests on the fact that
the relation of husband and wife exists and a decree awarding such maintenance
contemplates the existence of the marital relation not only when the decree is
made but during its life. If the wife or husband should thereafter bring an
action for divorce the decree in that action would be conclusive of the rights
of the parties and "if it contained no provision for support it would
necessarily terminate the allowance theretofore made in the action." In the case
here the decree of divorce expressly declares "that the plaintiff take nothing
by her said action . . . and the said parties are, and each of them is freed and
absolutely released from the bonds of matrimony and all the obligations
thereof." Inasmuch as the decree of maintenance was made in the same action and
was dependent upon the existence of the marriage relation it must follow that,
upon the termination of that relation, the allowance would cease especially as
the divorce decree expressly declared that plaintiff should take nothing by her
action. In Smith v. Superior Court, 136 Cal. 17, [68 Pac. 100], the court said:
"It is conceded that a complete divorce will relieve petitioner from the
judgment for alimony because the plaintiff in the first suit would no longer be
his wife." In that case, however, the principle did not apply because an appeal
was pending from the divorce decree, the effect of which was, as declared by the
court, that "these parties are not divorced." No appeal having been taken in the
present case from the divorce decree its effect was to relieve defendant from
the judgment for future support. "After the judgment granting the divorce the
plaintiff  was no longer the wife of defendant, and he owed her no longer any
marital duty." ( Howell v. Howell, 104 Cal. 45, [43 Am. St. Rep. 70, 37 Pac.
770], and see Harlan v. Harlan, 154 Cal. 341, [98 Pac. 32], for review of the
cases.)

   But when the decree of divorce was entered in the present case there was a
judgment for maintenance, counsel fees, and costs from which no appeal had then
been taken nor was at any time taken. The final decree had no effect upon that
judgment (cases supra) except to put an end to its future operation. Had the
divorce decree recited that the maintenance judgment was set aside or if such
was the necessary effect of the language used in the divorce decree, we think
respondent's contention might be sustained. But the application for maintenance
being a separate proceeding in the case and the judgment appealable ( Sharon v.
Sharon, 75 Cal. 1, [16 Pac. 345]; Hite v. Hite, 124 Cal. 389, [71 Am. St. Rep.
82, 45 L. R. A. 793, 57 Pac. 227]) we cannot give to the divorce decree the
force contended for, to wit, that the maintenance decree was set  aside, since
it is entirely consistent with the language of the divorce decree that the
maintenance decree remained undisturbed. In adjudging "that plaintiff take
nothing by her said action," we think is meant that plaintiff was to have no
relief in the future. Plaintiff would, therefore, be entitled to judgment for
the allowance given up to the date of the decree of divorce and counsel fees and
costs in her judgment mentioned. If we could say with certainty that plaintiff's
action was for maintenance alone we might with some safety assume that the
default judgment as well as the default for nonappearance was set aside and that
the issue of maintenance was again heard. But her action may have been for
divorce and judgment for maintenance or alimony may have been given pendente
lite, in which case defendant's answer may have been to her alleged grounds for
divorce. In that case the divorce decree would not be inconsistent with the
maintenance judgment and should not be given the effect of setting aside that
judgment. No explanation is given for not bringing up the pleadings in that
action or the order of the court in setting aside defendant's default except it
was stated at the argument that all the court records were destroyed in 1906,
each party happening to preserve the copies of the several decrees. Before
defendant in the present action  should be permitted to evade the effectiveness
of plaintiff's judgment pleaded there should be something more than vague and
uncertain implications drawn from his decree of divorce.

   We conclude that plaintiff's judgment for maintenance had vitality
undisturbed up to the date of the divorce decree but had no operative effect for
maintenance beyond that date. The statute of limitations began to run against
that judgment on February 12, 1903, certainly no later than April 20, 1903, and
any action brought upon it was barred in five years by subdivision 1 of section
336 of the Code of Civil Procedure. This action was commenced September 24,
1910, and is barred by that section. But as there is no finding on that issue
the judgment must be reversed, and it is so ordered.

   Hart, J., and Burnett, J., concurred.


                              89 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             MARION BARTON, Plaintiff and Appellant, v. WILLIAM H.
                        BARTON, Defendant and Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 10836

            Court of Appeal of California, Third Appellate District

          230 Cal. App. 2d 43; 40 Cal. Rptr. 676; 1964 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      841


                               September 29, 1964

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied October 22, 1964,
and Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court was Denied November
25, 1964.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Sacramento
County.  Jay L. Henry, Judge.

   Action for separate maintenance and cross-action for divorce.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Separate Maintenance.  --In an action by a wife for separate
maintenance alleging adultery, in which action defendant husband
cross-complained for divorce on the ground of extreme cruelty, it was within the
power of the court to award both a decree of separate maintenance with alimony
to the wife and a decree of divorce to the husband.

(2) Id.--Causes for Denying Divorce--Recrimination.  --In an action by a wife
for separate maintenance alleging adultery, in which action defendant husband
cross-complained for divorce on the ground of extreme cruelty, a finding of
adultery on the part of the husband did not justify denying him a divorce where
there was blame on both sides in that the wife often refused marital relations
and repeatedly berated the husband as being an unfit husband and an immoral
person.

(3) Id.--Proceedings--Questions of Law and Fact--Cruelty.  --In a divorce
action, whether there was a wrongful infliction of grievous mental suffering is
a question of fact to be deduced from the circumstances of the case and
determined in the light of the intelligence, refinement and delicacy of
sentiment of the person complaining. Decision rests on the trial judge's good
sense and judgment and his conclusion is final unless the evidence is so slight
as to indicate an abuse of discretion.

(4) Id.--Grounds for Divorce--Extreme Cruelty--Corroboration.  --In a divorce
action by a husband, there was sufficient corroboration of his complaints of
cruelty where an official of his employer testified that the wife had visited
the employer to urge that her husband be discharged and to complain about his
conduct, and where the husband's mother testified that for a period of 15 years
she had not been welcome in her son's home and visits from her grandchild were
forbidden.

(5) Id.--Grounds for Divorce--Extreme Cruelty--Corroboration.  --In actions for
divorce on the ground of extreme cruelty, the principal purpose in requiring
corroboration of the complainant's testimony as to cruelty is to prevent
collusion.

(6) Id.--Grounds for Divorce--Extreme Cruelty--Corroboration.  --Where it is
clear from the evidence in a divorce action that there is no collusion, only
slight corroboration of the complainant's testimony as to cruelty is required.

(7) Id.--Custody of Children--Discretion of Court.  --In a divorce action, it
was not an abuse of discretion to award custody of the parties' 19-year-old
daughter to the father where the daughter planned to enter college, had
expressed a preference for her father's custody, and had left her mother's home
under circumstances suggesting unadjustable incompatibility, and where the
father had leased a two-bedroom duplex 6 blocks from the school at which she
intended to enroll.

COUNSEL: Elizabeth Inglis Hummel for Plaintiff and Appellant.

Gray & Thurn and Charles F. Gray, Jr., for Defendant and Respondent.

JUDGES: Pierce, P. J.  Friedman, J., and Moor, J. pro tem., * concurred.

*   Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: PIERCE

OPINION

     Plaintiff wife sued for separate maintenance and defendant husband
cross-complained for a divorce upon the ground of extreme cruelty. Both sought
custody of a minor daughter. The trial court found that the husband had been
guilty of adultery as alleged in the wife's complaint and a decree of separate
maintenance was made with an alimony award. It found that the wife had been
guilty of extreme cruelty and a divorce was granted to the husband.  Custody of
the minor child was awarded to the husband.  The community property was divided.

   The wife appeals from the divorce decree and the child custody award.  The
alimony award and property division are unchallenged.  The husband does not
appeal.   The grounds of the wife's appeal are (1) the court's lack of power to
award the husband a divorce after a contemporaneous finding of the husband's
adultery and a decree of separate maintenance with alimony to the wife; (2)
insufficiency of the evidence to support  the court's finding of the wife's
extreme cruelty; and (3) insufficiency of the evidence to support the court's
order awarding custody of the daughter to the husband.  We disallow all
contentions and affirm the judgment.

     We consider first the argument that there can be no coexistence between a
decree of separate maintenance awarding alimony to the wife and a decree
granting a divorce to the husband.  In Lampson v. Lampson, 171 Cal. 332, 333
[153 P. 238], it was held that "Where a divorce is granted to the husband for
the fault of the wife and nothing further appears concerning the circumstances,
as is the case here, the court has no power to allow permanent alimony to the
wife." (Italics added.) In In re McKenna, 116 Cal.App. 232, which followed the
Lampson case, the court made the statement at page 233 [2 P.2d 429]: ". . . The
court was without jurisdiction to grant permanent support to the wife by reason
of the fact that the divorce was not granted to her, but was granted to her
husband for her fault, . . ." This court in 1961, speaking through Presiding
Justice Van Dyke, in Salvato v. Salvato, 195 Cal.App.2d 869, at page 871 [16
Cal.Rptr. 263], stated that that language in In re McKenna, supra, was "too
broad." In Salvato the husband had contended that because he had been awarded a
divorce for the wife's extreme cruelty an allowance by the trial court of
alimony to the wife on her cross-complaint for separate maintenance upon a
finding that "plaintiff had been guilty of extreme cruelty toward defendant, as
alleged in her cross complaint for Separate Maintenance in the action," 1
exceeded the court's powers.  Disallowing this contention, this court stated on
pages 871-872:

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   We quote
from the record, Clerk's Transcript, page 48.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    ". . . The action here was not a mere 'application for divorce.' Respondent,
having, as the court found, a cause of action for divorce against appellant,
elected, perhaps because of personal or religious scruples, to prove the facts
in support of a cross-complaint for separate maintenance. This she had a
statutory right to do.  And this right should not be circumscribed and limited
by slavish adherence to a rule obtaining in a simple action for divorce where
the fault of the defendant alone is in issue.  Had defendant sued for divorce
the court could, and no doubt would, have granted a divorce to both parties in
order to escape from the rule declared in Lampson and McKenna and do justice.  .
. .

    "We see no reason why, in line with the modern and enlightened policy
evinced in such cases as De Burgh v. De Burgh, 39 Cal.2d 858 [250 P.2d 598],
Hull v. Superior Court, 54 Cal.2d 139 [5 Cal.Rptr. 1, 352 P.2d 161], Hudson v.
Hudson, supra [52 Cal.2d 735 (344 P.2d 295)], and others, it should not be
declared in this case and on this record alimony could be granted to the wronged
wife."

   We see no reason to recede from our rule in the Salvato case.  The only
distinction between the facts there and here is that the husband seeks the
benefit of the rule to sustain his divorce decree, whereas the wife in Salvato
sought and received her alimony. This is an indistinguishable difference.  Sauce
for the goose is sauce for the gander.

   The only case cited by appellant to support her position to the contrary is
Mattson v. Mattson, 181 Cal. 44 [183 P. 443], but that case was expressly
overruled by our Supreme Court in De Burgh v. De Burgh, 39 Cal.2d 858, 871 [250
P.2d 598], to the extent that it supported "a mechanical application of the
doctrine of recrimination." In De Burgh, Justice Traynor, author of the majority
opinion, studies "the history of the doctrine of recrimination, its objectives,
and the wording and legislative background of the applicable statutes." (See p.
863.) No purpose will be served by repeating, even in outline, what is said
therein.  We do note and eschew attempt at embellishment of the following (pp.
863-864):

   ". . . The family is the basic unit of our society, the center of the
personal affections that ennoble and enrich human life.  It channels biological
drives that might otherwise become socially destructive; it ensures the care and
education of children in a stable environment; it establishes continuity from
one generation to another; it nurtures and develops the individual initiative
that distinguishes a free people.  Since the family is the core of our society,
the law seeks to foster and preserve marriage. But when a marriage has failed
and the family has ceased to be a unit, the purposes of family life are no
longer served and divorce will be permitted."

     We approach the contention of appellant under the modern (De Burgh)
interpretation of the California statutes on recrimination, Civil Code section
111, subdivision 4, and section 122, and with the above quoted precepts and
principles in mind.  Determination of this issue requires an examination of the
facts.  Resolving all factual conflicts, and giving all permissible inferences,
in respondent's favor the record shows:

    Marital difficulties between the parties began in 1956 when the husband
returned from a convention.  The wife locked herself in a bedroom and refused
any communication with her husband for a week.  At the end of this period in
coventry, the two drove to Downieville to visit their daughter. There the wife
accused the husband of neglecting her and their child and of subordinating his
family life for his job.  They returned home and the wife told her husband he
was a complete failure as a husband and that she wanted a divorce. This wish was
not acted upon but for four years thereafter the parties, although living in the
same house, had no marital relations. In the summer of 1960 the husband asked
the wife for a divorce. At first she agreed and then refused.  In an effort to
save the marriage, the parties agreed to resume marital relations. The husband
was employed as a lobbyist, a vocation to which the wife objected.  At one time,
in 1961, when the husband arrived home in the evening, the wife unjustly accused
him of having gone "out on the town" with a legislator's secretary.

   However, thereafter the husband did become interested in another woman who
ultimately, as the court found, became his mistress.  In December 1961 the
husband again asked for a divorce and the parties were separated for about two
months.  They again resumed joint occupation of living quarters but not marital
relations. The wife at that time ascertained the identity of the other woman.
She often used profane language toward her husband, told him he was immoral,
unfit for his job, and threatened to have him discharged by his employer.

   An official of the husband's employer testified as his witness at the trial.
He told of a visit by the wife, the purpose of which was to urge that her
husband be discharged. This witness also testified to the wife's complaints
regarding her husband's conduct made to the association for which he worked and
to various members.  The husband's mother, also his witness, testified that for
a period of 15 years she had not been welcome at her son's home and visits from
her grandchild were forbidden.

   The husband testified that his wife's conduct described above left him with a
feeling that he was just existing.  Her statements that he was a failure
depressed him and lack of any ability of the two to communicate also bothered
him.

   Our examination of the record convinces us that here there was fault on both
sides, that blame was approximately equal, and that it would have been a
"degradation of marriage and  a frustration of  its purposes" (to borrow the
expression of Justice Traynor in De Burgh v. De Burgh, supra, 39 Cal.2d 858,
864) for the trial court to have left this marriage in existence by a denial to
the husband of a divorce on the ground of extreme cruelty. The definition of
extreme cruelty in Civil Code section 94 includes the "wrongful infliction of
grievous . . . mental suffering, upon the other by one party to the marriage."
Whether such suffering has or has not been inflicted is a question of fact to be
deduced from the circumstances of the case.  It is to be determined in the light
of the intelligence, refinement and delicacy of the sentiment of the plaintiff.
( Keener v. Keener, 18 Cal.2d 445 [116 P.2d 1].) No precise legal test can be
stated.  Decision rests upon the good sense and judgment of the trial judge.  (
Barnes v. Barnes, 95 Cal. 171 [30 P. 298, 16 L.R.A. 660]; Keener v. Keener,
supra.) His conclusion is final unless the evidence is so slight as to indicate
an abuse of discretion. ( McFall v. McFall, 58 Cal.App.2d 208 [136 P.2d 580];
Johnson v. Johnson, 214 Cal.App.2d 29 [29 Cal.Rptr. 179].) There was no abuse of
discretion here either in the court's determination that this marriage was
irretrievably wrecked, or in its determination that the wife's extreme cruelty,
substantially equal to the husband's adulterous conduct and not altogether
provoked thereby, was a cause thereof.   Corroboration of the husband's
testimony (which corroboration has been given above) was sufficient.   The
principal purpose of corroboration is to prevent collusion. ( Ruggles v. Ruggles
, 43 Cal.2d 547 [275 P.2d 42].)   And where it is clear from the evidence that
there is no collusion -- a fact quite apparent here -- only slight corroboration
suffices.  ( Cardew v. Cardew, 192 Cal.App.2d 502 [13 Cal.Rptr. 620].)
Corroboration of a single act of cruelty has been held to be enough.  ( Hayes v.
Hayes, 181 Cal.App.2d 634 [5 Cal.Rptr. 509]; Secondo v. Secondo, 218 Cal. 453
[23 P.2d 752].)

     There was no abuse of discretion in the award of custody of the daughter to
the husband.  The 18-year-old child (at the time of trial -- now 19 years of
age) had expressed a preference that such custody be granted.  At the time of
the trial she was not living with either parent but with her paternal uncle and
grandmother, James Barton and Bessie Barton, admittedly a suitable home.  At
that time (July 1963) the daughter planned to attend Sacramento City College in
the fall and the father had leased a two-bedroom duplex 6 blocks from the school
where she could live and  where he could be with his daughter in the evenings
and on weekends.  When he was away arrangements for adult supervision in his
absence had been made.  She had left her mother's home under circumstances
strongly suggesting an unadjustable incompatibility between the two.  Actual
departure from the mother's home had occurred when the mother "had told her to
move out of the house and to go live with her father." It also appeared that the
mother had habitually dwelt upon her marital difficulties, had on many occasions
denounced the husband, telling the daughter her father was "no good"; that the
mother listened to her daughter's telephone calls with her friends toward whom
the mother was so unfriendly that the daughter hesitated to bring them into the
home.  (The daughter admitted, however, that she knew her mother loved her.
Also admitted was the fact that she had had an emotional problem, a cause of
justifiable concern on the part of her mother, for which disciplinary control
would have been indicated.) It appeared in evidence that no interference would
be placed in the way of visits between mother and daughter as often as the
former might desire.  It did not appear that the father's love affair would
entail any contacts between the daughter and the mistress.

   The foregoing facts would justify the court's having selected the father as
the proper parent to have custody of the daughter. To them may be added other
considerations: There is an all-things-being-equal  statutory preference given
to the father of a child of an age to require education ( Civ. Code, § 138).
Moreover, there are practical difficulties involved in placing court-coerced
restraints upon adolescents who have so nearly reached legal maturity.  (Many
19-year-old girls have married, started to raise families, become homemakers.)
Particularly is this true of a college student who is already emancipated from
parental control in many respects.  We can find in the court's selection nothing
but the exercise of a sound judicial discretion motivated by the child's best
interests.

   The judgment is affirmed.


                              90 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            MARIE K. CHIRGWIN, Appellant, v. FREDERICK H. CHIRGWIN,
                                   Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 11409

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SECOND APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION ONE

          26 Cal. App. 2d 506; 79 P.2d 772; 1938 Cal. App. LEXIS 1073


                             May 24, 1938, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:      APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County, and from orders denying a motion to vacate the judgment and denying a
new trial. Harry R. Archbald, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Judgments--Separate Maintenance.  --The right to separate
maintenance without applying for a divorce rests on the fact that the relation
of husband and wife exists, and a decree awarding such maintenance contemplates
the existence of the marital relation not only when the decree is made but also
during its life; and if the wife or husband secures a valid decree of divorce,
that decree is conclusive of the rights of the parties, and if it contains no
provision for support, it necessarily terminates the allowance therefor made in
the action for separate maintenance.

(2) Id.--Foreign Judgments--Comity--Full Faith and Credit--Constitutional Law.
--A court of one state may, upon principles of comity, recognize and give effect
as a dissolution of the marriage relation to a divorce granted in another state,
although not the matrimonial domicile, to one who had a bona fide domicile in
that state, upon constructive or substituted service of process, notwithstanding
that such divorce is not within the protection of the full faith and credit
provision of the federal Constitution.

(3) Id.--Appeal--Bill of Exceptions--Issues--Findings.  --In this action to
recover money due on a foreign judgment for separate maintenance, where the
appeal was presented upon a bill of exceptions and only a portion of the
evidence adduced at the trial was shown therein, the appellate court was bound
by the findings of fact made by the trial judge in so far as they were
consistent with the written stipulation of facts and such fragmentary evidence
as was contained in the bill of exceptions.

(4) Id.--Judgments--Separate Maintenance--Domicile.  --In said action, where the
trial court found that the judgment for separate maintenance was invalid and
unenforceable, and that defendant was justified in acquiring, and had in good
faith acquired, a domicile in another state and had obtained a decree of divorce
therein prior to the date of said judgment, and plaintiff made no attack on said
decree except as to its legal effect as shown upon its face, the appellate court
was not concerned with the status of either the judgment or the decree; and
where there was nothing in the record which would prevent the trial court from
making the findings which were made, the requirements had been met which would
entitle the decree of divorce to recognition by the courts of this state.

(5) Id.--Jurisdiction--Service--Termination of Marital Status.  --In said
action, although personal service was obtained in the action for separate
maintenance, and constructive service only was had in the divorce action, taking
into consideration all of the facts and circumstances, as well as the absence of
an attack on the divorce decree for fraud, the courts of this state were bound
to recognize the termination of the marital status prior to the rendition of the
judgment for separate maintenance, which judgment could have been legally
rendered only while the marital status continued, and it was proper to deny
recovery to plaintiff on said judgment.

COUNSEL: Joseph I. King for Appellant.

Barker & Keithly for Respondent.

JUDGES: YORK, P. J. Doran, J., and White, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: YORK

OPINION

    The facts are stated in the opinion of the court.

   YORK, P. J. -- This is an appeal from a judgment in favor of the respondent
in an action brought to recover money due on a foreign judgment, as well as an
appeal from an order denying motions to vacate the judgment and for a new trial.

   It appears from the record herein that the appellant, Marie K. Chirgwin, and
the respondent, Frederick H. Chirgwin, intermarried on June 30, 1929, in the
city of New York and were there living on December 11, 1933, when appellant
commenced an action against respondent for separate maintenance on the ground of
extreme cruelty, abandonment and failure to provide. The respondent was
personally served with process in said action in New York on December 11, 1933.
He failed to answer or appear therein, and left New York the next day, i. e.,
December 12, 1933. He became a resident of the state of Nevada some time prior
to December 25, 1933, and on February 5, 1934, filed in the state of Nevada an
action  for divorce against appellant on the ground of extreme cruelty.
Constructive service only was had upon appellant in the Nevada divorce action,
she failed to answer or appear thereon, and on March 13, 1934, a decree of
divorce was entered in the state of Nevada in favor of respondent, which
judgment actually became final on the same day. After due proceedings in the
separate maintenance action in New York a decree of judicial separation was
entered on April 16, 1934, which awarded to appellant the sum of $ 30 per week
for her support and maintenance and her costs of action. At no time did either
defendant in the New York action or in the Nevada action make any attempt to
have the respective judgments modified or set aside.

   The instant action was prosecuted in California in the name of an assignee of
appellant, to recover sums which she alleged had accrued under the New York
judgment, but during the course of this proceeding Marie K. Chirgwin was
substituted as party plaintiff, pursuant to a reassignment and an order of the
court. Appellant, said Marie K. Chirgwin, is still a resident of the state of
New York, and the respondent is now a resident of the state of California.

   In defense of this California action, respondent pleaded the Nevada divorce
decree as evidence of the prior termination of the marital relation and
therefore an absolute bar to the right of the New York court subsequently to
make any award in appellant's favor in the separate maintenance action.

   At the trial appellant rested her case entirely upon the New York judgment
and a written stipulation of facts filed herein; the trial court rendered its
judgment in favor of respondent, and upon this appeal appellant contends that
the said judgment is erroneous because (1) the trial court failed to give full
faith and credit to the New York judgment; and (2) the Nevada decree is
immaterial in that it is evidence only in a proceeding affecting the marital
relation between the parties, and the action at bar is not such a proceeding.

   Respondent urges that the Nevada decree of divorce absolutely terminated the
marital status of the parties hereto and that the New York judgment in the
separate maintenance action is unenforceable because of such prior termination
of the marital status.

     The right to separate maintenance without applying for a divorce "rests on
the fact that the relation of husband  and wife exists and a decree awarding
such maintenance contemplates the existence of the marital relation not only
when the decree is made but also during its life. It would seem to follow
therefore, that if the wife or husband should thereafter bring an action for
divorce, the decree in that action would be conclusive of the rights of the
parties, and if it contained no provision for support, it would necessarily
terminate the allowance therefor made in the action for separate maintenance."
(1 Cal. Jur. 1038, citing Simpson v. Simpson, 21 Cal. App. 150 [131 Pac. 99];
Cardinale v. Cardinale, 8 Cal. (2d) 762 [68 Pac. (2d) 351].)

   In the case of In re Ferry's Estate, 155 Misc. 198 [279 N. Y. Supp. 919, 921]
(1935), it is stated: "Under the full faith and credit clause of the Federal
Constitution (Art. IV, sec. 1) a state is not compelled to recognize a divorce
granted in another state without obtaining jurisdiction of the defendant, but in
accordance with its own public policy may recognize such a divorce. ( Haddock v.
Haddock, 201 U.S. 562 [26 Sup. Ct. 525, 50 L. Ed. 867, 5 Ann. Cas. 1].) . . .

   "The adjudged policy of this state has been to refuse to recognize as binding
a decree of divorce obtained in a court of a sister state, not the matrimonial
domicile, upon grounds insufficient for that purpose in this state, when the
divorced defendant resided in this state and was not personally served with
process and did not appear in the action. ( Hubbard v. Hubbard, 228 N. Y. 81, at
page 84, 85 [126 N. E. 508, 509], reciting Olmsted v. Olmsted, 190 N. Y. 458 [83
N. E. 569, 123 Am. St. Rep. 585], affirmed 216 U.S. 386 [30 Sup. Ct. 292, 54 L.
Ed. 530, 25 L. R. A. (N. S.) 1292] . . .; Winston v. Winston, 165 N. Y. 553 [59
N. E. 273]), and the reason for the stated policy of this state is its statutory
adoption of the rule that there may be of right but one sufficient cause, to
wit, adultery, for absolute divorce.

   "A judgment of a sister state cannot push its effect into another state to
the subversion of its laws and defeat of its policy ( People v. Baker , 76 N. Y.
78, 88 [32 Am. Rep. 274]) and also 'public policy will not permit us to give
effect, as against our own citizens, of a judgment affecting their marital
status, so obtained on grounds thought by us to be insufficient' ( Ball v. Cross
, 231 N. Y. 329, 331 [132 N. E. 106, 107, 39 A. L. R. 600])." See, also, Johnson
v. Johnson, 146 Misc. 93 [261 N. Y. Supp. 523] (1933).

     However, it is settled beyond dispute that a court of one state may, "upon
principles of comity, recognize and give effect as a dissolution of the marriage
relation to a divorce granted in another state, although not the matrimonial
domicile, to one who had a bona fide domicile in that state, upon constructive
or substituted service of process, notwithstanding that such divorce is not
within the protection of the full faith and credit provision. ( Haddock v.
Haddock, 201 U.S. 562 [26 Sup. Ct. 525, 50 L. Ed. 867, 5 Ann. Cas. 1]; DeBouchel
v. Candler, 296 Fed. 482; Hubbard v. Hubbard, 228 N. Y. 81 [126 N. E. 508]; Ball
v. Cross, 231 N. Y. 329 [132 N. E. 106, 39 A. L. R. 600]; In re Baker, 112 Misc.
295 [183 N. Y. Supp. 139].)" (39 A.  L. R. 616.)

   It was stated in the case of DeBouchel v. Candler, supra, 296 Fed. 482, 485,
referring to the full faith and credit provision of the Constitution: ". . . nor
is the provision applicable at all save to judgments rendered with jurisdiction,
which is the power to adjudge, and jurisdiction may be collaterally inquired
into. A fundamental principle to be regarded in determining jurisdiction is,
that judgments affecting purely personal rights must be founded on service
within the territorial jurisdiction of the court on the party to be affected,
but that judgments in rem -- that is, affecting a particular thing -- may be
rendered by a court having possession and just control of the thing, though the
persons interested in it are absent from the territorial jurisdiction and can be
notified only by service other than personal. A divorce, in some of its
incidents such as alimony, is in personam, but in its fixation of matrimonial
status it is substantially in rem. Having regard to these principles, the
following propositions are believed to be established, and, if recognized and
observed, will make a fair certainty as to the validity of a divorce decree in
states other than that where it is made: . . .

   "5. If either spouse removes to another state animo manendi, and acquires
there a domicile, a jurisdiction arises in such state, based on its interest in,
and right to fix, the matrimonial status of its new inhabitants, in virtue of
which it may decree such status. After such length of residence as it may fix,
and for such causes as it may allow, a divorce may be granted effective within
such state; but, if made on substituted service, and perhaps when on personal
service if in  evasion of the laws of another state, it is not entitled to full
faith and credit in other states, but will by comity be recognized, if not
detrimental to their policy or interests. . . .

   "7. The actual domicile of one party or the other in the state in which a
decree of divorce is granted being thus essential to the jurisdiction to make
it, whether such domicile in fact exists may be collaterally inquired into when
the decree is sought to be used in another state. If it clearly appears that
such domicile was lacking, the decree will be treated as a nullity, and the
status of the parties unaffected thereby.

   "8. The finding of the fact of domicile by the court making the decree raises
a presumption that it existed. After a lapse of time, and especially after the
rights of other persons have intervened on the faith of the decree, the clearest
and most satisfactory proof should be required to overcome the presumption."

   In the instant action the court found that the respondent "was a bona fide
resident of and was in good faith domiciled in said state of Nevada and in the
county of Washoe therein continuously for and during a period next prior to the
commencement of said last mentioned divorce action, longer than the period as to
which residence within said state was necessary and required to give said last
mentioned court jurisdiction of said divorce action . . ." It was also found
that appellant and respondent "separated prior to the commencement of said
divorce action and lived separate and apart thereafter; that said Marie K.
Chirgwin's treatment of and conduct toward said Frederick H. Chirgwin, in part
as hereinafter found, was such as that he was thereby and at all times during
the period of their separation and prior to the rendition of said decree of
divorce justified in living separate and apart from her (and he did so on such
account) and in acquiring as aforesaid a separate residence and domicile within
the state of Nevada and in taking, and that he did take to such separate
residence and domicile within said state of Nevada the marital status and res
resulting from his marriage with said Marie K. Chirgwin; and that said Marie K.
Chirgwin by such conduct on her part consented to have said marital status and
res and her interest therein and right to the continuance thereof passed upon,
determined and adjudicated by said court of the state of Nevada. . . . and that
said Marie K. Chirgwin was and is bound by said decree. . . .

    "That said purported New York decree is invalid and unenforceable as against
defendant and that said supreme court of the state of New York did not at the
time of the rendition of said decree have jurisdiction to render the same."

     This appeal is presented to this court upon a bill of exceptions and only a
portion of the evidence adduced at the trial is shown therein. Therefore, this
court is bound by the findings of fact made by the trial judge in so far as they
are consistent with the written stipulation of facts and such fragmentary
evidence as is contained in said bill of exceptions.

     As hereinbefore shown, this action on the New York judgment was brought in
the state of California, and the trial court found that said New York judgment
was invalid and unenforceable. In said action appellant asserted the validity of
the New York judgment, but made no attack on the Nevada decree except as to its
legal effect as shown upon its face. This court, therefore, is not concerned
with the status of either the New York judgment or the Nevada decree of divorce
in the states of Nevada or New York. There is nothing in the record which would
prevent the trial court from making any of the findings which were made, and the
trial court having found that respondent was justified in acquiring and that he
did so acquire a residence and domicile in the state of Nevada, it is apparent
that the requirements have been met which would entitle the Nevada decree of
divorce to recognition by the courts of California.

     Although personal service was obtained in the New York action and
constructive service only was had in the Nevada action, taking into
consideration all of the facts and circumstances as well as the absence of an
attack upon the Nevada decree by appellant for fraud, the courts of this state
are bound to recognize the termination of the marital status prior to the
rendition of the judgment in the New York action, which judgment could only be
rendered in favor of the wife against her husband, while he was still her
husband.

   Since it was found by the trial court that the marital status of the parties
was terminated by the Nevada decree of divorce prior to the rendition of the New
York judgment and that the New York court was therefore without jurisdiction to
render its judgment in the separate maintenance action, the  judgment appealed
from should be, and it is, affirmed. The order denying the motion to vacate the
judgment is also affirmed, and the appeal from the order denying motion for a
new trial is dismissed.

   Doran, J., and White, J., concurred.


                              91 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            KATHLEEN S. BAKER, Plaintiff and Appellant, v. FRANK E.
                        BAKER, Defendant and Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 21822

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                 Division Three

            233 Cal. App. 2d 569; 43 Cal. Rptr. 811; 1965 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1391


                                 April 13, 1965

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied May 13, 1965, and
Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court was Denied June 16,
1965.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of the City and
County of San Francisco.  Clarence W. Morris, Judge.

   Action and cross-action for divorce.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Grounds for Divorce--Wilful Desertion--Evidence.  --Though a wife's
initial absence from her husband was by consent, and hence not desertion (Civ.
Code, § 99), consent to separation is a revocable act and when the husband
sought in good faith to have his wife return to the family home, and she refused
without just cause, her refusal was deemed desertion. (Civ. Code, § 101.)

(2) Id.--Causes for Denying Divorce--Recrimination--When Doctrine not
Applicable.  --Where, after considering all the evidence, the trial court found
that each party had a cause of action for divorce, that the marriage had failed,
that there was no likelihood of reconciliation, and that continuance of the
marriage would involve serious hazard to the health of both parties and be a
deleterious influence on their minor child, the court properly exercised its
discretion by granting a divorce to each party.

(3) Id.--Grounds for Divorce--Wilful Desertion--Corroboration of Charge.  --In a
divorce action based on desertion, it is not necessary that all of the
complaining party's testimony concerning desertion be corroborated.

(4) Id.--Grounds for Divorce--Wilful Desertion--Corroboration of Charge.  --A
husband's testimony of the wife's wilful desertion was sufficiently corroborated
by her witness' testimony that the parties originally lived together in another
state and that she came to this state for a temporary visit, but remained here,
living first with her sister and later in an apartment while her husband resided
in the other state.

(5) Id.--Disposition of Property--Review--When Cause Will not Be Reversed.  --On
the granting of a divorce to both parties who stipulated to the extent and
nature of their community property, which was divided equally, though the
husband violated his fiduciary duties to the wife by failing to disclose the
full extent of the community property, the judgment need not be reversed, but
may be modified to permit equal division, where the court properly and justly
granted a divorce to each party.

COUNSEL: Llewellyn Johns and Gunnar G. Gunheim for Plaintiff and Appellant.

M. Mitchell Bourquin and William E. Boone for Defendant and Respondent.

JUDGES: Salsman, J.  Draper, P. J., and Devine, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: SALSMAN

OPINION

     Appellant Kathleen Baker filed a complaint for divorce on the ground of
extreme cruelty. Respondent Frank Baker answered and cross-complained for
desertion.

   After trial the court granted each party a divorce, allowed  alimony to
appellant, and divided the community property equally.

   Appellant alleges that the granting of a divorce to respondent was based on
insufficient evidence; that as a matter of law respondent had no cause of action
for divorce on the ground of desertion, and further that it was an abuse of
discretion to grant respondent a divorce.

   The parties were married in 1942.  While respondent was in the military
service they resided for a short time in Rhode Island.  After the war,
respondent obtained civilian employment which took the family to Seattle, later
to Bermuda, and finally to New Orleans.

   The evidence upon which appellant relied to establish her cause of action
based upon extreme cruelty was in sharp conflict.  We need not relate the
testimony of the parties on that issue.  It is sufficient to say that the trial
court accepted the testimony that supports appellant's charge, and that the
judgment awarding appellant a divorce finds sufficient support in the evidence.
It is necessary, however, to state the circumstances upon which respondent based
his cause of action for desertion, because it is that portion of the judgment to
which appellant earnestly objects.

   In 1958 the parties were living in New Orleans.  Respondent's employers
required him to attend a training school in Chicago.  The parties agreed that,
during respondent's absence, appellant would visit her sister in San Francisco.
Respondent expected to be in San Francisco in September of that year for Naval
Reserve duty.  It is undisputed that when appellant first came to San Francisco
she intended to return to respondent and their home in New Orleans.  After
appellant's arrival in San Francisco she became ill, and was unable to accompany
respondent to New Orleans when he returned to resume his employment.  Respondent
again came to San Francisco in December of 1958, but appellant refused to return
with him to their home, stating that something seemed wrong with their marriage
and that she wished to consult a psychiatrist.  Again in June 1959 respondent
came to California and asked appellant to return to New Orleans, but she refused
to do so.  There was also evidence that appellant thereafter persisted in her
refusal despite continued urging on the part of respondent that she return.

   The trial court found that ". . . defendant, during the earlier years of said
marriage, . . . did inflict grievous mental suffering upon . . ." appellant, but
was not guilty of such  conduct ". . . during the later years of the marriage
immediately preceding the separation." The  court also found that ". . . on or
about June 30, 1959"  appellant ". . . voluntarily and without cause, separated
herself from defendant and cross-complainant with the intention to desert and
abandon him, and ever since has continued to will fully [sic] and without cause
live separate and apart from him.  . . ."

   Appellant first seeks to argue that since the parties separated by consent,
and respondent testified he did not seek a reconciliation, there can be no
desertion. But the record shows only that respondent attempted to be careful in
his choice of language.  He declined to use the term "reconciliation" in his
testimony, because he did not believe that his wife's sojourn in San Francisco
constituted an actual severance of their marriage relationship.  His testimony
is clear, however, that he asked appellant many times to return to their home
and that she refused.   Although appellant's initial absence was by consent, and
hence not desertion ( Civ. Code, § 99), nevertheless consent to separation is a
revocable act, and when respondent sought in good faith to have appellant return
to the family home, and she refused without just cause, her refusal may be
deemed desertion. ( Civ. Code, § 101.) The evidence supports the trial court's
finding that appellant's continued absence after June 30, 1959, was accompanied
by an intent to desert her husband.

   Appellant's principal contention, stated in various ways in her brief, is
that respondent was not entitled to a divorce on the ground of desertion
because, at the time respondent claims his cause of action arose, appellant
possessed a valid cause of action for divorce on the ground of cruelty. There is
no merit in this contention.  It is true that, when one spouse has a matured
cause of action for desertion, that is, when the statutory period of one year
has elapsed, the deserting spouse cannot put the innocent spouse in default by
showing an offer to reconcile, refused by the innocent party, and thereby accrue
a cause of action for divorce based on desertion. The reason for this rule is
that reconciliation is regarded as condonation of the offense and condonation is
not compelled by the law.  (See Vosburg v. Vosburg, 136 Cal. 195, 204 [68 P.
694]; Benkert v. Benkert, 32 Cal. 467, 471; Meyer v. Meyer, 82 Cal.App. 313, 317
[255 P. 767]; Kenniston v. Kenniston 6 Cal.App. 657, 661-663 [92 P. 1037].)
Obviously this rule will not support by analogy the position contended for by
appellant.  Moreover, although the trial court found that appellant  had a valid
cause of action for divorce based upon cruelty, she did not separate from
respondent for that reason.  When she left New Orleans to visit her sister in
San Francisco, and respondent left to attend training school in Chicago, their
separation was a matter of convenience only, and not with the expectation that
either was to seek a divorce. Much later, however, appellant repeatedly refused
respondent's pleas to return to their home, and when this refusal persisted long
after the statutory period of one year had elapsed, it is clear that a cause of
action for desertion arose in respondent's behalf.

   Our law permits a spouse, who has a cause of action for divorce, to sue for
separate maintenance rather than for divorce. ( Civ. Code, § 137.) In Glaston v.
Glaston, 69 Cal.App.2d 787 [160 P.2d 45], the wife had adjudicated her cause of
action for separate maintenance under the laws of New York.  Nevertheless, that
judgment was held not to bar the husband's cause of action for divorce in
California based upon new grounds which arose after the wife had obtained her
judgment in New York.  To sustain appellant's contention here would be to hold
in effect that the spouse whose cause of action for divorce arose first could
thereafter prevent the other spouse from ever obtaining a cause of action for
divorce on any ground.  This is not the law.

     After consideration of all the evidence the trial court found that each
party had a cause of action against the other.  The court further found the
marriage had failed; that there was no likelihood of reconciliation or that the
marriage  could be saved, and that its continuance would involve serious hazard
to the health of both parties and be a deleterious influence upon their minor
child. Pursuant to these findings the trial court could exercise its discretion
and, applying the rules set forth in DeBurgh v. DeBurgh, 39 Cal.2d 858, 872-874
[250 P.2d 598], grant a divorce to each party.  (See also Phillips v. Phillips,
41 Cal.2d 869 [264 P.2d 926]; Mueller v. Mueller, 44 Cal.2d 527 [282 P.2d 869];
Gilmore v. Gilmore, 45 Cal.2d 142 [287 P.2d 769]; Hendricks v. Hendricks, 125
Cal.App.2d 239 [270 P.2d 80]; Thompson v. Thompson , 136 Cal.App.2d 539 [288
P.2d 832].) The evidence in the record fully supports the findings and clearly
demonstrates that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in granting each
party a divorce.

   Appellant also contends there was no corroboration of respondent's  testimony
as required by Civil Code section 130.   Of course it is unnecessary that all of
respondent's testimony be corroborated. Appellant concedes that here only slight
additional proof was necessary.  (See Ballard v. Ballard, 215 Cal.App.2d 79, 82
[29 Cal.Rptr. 803]; LeVanseler v. LeVanseler, 206 Cal.App.2d 611, 613 [24
Cal.Rptr. 206].)   Some corroboration is found in the testimony of appellant's
witness, which disclosed that the parties originally lived in New Orleans and
that appellant came to San Francisco for what was intended to be a temporary
visit, but continued to remain in San Francisco, living first with her sister
and later in an apartment, while respondent resided in New Orleans.  Moreover,
as said in Ruggles v. Ruggles, 43 Cal.2d 547, 549 [275 P.2d 42], "The
circumstances of the separation and the period of time during which the parties
lived apart, as disclosed by appellant's testimony, may be taken into
consideration as corroborative of respondent's statements." There was sufficient
corroboration here.

     Finally appellant advances a point on appeal which was not before the trial
court.  The parties stipulated concerning the extent and nature of the community
property and the court, upon the authority of DeBurgh, supra, divided the
property equally.  After judgment, however, it was discovered that respondent
had not a made a full disclosure of the community property. Appellant argues
that this was a fraud upon her and upon the court, and hence the judgment must
be reversed.

   It cannot be denied that respondent did violate his fiduciary duties to
appellant by failing to disclose the full extent of the community property. It
does not follow, however, that the judgment must be reversed.  We have recited
the court's findings concerning the marriage and its conclusive failure.  Our
review of the record convinces us that these findings are fully supported by the
evidence, and that the court properly and justly granted a divorce to each of
the parties.  Although respondent's testimony concerning the extent of the
community property was not true, it is unlikely that, for this reason alone, the
trial court would reject his entire testimony and grant a divorce only to
appellant.

   Respondent has consented that the judgment may be modified to provide for an
equal division of the community property. The total of the community property
undisclosed at trial is admitted to be $ 35,190.07.  The judgment is therefore
modified so as to award one-half of that amount to each of the  parties, and as
so modified the judgment is affirmed.

   Costs are awarded to appellant.


                              92 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           GERTRUDE E. PLUMMER, Petitioner, v. THE SUPERIOR COURT OF
            THE CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO et al., Respondents

                                S. F. No. 16661

                          Supreme Court of California

                20 Cal. 2d 158; 124 P.2d 5; 1942 Cal. LEXIS 257


                                 April 2, 1942

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Petitioner's Application for a Rehearing was Denied
April 30, 1942.  Edmonds, J., Voted for a Rehearing.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    PROCEEDING in mandamus to compel the Superior Court of the
City and County of San Francisco and I. L. Harris, Judge thereof, to hear and
determine a contempt proceeding.

COUNSEL: Albert Picard and Francis McCarty for Petitioner.

Phillip Barnett for Respondents.

JUDGES: In Bank. Carter, J.  Gibson, C. J., Shenk, J., Curtis, J., Houser, J.,
and Traynor, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: CARTER

OPINION

     Petitioner has applied for a writ of mandate to compel the respondent
superior court to hear and determine a contempt proceeding instituted by her
against her former husband.

   On October 19, 1937, petitioner commenced an action for divorce against her
husband, C. T. Plummer, and on the same day the parties entered into an
agreement providing for the settlement of their property rights, and for
stipulated monthly payments to be made by petitioner's husband to her for her
support and maintenance, and forever releasing him from any other claims.  The
agreement recited that the parties had separated about a month before.  It
provided that Plummer was to pay premiums on a life insurance policy in which
petitioner was to have rights "Until the remarriage of first party (petitioner)
. . .;" that the monthly payments were for support and maintenance of petitioner
and were to continue until she died or remarried; and that neither of the
parties should have any claim against  the other except as set forth in the
agreement and each releases the other from contributing to "her or his
maintenance as a wife or husband, as the case may be, during their natural lives
. . .;" that it is the intention of the parties to "forever adjust all property
rights growing out of said marriage, including the right to support and
maintenance." Nothing is expressly stated with reference to the agreement being
subject to the approval of the court, its being made a part of a divorce decree,
or that a divorce action was contemplated.  Petitioner alleged in her complaint
in the divorce action: "That prior to the commencement of this action, by a
written agreement, plaintiff and defendant settled and adjusted between
themselves their respective rights in and to all community property of said
marriage, which said settlement plaintiff hereby requests the court to approve
and confirm." She prayed for the approval and confirmation of the agreement.
The interlocutory decree of divorce entered on November 22, 1937, provided: "It
is further ordered, adjudged and decreed that that certain contract dated as of
the 19th day of October, 1937, a copy of which is annexed hereto and made a part
hereof, wherein the parties hereto agree upon a division of all of their
community property be and it is hereby ratified, approved and confirmed." The
final decree stated "that that certain contract dated as of the 19th day of
October, 1937, a copy of which is annexed to the Interlocutory Decree of Divorce
herein, wherein the parties hereto  agree upon a division of all of their
community property, be and it is hereby ratified, approved and confirmed."
Petitioner alleges in her petition and it is not denied that the agreement was
made in contemplation of divorce.

   Petitioner's husband failing to make the payments as provided in the
agreement, she instituted proceedings to have him declared in contempt for such
failure.  The court issued an order to show cause but dismissed the same at the
time fixed for hearing and refused to hear the same on the ground that it was
without jurisdiction because there was no order of the court that the payments
be made.  The issue presented is whether the provision for the monthly payments
for support of petitioner is merely a part of a contract between the parties and
enforceable only by ordinary contract remedies, or is an operative part of the
divorce decrees to the extent that it may be enforced by contempt proceedings.

   The problem was first presented for solution by an appellate court of this
state in Tripp v. Superior Court, 61 Cal. App. 64 [214 Pac. 252], where the
agreement was made after the divorce action was commenced and recited its
commencement and indicated that the agreement was subject to approval of the
court.  The property rights of the parties were put in issue by the pleadings.
The decree stated that the agreement was incorporated therein and it was then
set forth in the body of the decree. To the contention that the decree did not
order the making of the payments for which provision had been made in the
agreement, the court stated at page 67:

   "It is true that neither of the decrees contained such an order in express
terms, but we are nevertheless of the opinion that petitioner's contention
cannot be upheld.  The agreement recited the fact that a divorce action was
pending between the parties and contained a formal stipulation that it should be
subject to the approval of the court and that, when so approved, it should be
embodied in the decree in the divorce action. This stipulation surely
contemplated that the terms of the agreement, when it should be embodied in the
decree, should have the compelling power of the court behind its every covenant.
The court had full power to deal with the matters covered by the agreement and
to render its judgment thereon, at least to the extent of making proper
provision for the support and maintenance of the wife, provided that it were
first ascertained that petitioner was guilty of the charges made against him in
the divorce action. Notwithstanding this  power of the court, the parties
undertook to stipulate a decree as to property matters, subject under the law as
well as under the agreement to the approval of the court.  This approval was
evidenced by the fact that the agreement was incorporated in terms in both the
interlocutory and final decrees, preceded in each instance by the statement that
the agreement was made part of the decree. Under these circumstances we are
convinced that the terms of the agreement, except in so far as they were
executed either before or at the time of the interlocutory decree, became
enforceable as mandates of the court." That case was followed by Andrews v.
Superior  Court, 103 Cal. App. 360 [284 Pac. 494], where the agreement was made
after the divorce action was commenced; the complaint said nothing concerning
the agreement.  The decree provided that the agreement theretofore entered into
was made a part thereof.  The court held that was not sufficient to make the
agreement an enforceable part of the decree, stating at page 363:

   "Before proceeding further it is necessary to determine the legal effect or
force of that part of the interlocutory judgment complained of.  A close study
thereof shows only that a property settlement is made a part and portion of the
judgment.  The phrases 'heretofore entered into between plaintiff and
defendant,' 'and providing for payments to plaintiff of two hundred ($ 200.00)
dollars per month,' and 'and on file in this case,' clearly are matters only of
identification of a certain property settlement and in nowise state any order
for the payment of any sum.  The interlocutory judgment contains no order,
decree or judgment for the payment of any sum." In regard to the Tripp case the
court said at page 365:

   ". . . the court, after setting forth the property settlement in full in the
interlocutory judgment, ordered in said judgment 'that said plaintiff shall take
all of the community property as set forth in said property settlement and
agreement as aforesaid.' Therefore that case is not authority for the contention
that a mere incorporation by reference of a property settlement (not set forth
in any pleading) in an interlocutory judgment of divorce is equivalent to a
direct order for payment in accordance with such property settlement." Next was
Ex parte Weiler, 106 Cal. App. 485 [289 Pac. 645], in which the agreement was
made before the divorce action was commenced and said nothing about divorce
other than that it was to be referred to in and made a part of any divorce
judgment.  The complaint asked for an approval of the agreement, and the decree
approved it and made it "a part of this decree." The court held that the
agreement was enforceable as a part of the decree by contempt proceedings.  In
Schnerr v. Schnerr, 128 Cal. App. 363 [17 P. (2d) 749], the agreement was made
before the divorce action was commenced and contained no provision that it was
to be approved by the court or made a part of a divorce decree. The complaint
merely referred to an agreement having been made and the divorce decree approved
the agreement.  It was held not to be enforceable as part of the decree. In
Baxter v. Baxter, 3 Cal. App. (2d) 676 [40 P. (2d) 536], the agreement was made
the same day the action was commenced; it mentioned a possibility of divorce but
no suggestion of approval by the court appeared.  The complaint did not mention
the agreement; it was introduced as an exhibit.  The decree approved the
agreement and stated that it "is hereby . . . made a part of this . . . decree."
The court held that the agreement was not an enforceable part of the decree
stating at page 682:

   "Where a property settlement agreement contains a provision that it shall not
go into effect until it is approved by the court, and is therefore rather in the
nature of a stipulation of the parties than a final agreement, and the complaint
in a divorce action contains the proper allegations and prayer looking toward
the settlement of the property rights of the parties, an order of the court that
the terms of the contract be carried out will be implied from the incorporation
of the agreement in the decree, either bodily or by reference.  ( Tripp v.
Superior Court, 61 Cal. App. 64 [214 Pac. 252]; Ex parte Weiler, 106 Cal. App.
485 [289 Pac. 645]. But if the agreement is complete in itself, without
reference to action by the court, and the plaintiff does not ask for a property
settlement, the court does not, by merely approving the settlement or even by
incorporating it in the decree, order the performance of the contract." The
agreement in Petry v. Superior Court, 46 Cal. App. (2d) 756, 759 [116 P. (2d)
954], was made after the divorce was commenced, and it was introduced into
evidence at a default hearing and a request was made by the plaintiff that it be
incorporated into the decree. The decree expressly ordered the performance of
the agreement, but the court stated the rule to be:

   "The mere approval of a property settlement, with nothing further, is not
such an order.  ( Miller v. Superior   Court [3 Cal. App. (2d) 676  (40 P. (2d)
536)], supra; Schnerr v. Schnerr, 128 Cal. App. 363 [17 P. (2d) 749].) If an
agreement is complete in itself, without reference to action by the court, and
the plaintiff does not ask for a property  settlement, the court does not, by
merely approving the settlement, or even by incorporating it in the decree,
order the performance of the contract.  ( Andrews v. Superior Court, 103 Cal.
App. 360 [284 Pac. 494]; De Haven v. Superior Court, 114 Cal. App. 253 [300 Pac.
95].) On the other hand, where a property settlement agreement contains a
provision that it shall not go into effect until it is approved by the court,
and is therefore rather in the nature of a stipulation of the parties than a
final agreement, and the complaint in a divorce action contains the proper
allegations and prayer looking toward the settlement of the property rights of
the parties, an order of the court that the terms of the contract be carried out
will be implied from the incorporation of the agreement in the decree, either
bodily or by reference." In Miller v. Superior Court, 9 Cal. (2d) 733 [72 P.
(2d) 868],  an agreement was made prior to the institution of the divorce action
and contained a clause for monthly payments for maintenance.  The complaint
requested that the agreement be made a part of the decree; the decree approved
the agreement and ordered the payment of the money.  Finally, in an endeavor to
reconcile and rationalize the various rules theretofore announced, this court
set forth the controlling principles in Lazar v. Superior Court, 16 Cal. (2d)
617, 620 [107 P. (2d) 249], as follows:

   "If a property settlement agreement is complete in itself and is merely
referred to in a divorce decree or approved by the court but not actually made a
part of the decree, then the provisions of such agreement cannot be enforced by
contempt proceedings.  ( Baxter v. Baxter, 3 Cal. App. (2d) 676 [40 P. (2d) 536]
; Schnerr v. Schnerr, 128 Cal. App. 363 [17 P. (2d) 749].) On the other hand,
if, by the language of the agreement itself, it is shown that the intent was to
make the agreement a part of a future divorce decree and, if the agreement is
actually incorporated in the decree, then such provisions become a part of the
order of the court and may be enforced as such."  Whatever may have been the
rule before the Lazar case, it is now settled that in order to authorize the
enforcement of the provisions of a property settlement agreement by a contempt
proceeding, the court must order the performance of such provisions.

    Applying the foregoing rule to the case at bar we find that, even if it be
assumed that the agreement was so incorporated into the decree that an order for
compliance therewith could be implied, there is nothing in the agreement which
necessarily shows an intent to make it a part of a future divorce decree.
Nothing is said therein regarding the approval of the agreement by the court,
nor that it should become a part of a subsequent decree. The reference therein
to the payments being for maintenance and support, and a release of all other
claims for support are wholly consistent with the agreement being in view of
separation with no divorce involved.  The agreement is complete in itself.
However, the divorce decrees do not order or direct either party to do or
perform any act or carry out any provision or stipulation provided for in the
agreement.  The interlocutory decree simply by way of recital states that a copy
of the contract "annexed hereto and made a part hereof . . . is hereby ratified,
approved and confirmed." The final decree contains a similar recital.

   In the Lazar case, supra, certain provisions of the agreement were set forth
in the decree in haec verba following the words "It is ordered, adjudged and
decreed" that the acts provided for therein be performed.  In other words, the
court expressly ordered that such provisions be performed.  Such is not the case
here, and it cannot be said that it was the intention of either the parties or
the court that the provisions of the agreement be made a part of the decrees to
the extent they were reduced to a final mandatory judgment, ordering and
commanding the performance of certain acts, a failure to perform which would
constitute a contempt of court.

   The rights of the parties under a mandatory judgment whereby they may be
subjected to punishment as contemnors for a violation of its provisions, should
not rest upon implication or conjecture, but the language declaring such rights
or imposing burdens should be clear, specific and unequivocal so that the
parties may not be misled thereby.

   Situations may arise where a trial court may be disposed to approve a
property settlement agreement in a divorce action, and for the purpose of
identifying such agreement, cause the same to be annexed to the interlocutory
decree of divorce, but for obvious reasons would refrain from making a mandatory
order  that the parties be required to perform each and every provision of such
agreement or be subjected to a  charge of contempt of court for failure to do
so.  It is a matter of common knowledge that such agreements often contain
provisions which cannot be specifically enforced, and it would be idle for a
court to make a mandatory order directing the performance of such provisions.
In those cases where it is the intention of the parties and the court to have
certain provisions of such an agreement constitute a part of the decree or
judgment and made enforceable as such, the court may set forth such provisions
in the decree and provide therein that the same be performed.  This is the usual
practice and when it is followed all doubt as to the effect of such provisions
is removed.

   No such intention appears from the decrees in the case at bar, and we
therefore hold that the provisions of the agreement cannot be enforced by a
contempt proceeding.

   The peremptory writ of mandate prayed for is denied.


                              93 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          JAMES G. GRANNIS, Petitioner, v. SUPERIOR COURT OF THE CITY
               AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO, and JOHN HUNT, Judge,
                                  Respondents

                                 S. F. No. 4078

                          Supreme Court of California

                  146 Cal. 245; 79 P. 891; 1905 Cal. LEXIS 516


                                February 8, 1905

PRIOR-HISTORY:     PETITION for Writ of Prohibition to the Superior Court of the
City and County of San Francisco.  John Hunt, Judge.

COUNSEL: Galpin & Bolton, for Petitioner.

A. P. Van Duzer, for Respondents.

JUDGES: In Bank.  Shaw, J.  Angellotti, J., Van Dyke, J., Lorigan, J.,
McFarland, J., Henshaw, J., and Beatty, C. J., concurred.

OPINION BY: SHAW

OPINION

     This is a proceeding in prohibition to prevent the superior court of San
Francisco from acting upon a motion pending before it to modify a judgment.

    On June 25, 1903, an action for divorce, in which Amelia B. Grannis was
plaintiff and James G. Grannis was defendant, was regularly tried by the
superior court, and on July 1, 1903, said court rendered and entered its
judgment in said action purporting to grant an absolute and immediate divorce to
the plaintiff.  The decree as entered was signed by the judge, and the decree
proper was preceded by a recital that it appeared to the court "that all the
allegations contained in the plaintiff's complaint are true," except certain
facts not material.  There were other recitals which were equivalent to special
findings as to the amount of the community property and as to the children,
which are immaterial to the consideration of the present case.  The portion of
the entry constituting the judgment of divorce was as follows: --

   "It is now, therefore, ordered, adjudged and decreed as follows, to wit: That
the marriage between the plaintiff, Amelia B. Grannis, and the defendant, James
G. Grannis, be dissolved, and the same is hereby dissolved, and said parties
are, and each of them is, freed and absolutely released from the bonds of
matrimony existing between them, and all the obligations thereof." Other
provisions of the decree disposed of the property and the custody of the
children.

   Proceedings on appeal and motion for new trial having terminated without
effect, the plaintiff on August 31, 1904, more than a year after the judgment,
served on the defendant notice of a motion to set aside the portion of the
decree above quoted, on the ground that it was void, it being in form and effect
a final judgment of divorce instead of the interlocutory judgment prescribed by
the act of 1903.  In pursuance of this notice, plaintiff, on September 2, 1904,
presented the motion to the court,  and the court, against the defendant's
objections, declared its intention to determine said motion and to make an
order, to quote its own language, "that so much of said decree as awards to the
said plaintiff an absolute decree is hereby vacated and set aside; but said
decree, in so far as it may determine that the plaintiff is entitled to a
divorce, shall be in no way modified or affected by this order." The object of
the present proceeding is to prevent the superior court from making the order,
or from further proceeding in pursuance of the motion.

   The contention of the petitioner is, that the judgment entered  by the court
on July 1, 1903, was both in form and effect a judgment of absolute divorce, and
that as proceedings for new trial and on appeal have ended, and more than six
months had elapsed at the time proceedings on the motion were begun, the
superior court has no power to modify or vacate it.

   After proceedings to vacate or modify a judgment on motion for new trial, or
an appeal, or under section 473 of the Code of Civil Procedure, are ended, and
the time therefor has expired, the superior court has no power or authority to
vacate or modify its judgment in a matter of substance on account of judicial
error in the decision, no matter how apparent such error may be on the face of
the record.  Its power thereafter is limited to the correction of mere clerical
misprisions on the record, or to the excision of such parts of the record as
appear to be, or can be shown to be, void for lack of jurisdiction or power.  (
Egan v. Egan, 90 Cal. 15, 20; Jacks v. Baldez, 97 Cal. 91; Norton v. Atchison
etc. R. R. Co., 97 Cal. 390. 1) The modification proposed to be made herein is
not the correction of a clerical error, but goes to the substance and effect of
the judgment.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   33 Am.
St. Rep. 198.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Under these circumstances the superior court has no power to make the order
in question, unless the judgment proposed to be so modified is absolutely void
as a final judgment. When the judgment was rendered the court had jurisdiction
of the subject-matter in general and of the parties.  The general rule is, that,
under such circumstances, a judgment, however erroneous,  is not void. It must
be conceded that the court cannot make this order unless, by the legislation of
1903 (Stats. 1903, pp. 75, 76, 176) amending section 61 of the Civil Code and
adding thereto sections 131 and 132, the court is divested of power to enter a
final judgment granting a divorce until it has first entered an interlocutory
judgment declaring a party entitled to a divorce, and an interval of one year
has passed thereafter before such final judgment.

   The provisions of the code must be construed with a view to effect its
objects (Civ. Code, sec. 4), and when the language used is not entirely clear,
the court may, to determine the meaning, and in aid of the interpretation,
consider the spirit, intention, and purpose of a law, and to ascertain such
object and purpose may look into contemporaneous and prior legislation on the
same subject and the external and historical facts and conditions which led to
its enactment.  (26 Am. & Eng. Ency. of Law, 601, 602, 603, 623-624, 632.)

   The institution of marriage is an important feature of civilization, and its
preservation is essential to the maintenance of organized society.  As was said
in Deyoe v. Superior   Court, 140 Cal. 482, 1 "In every civilized country
marriage is recognized as the most important relation in life, and one in which
the state is vitally interested.  . . . The well-recognized public policy
relating to marriage is to foster and protect it, to make it a permanent and
public institution, to encourage parties to live together, and to prevent
separation and illicit unions." Owing to the strength of human passions and the
weakness of human nature the regulation and preservation of the institution of
marriage and the prevention of the abuse of the right of divorce have always
been one of the most difficult problems of government.  It has been considered
essential to the promotion of happiness and the good order of society to provide
that for certain offenses against marital rights the innocent party could, under
fixed restrictions, have the marriage dissolved by judicial decree. But it has
been found that this right is often abused; that by collusion and fraud, by
fabricated testimony, or by the exaggeration of trifling offenses, divorces are
obtained which should not have been granted; that when the procedure is easy and
speedy slight causes are magnified and made the pretext for hasty divorces, and
that too frequently actions for divorce are not prompted by the necessity of
relief from marriage bonds which, by the fault of the other party, have become
the cause of misery and suffering, but are inspired by a desire to become free
from the old obligations in order to make a new alliance.  It has also been
found that in some cases difficult complications occur, arising from divorced
persons contracting a subsequent marriage before the judgment of divorce became
final by the expiration of the time within which an appeal could be taken.  To
prevent or mitigate these evils it has always been the legislative policy to
make many restrictions in the procedure in divorce cases which are not
applicable in ordinary actions.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   98 Am.
St. Rep. 73.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    In continuation of this policy the legislature in 1897 amended section 61 of
the Civil Code so as to provide that a marriage contracted by a divorced person
during the life of the former spouse, and within one year after the time of the
judgment in divorce, should be illegal and void. (Stats. 1897, p. 34.)
Immediately it was contended that this law was of no effect beyond the confines
of the state, and that marriages solemnized during the year after the divorce
within another state or territory, which were valid by the laws of such state or
territory, must be recognized as valid in this state.  Numerous attempts thus to
evade the law were made, and much difference of opinion existed as to the
legality of such marriages, until finally, in August, 1902, it was decided by
this court that such marriages were valid in this state, and the question was
thus settled.  ( Estate of Wood, 137 Cal. 130.) Thereupon the act of 1897 became
practically a dead letter.  All who wished to enter into another marriage within
the year easily accomplished their purpose and evaded the law by a short journey
beyond the borders of the state.

   At its next ensuing session the legislature passed the acts making a second
amendment to section 61, and adding the new sections as above mentioned.  By the
last amendment to section 61 it was provided, with respect to a second marriage
to a different person during the life of a former spouse,  that "In no case can
a marriage of either of the parties during the life of the other be valid in
this state, if contracted within one year after the entry of an interlocutory
decree in a proceeding for a divorce." The new sections 131 and 132 are as
follows: --

   "131.  In actions for divorce the court must file its decision and
conclusions of law as in other cases, and if it determines that no divorce shall
be granted, final judgment must thereupon be entered accordingly.  If it
determines that the divorce ought to be granted an interlocutory judgment must
be entered, declaring that the party in whose favor the court decides is
entitled to a divorce, and from such interlocutory judgment an appeal may be
taken within six months after its entry, in the same manner and with like effect
as if the judgment were final.

   "132.  When one year has expired after the entry of such interlocutory
judgment, the court on motion of either party,  or upon its own motion, may
enter the final judgment granting the divorce, and such final judgment shall
restore them to the status of single persons, and permit either to marry after
the entry thereof; and such other and further relief as may be necessary to
complete disposition of the action; but if any appeal is taken from the
interlocutory  judgment or motion for a new trial made, final judgment shall not
be entered until such motion or appeal has been finally disposed of, nor then,
if the motion has been granted or judgment reversed.  The death of either party
after the entry of the interlocutory judgment does not impair the power of the
court to enter final judgment as hereinbefore provided; but such entry shall not
validate any marriage contracted by either party before the entry of such final
judgment, nor constitute any defense of any criminal prosecution made against
either."

   The manifest purpose of these several amendments was to avoid the effect of
the decision in Estate of Wood, 137 Cal. 130, by going a step further than the
law of 1897.  That law simply prohibited a remarriage within one year, and made
such marriage illegal and void, if made within this state, but it did not affect
the procedure in an action for a divorce nor the validity or effect of a
judgment therein.  The law of 1903 acts upon the proceeding and upon the
judgment, and secures the same period of delay as the former act,  by providing
for a delay in the entry of final judgment dissolving the marriage for at least
one year after the trial and interlocutory judgment in the action.  It thus
presents the same obstacle to speedy divorces, the same opportunity for
reflection and reconciliation, and the same check to collusion and fraud, and in
the mean time it effectually prevents a subsequent marriage with another person
by the simple provision that the former marriage, during the interval, shall
remain undissolved.  The ultimate object, of course, was to reach and mitigate
the same evils to which the act of 1897 was directed.

   For a time after this act took effect there was some difference of opinion
among the judges of the superior courts with respect to its validity, several of
them holding it unconstitutional and granting what purported to be immediate
final judgments of divorce in disregard of its provisions.  The question was
settled in favor of the validity of the law by this  court in Deyoe v. Superior
Court, 140 Cal. 482. 1 In the mean time, however, a number of so-called final
judgments had been entered, among them the one here involved.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   98 Am.
St. Rep. 73.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    It is obvious that the entire purpose of this legislation will be
practically defeated if the law receives a construction which will enable the
courts at the request, or with the consent, express or implied, of the parties,
or either of them, to give final judgment immediately upon the trial, and
without a previous interlocutory judgment. In order to reach this conclusion the
law must be held to be merely directory in this respect and the disregard of it
a mere error not affecting its validity except upon appeal, or in some form of
direct attack.  The departure from the prescribed order of proceeding, with the
consent or acquiescence of the parties, must be considered as an irregularity
which is waived, and the giving of an immediate final judgment held an error,
which, whether expressly waived or not, can be effectively cured and the
judgment placed beyond attack, by the mere failure to appeal.  Persons seeking
or submitting to a divorce for the purpose of entering into another marriage, or
in collusion for any improper purpose, will request, consent to, or acquiesce in
an immediate final judgment, many cases will occur in which it will seem a
harmless deviation from the strict course of procedure, the matter will seem
unimportant, and the desire or request of the parties, or the seeming
necessities of exceptional cases, will prevail, and final judgments will be
immediately given.  It will soon become customary.  The evil-disposed persons,
against whom alone the law is directed, will be the ones who will avail
themselves of this opportunity to evade its true intent and purpose.

   In view of these considerations we think that, if it is reasonably possible,
the terms of the act should receive a construction calculated to make its object
and purpose secure, and which will make it impossible for either party to
contract another lawful marriage within a year from the time of the trial and
interlocutory judgment. The language is clearly susceptible of this
construction, and the object and purpose to be accomplished make it necessary to
reject any other construction.  It declares that "if it [the court] determines
that the divorce ought to be granted an interlocutory judgment must  be entered"
(sec. 131) and further that "when one year has expired after the entry of such
interlocutory judgment the court . . . may enter the final judgment granting the
divorce, and such final judgment shall restore them to the status of single
persons," and that if an appeal is taken from the interlocutory judgment, or a
motion for a new trial is made, "final judgment shall not be entered until such
appeal or motion has been finally disposed of" (sec. 132), and by section 61 a
subsequent marriage is made void if contracted within the year after the
interlocutory judgment. These provisions, interpreted in the light of the
previous legislation and decisions and the purpose to be accomplished by the
law, are clearly to be understood as a limitation on the power of the court in
the matter, and as intended to forbid the entry of a final judgment until after
the prescribed period.  The law can only be made effectual for the
accomplishment of its object by holding that any final judgment purporting to
grant the divorce is absolutely void if thus prematurely entered.

   This conclusion receives additional support from a consideration of the
nature of a proceeding for a divorce, and of the recognized public policy on the
subject.  The parties to such an action have not the right to control procedure
as in other actions.  The  court is not bound by admissions in the pleadings nor
by the stipulations of the parties, nor is its inquiry as to the facts limited
by the pleadings.  (7 Ency. of Plead. & Prac., 88, 121.) Nor can a divorce be
granted solely upon the testimony or admissions of the parties.  (Civ. Code,
sec. 130; 9 Am. & Eng. Ency. of Law, 845.) The state is interested in the
matter.  In Deyoe v. Superior Court, 140 Cal. 482, 1 it is said: "While an
action to obtain a decree dissolving the relation of husband and wife is
nominally an action between two parties, the state, because of its interest in
maintaining the same unless good cause for its dissolution exists, is an
interested party.  It has been said by eminent writers upon the subject that
such an action is really a triangular proceeding in which the husband and wife
and the state are parties." (See, also, McBlain v. McBlain, 77 Cal. 507; Warner
v. Warner, 100 Cal. 11; Hatton v. Hatton, 136 Cal. 356; Newman v. Freitas, 129
Cal. 292; 1 Nelson on Divorce,  secs. 1, 7, pp. 2, 17.) The rule in actions
affecting property that the parties interested may control the disposition of
the interests involved, and that the judgment of the court will be made to
conform to such dispositions, when ascertained, has no application to divorce
cases.  Hence it follows that in such cases there can be no effectual waiver by
the parties of any restriction established by law for the benefit of the public
or for the protection of the interest which the state has in the preservation
and permanence of the marriage relation.  The provision forbidding the granting
of a divorce solely upon the admission, stipulation, or testimony of the parties
goes to the sufficiency of the proof, which is not ordinarily disclosed upon the
record.  A disregard of this provision cannot be made to appear of record except
upon appeal, and for this reason it cannot be made the subject of inquiry upon
any collateral attack. But on appeal, where such disregard appears, it is always
held to be an act beyond the power of the court to do, or of the parties to
sanction, and absolutely void. The restriction now under consideration is of
such a nature that a disregard of it must always be apparent upon the face of
the record, and, consequently, the lack of power in the court will appear in
every case upon an inspection of the record alone.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   98 Am.
St. Rep. 73.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The rule invoked by the petitioner, taken in connection with the construction
we have given to the act, would put the premature entry of final judgment of
divorce in the class of errors which can always be reached on collateral attack.
Tallman v. McCarty, 11 Wis. 406, cited and relied on by petitioner, state the
rule as favorably to him as any case that can be found.  The law of Wisconsin
provided that in partition suits there should be an interlocutory judgment
declaring the interests of the parties, that commissioners to make partition
were then to be appointed, and upon the confirmation of their report the court
was authorized to render a final judgment of partition. Commissioners were
appointed and final judgment rendered in accordance with their report, but there
had been no interlocutory judgment. On collateral attack in the above case the
court held the judgment valid and said: "No order which a court is empowered,
under any circumstances, in the course of a proceeding over which it had
jurisdiction, to make, can be treated as a nullity merely because it was made
improvidently,  or in a manner not warranted by law, or the previous state of
the case.  The only question in such a case is, had the court or tribunal the
power, under any circumstances, to make the order or perform the act?  If this
be answered in the affirmative, then its decision upon those circumstances
becomes final and conclusive, until reversed by a direct proceeding for that
purpose." The italics are our own.  It is to be observed that no question of
public policy was there involved, and that the public had no particular interest
in the decision of the case, nor was there anything in the statute governing the
procedure in that case which could be construed as a restriction upon the
ordinary powers of the court.  In a partition suit the parties could agree as to
their respective interests, could waive an interlocutory judgment and consent to
the immediate appointment of commissioners, or even to an immediate final
judgment, without any preliminary proceedings at all, without in any respect
contravening public policy or transgressing restrictions made to protect the
interests of society.  The law in question in this case, as we have construed
it, is a limitation upon the power of the court with respect to the
subject-matter, so that the court shall not be competent to grant a final
divorce at any time during the year succeeding the interlocutory judgment, and
so as to require that the interlocutory judgment be first entered.  The parties
could not waive these proceedings, nor invest power in the court by their
consent or acquiescence.  The purpose of the statute is to provide that in any
event and under all circumstances there shall be an interval of one year after
the party is declared to be entitled to a divorce before it can become absolute.
The question above stated cannot here be affirmatively answered.  There can be
no state of facts which will give the court power to enter final judgment
immediately.  Hence, upon the face of the record, and as a matter of law, the
final judgment in question is, as a final judgment, without actual or possible
authority, and is therefore necessarily void.

   The cases holding judgments valid on collateral attack, although they may be
necessarily founded upon an erroneous view of the law, are none of them cases in
which the law which the court mistook was the law  which vested the jurisdiction
or power over the subject-matter in the court.  So far as they  are cases
involving jurisdiction of this class at all they are confined to instances where
the jurisdiction over the subject-matter is by law made to depend on the
preliminary determination of a question of fact.  In that event a determination
of the court rendering the judgment that the facts which give the jurisdiction
exist is conclusive in all collateral inquiries.  ( Farmers and Merchants' Bank
v. Board, 97 Cal. 328; In re Grove Street, 61 Cal. 438; Cahill v. Superior Court
, 145 Cal. 42.) But where the question upon which the jurisdiction depends is
one of law purely the jurisdiction over the subject-matter is always open to
collateral inquiry.  ( In re Grove Street, 61 Cal. 438; Arroyo D. and W. Co. v.
Superior Court, 92 Cal. 52; 1 Cahill v. Superior Court, 145 Cal. 42.) Mr.
Freeman says: "When a tribunal has not jurisdiction over the subject-matter, no
averment can supply the defect; no amount of proof can alter the case.  As power
over the subject-matter is given by law, nothing but an additional grant from
the legislative authority can extend that power over a class of cases formerly
excepted." (1 Freeman on Judgments, sec. 120.) And also, "If a court grants
relief, which under no circumstances it has any authority to grant, its judgment
is to that extent void." (Ibid., sec. 120c.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   27 Am.
St. Rep. 91.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   It is contended that the law, if thus construed, would be unconstitutional.
The constitution, it is said, confers upon the superior court full jurisdiction
of actions for divorce, and the effect of this law would be to arrest the
exercise of this jurisdiction, and suspend further action for one year, and if
it can do this for one year, it must have power to suspend its action
indefinitely, or absolutely, and for an unlimited time, and, if such power
exists, the legislature may thus practically destroy or divest the jurisdiction
given by the constitution.  If it were necessary to the validity of this act to
hold that the legislature has power to suspend absolutely the functions of the
superior court the argument might have weight.  We do not consider it necessary.
It is sufficient to hold that the legislature has power to make reasonable
regulations as to the proceedings by which the jurisdiction in such cases is
exercised, and to prescribe the terms and conditions on which a divorce may be
granted, and that in view of the subject-matter and purpose of the act, a
provision for the postponement  of final judgment for one year and a suspension
of the power of the court to enter such judgment in the mean time, is not an
unreasonable regulation of the procedure, and is within the legislative power to
prescribe, as a condition necessary to the existence of the right to a divorce.
The right to a divorce is subject to the legislative will, and exists only by
legislative grant.  The change in the method made by this law affects only the
procedure and the right of the parties to an immediate divorce, and does not
take jurisdiction from the court.  The right to a divorce, not being inherent or
constitutional, but statutory, the legislature could repeal the law and thus
effectually prevent the granting of any divorces, or it could suspend the right
for any number of years after the beginning of the action, without affecting the
jurisdiction of the court.  The legislature has complete control of the subject
and may impose whatever restrictions or delays it pleases either in regard to
the time for beginning the action, or the method and order of procedure after
the action is begun.  The grant of jurisdiction means only that such limited
rights of divorce as the legislature provides are cognizable in the superior
court under such system of procedure, and subject to such restrictions as may
from time to time be established.

   The judgment in question, being wholly void as a final judgment granting an
immediate divorce, it was within the power of the superior court at any time, on
motion of either party, or of its own motion, to declare it null, in so far as
it purported to be of such effect.  ( People v. Davis, 143 Cal. 675; People v.
Temple, 103 Cal. 453.)

   It is urged that "the greater contains the less" (Civ. Code, sec. 3536), and
hence that, as the judgment in question necessarily determines that the
plaintiff is entitled to a divorce, it is therefore valid to that extent as an
interlocutory judgment under the statute, and that the court should not vacate
it, but should regard it as valid to that extent, and, the year having expired,
should now enter a final judgment. Cases are cited to the effect that a judgment
for too much, or in excess of the power of the court, is not wholly void, but is
void only in so far as it is beyond the jurisdiction.  ( Anderson v. Parker, 6
Cal. 201; Ex parte Rosenheim, 83 Cal. 388; People v. Brown, 113 Cal. 35.) For
the purposes of this decision this  may be conceded.  There are strong reasons
in support of the proposition.  If the order proposed to be entered by the
superior court in pursuance of the motion was as far-reaching as the motion and
purported to set aside the judgment for all purposes, it would be necessary to
decide the question.  It does not go so far.  It purports only to vacate "so
much of the decree as awards to the said plaintiff an absolute divorce," and
expressly declares that, "in so far as it may determine that the plaintiff is
entitled to a divorce," the judgment is neither to be modified nor affected by
the order.  The proposed order is therefore strictly within the power of the
superior court, and the writ of prohibition should not be issued.

   The petition is denied.


                              94 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             MERLE L. CARR, Appellant, v. EDNA J. CARR, Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 5903

            Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District

            165 Cal. App. 2d 568; 332 P.2d 185; 1958 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      1327


                               November 26, 1958

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied December 12, 1958,
and Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court was Denied January
21, 1959.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from an order of the Superior Court of Riverside County
denying motion to set aside provisions of interlocutory judgment, final judgment
awarding alimony and later orders pertaining to alimony.  John G. Gabbert,
Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Alimony--Where Divorce Granted for Wife's Offense.  --A court has
no jurisdiction or power to award alimony to a wife when the husband obtains a
divorce from her on the grounds of cruelty, and a husband cannot be compelled,
under Civ. Code, § 139, to pay alimony to a guilty wife.

(2) Id.--Alimony--Divorce Granted to Both Parties.  --If a divorce is granted to
both parties, alimony may be granted to either, since the basis for alimony is
the granting of a divorce against the person required to pay it.

(3) Id.--Alimony--Where Divorce Granted for Wife's Offense.  --A court has
jurisdiction to award alimony to a wife despite the fact that the divorce is
awarded to the husband where it is provided by separate agreement that the
husband will pay alimony or support money to the wife in settlement of their
obligations to each other growing out of their marital relationship, for the
purpose of avoiding all litigation and contention, and to adjust the same
amicably and finally as between themselves, such agreement being confirmed by
the court and recited in the decree.

(4) Id.--Alimony--Where Divorce Granted for Wife's Offense.  --In a divorce
action in which the husband was granted a divorce on the grounds of cruelty, the
court had jurisdiction and power to award the wife permanent alimony where the
parties had entered into a property settlement agreement supplemented on the
same date by a stipulation that provided that the divorce decree should provide
for alimony in a certain amount to be paid for a specified time to the wife.

(5) Husband and Wife--Transactions Inter Se--Property Settlement Agreements.
--A stipulation or amendment to a property settlement agreement, under which the
wife agreed not to contest the divorce, if a divorce were awarded to the husband
the decree should grant alimony in a certain amount to the wife, was supported
by valid consideration where there was no collusion between the parties in
reference to obtaining the divorce and both claimed they had a just cause of
action for divorce.

(6) Id.--Transactions Inter Se--Property Settlement Agreements.  --The
compromise of a disputed claim or default right is a sufficient foundation for a
property settlement agreement between husband and wife.

(7) Id.--Transactions Inter Se--Particular Contracts.  --A wife has a right to
enter into a compromise agreement with her husband pending an action for
separate maintenance and while her rights are still finally undetermined, and
such an agreement is valid, although the court ultimately grants the husband a
divorce.

(8) Contracts--Consideration--Compromise of Claim.  --A doubtful right is
sufficient consideration for a contract, although it turns out afterwards that
the right was on the other side.

(9a) (9b) Divorce--Alimony--Modification of Allowance.  --There was no material
variation between a stipulation or amendment to a property settlement agreement
providing for the payment of a certain sum as alimony on the first of each month
and an order providing that such sum was to be paid in two installments on the
10th and 25th of each month, where the agreement itself provided for
modification of the support provisions, and the court acted consistently on the
provisions for support as severable from the provisions for division of the
general community property.

(10) Id.--Alimony--Modification of Allowance.  --Where a property settlement
agreement itself provides for modification of the support provisions, the court
can modify it unless the support is integrated with the property division.

(11) Id.--Judgment--Collateral Attack.  --Where there is error in awarding
alimony in an interlocutory decree for lack of power or jurisdiction, and it is
not urged by a timely appeal, or motion for relief under Code Civ. Proc., § 473,
it may be attacked at any time if void, and if such error appears on the face of
the record.

(12) Appeal--Decisions Appealable--Order Refusing to Vacate Judgment or Order.
--Ordinarily, where there is a right of appeal from a judgment or order, a party
cannot take an appeal from a subsequent order denying a motion to vacate the
judgment or order complained of, under such circumstances that the motion merely
calls on the court to repeat or overrule the former ruling on the same facts.

(13) Divorce -- Counsel Fees -- Pending Appeal.  -- The appellate court will not
award a wife suit costs where she did not appeal from an order by the lower
court denying her application for such costs in that court; a request for
attorney's fees for services rendered on appeal in a divorce action should
ordinarily be addressed to the trial court.

COUNSEL: Louise C. Barry for Appellant.

Clayson, Stark & Rothrock and Victor A. Gables for Respondent.

JUDGES: Griffin, P. J.  Shepard, J., and Coughlin, J. pro tem., * concurred.

*   Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: GRIFFIN

OPINION

     An interlocutory judgment of divorce was granted to plaintiff husband (on
the grounds of cruelty).  The court approved a property settlement agreement
executed by the parties in October, 1948, and ordered disposition of the
community property according to the terms of the agreement.  It also provided
for the payment of $ 100 per  month alimony to defendant in accordance with the
terms of a stipulation of the parties executed October 19, 1948.  Final judgment
ordering performance of the executory provisions of the interlocutory decree was
filed November 4, 1949.  On plaintiff's application on February 6, 1950, the
court modified the order for alimony, reducing it to $ 80 per month commencing
February 10, 1950.  On February 15, 1951, the court filed its order adjudging
plaintiff in contempt for failure to pay accumulated alimony or support to
defendant, totaling $ 200.  It also denied plaintiff's countermotion to
terminate alimony or support payments.  On May 29, 1952, a similar contempt
order was issued for failure to pay $ 560 alimony in arrears.  On August 13,
1952, it denied a second motion to terminate alimony payments.  On October 8,
1957, plaintiff filed a motion to modify the interlocutory and final judgments
pertaining to alimony and vacate the later judgments in reference thereto, and
on November 18, 1957, said motion was denied.  This appeal is from the order
denying plaintiff's motion to vacate the award of alimony in the interlocutory
judgment of October 21, 1948, the final decree of November 3, 1949, and all
later orders or judgments pertaining to alimony.

     The main contention of the plaintiff on this appeal is that the court had
no jurisdiction or power to award alimony  to the wife when the husband obtained
a divorce from her on the grounds of cruelty, and that a husband cannot be
compelled under section 139 of the Civil Code to pay alimony to a guilty wife.
There is adequate authority for this general proposition of law.  ( Harper v.
Carpenter, 24 Cal.App.2d Supp. 751 [67 P.2d 762]; Harwell v. Harwell, 26
Cal.App.2d 143 [78 P.2d 1167].)  Some modification of this rule is noted in De
Burgh v. De Burgh, 39 Cal.2d 858 [250 P.2d 598], where it is held that if a
divorce is granted to both parties alimony may be awarded to either, for the
basis of liability for alimony is the granting of a divorce against the person
required to pay it.

     A different rule prevails where it is provided by separate agreement that
the husband will pay alimony or support money to the wife in settlement of their
obligations to each other growing out of their marital relation and for the
purpose of avoiding all litigation and contention, and to adjust the same
amicably and finally as between themselves where such agreement is confirmed by
the court and recited in the decree. ( Remondino v. Remondino, 41 Cal.App.2d 208
[106 P.2d 437]; McKinney v.  McKinney, 152 Kan. 372 [103 P.2d 793].) See also
Wilson v. Wilson, 140 Me. 250 [36 A.2d 774, 775], where it is said (quoting from
Stratton v. Stratton, 77 Me. 373, 377 [52 Am.Rep. 779]):

   "'But the court, being invested with jurisdiction in reference to alimony,
there is nothing whereby parties are prohibited from entering into a proper
agreement in reference thereto, or the court from rendering judgment in
accordance with the agreement of the parties, which they have seen fit to make,
as in other cases.  . . .

   "'And by this, it should not be understood that we mean to hold that the
consent of parties can give the court jurisdiction of the subject matter in
controversy, where no jurisdiction has been conferred upon it by the
legislature.  But that when the court has jurisdiction of the general subject
matter in controversy, -- "power to adjudge concerning the general question
involved," . . . then the consent of the parties may authorize the court to
render a valid judgment, in accordance with such agreement.'"

   And further, at page 775 [36 A.2d]: "It is difficult to conceive of more
compelling particular circumstances justifying the employment of the exception
to the general rule than when, with the parties before the Court, there is a
noncollusive, court-approved agreement as to alimony, perhaps then acceded  to
by the husband because he believes that it is only fair and just  that following
the separation she have such support, which he is willing to provide, and
especially when she may have no other means due to age, poor health, or some
other cause.  She may believe she could prevail in a contest, but desists in
reliance upon his valid promise.  He obtains his divorce. Afterwards he breaks
his word.  Should the Court shield him in such a reprehensible act and deny her
the agreed-upon subsistence, because he obtained his divorce for her fault?"

   See also Fox v. Fox, 42 Cal.2d 49 [265 P.2d 881]; Dexter v. Dexter, 42 Cal.2d
36 [265 P.2d 873]; and Howarth v. Howarth, 81 Cal.App.2d 266 [183 P.2d 670].

     The record shows plaintiff filed his action for divorce and the parties
entered into negotiations for the purpose of obtaining an amicable settlement of
their differences.  The marriage could not be saved.  A bitter and expensive
divorce litigation was avoided when the parties finally arrived at a settlement
and agreed upon their respective rights to property, support and maintenance. As
the result of these negotiations, a property settlement agreement and
stipulation amending said agreement with respect to the question of support,
were both executed by the parties on October 19, 1948.  That is the date of the
agreement and it reads in part as follows:

   "Whereas, marital differences have caused the parties to separate and it is
their desire and intent to live separate and apart from each other permanently
and to effect a full and final settlement of their respective rights of property
and to support and maintenance, each from the other . . .

   "Whereas, each party is acting herein freely and deliberately and with the
aid and advice of separate counsel;

   "Now, Therefore, in consideration of the respective covenants and promises .
. . said parties covenant, promise and agree as follows:"

   The husband quitclaimed his interest in certain real property unto his wife,
subject to a deed of trust, plus furniture, etc., a certain small deposit in the
bank, and nominal bonds.  Plaintiff received a 1947 Ford coupe and a certificate
of interest in a life insurance policy.  It was agreed that each party pay his
or her own attorney's fees.  Then contained in the general quitclaim and release
clause is the following expression:

   ". . . except as in this instrument otherwise stipulated,"  each party
releases the other from support "granted by law, and to alimony, suit money or
attorney's fees in any action for . . . divorce commenced or prosecuted by
either party . . ."

   Apparently this agreement was signed by both parties, as well as by their
attorneys.  Defendant contends it was signed by them and their counsel on the
same day and in connection therewith, and as a material part thereof, they also
signed a written stipulation which is in evidence and reads in part as follows:

   "It is stipulated . . .

   "1. Any decree of divorce granted to plaintiff herein shall contain a
provision approving the Property Settlement Agreement entered into between said
parties on or about October 19, 1948, a copy of which is filed in this action.

   "2. The said decree of divorce shall further provide that plaintiff pay to
defendant as alimony, the sum of One Hundred ($ 100) Dollars per month beginning
November 1, 1948; said payments to continue until such time as defendant shall
remarry, or until further order of the court." And that:

   "In consideration of said stipulation, the defendant Edna J. Carr appears in
the above entitled action, waives time to plead to plaintiff's complaint and she
further stipulates that this action may be heard at any time convenient to the
court, as a default matter."

   Plaintiff now contends he signed the stipulation the day after he signed the
property settlement agreement, although it is dated October 19, 1948.  On
October  19th defendant wrote a letter to a depositary authorizing him to
deliver the enclosed agreement and stipulation duly signed by her to plaintiff's
counsel when plaintiff executed the quitclaim deed to the property assigned to
her and after he had collected "Fifty Dollars ($ 50)" representing alimony for
the last one-half of October at the rate of $ 100 per month.  She said it was
her understanding that Mr. Carr would obtain his decree of divorce without
contest by her, when these conditions were fulfilled. Apparently these
conditions were fulfilled and thereafter plaintiff obtained a decree reciting
that the property settlement agreement of the parties executed on "October 19,
1948, filed herein, is approved" and that plaintiff is ordered to pay defendant
alimony in the sum of $ 100 per month, payable on the 10th and 25th of each
month commencing on November 10, 1948, and to continue until the remarriage of
the defendant "or the further order of this court." This order was in accordance
with the written stipulation  filed therein prior to the time of the making of
the order.  The court examined the property settlement agreement and
stipulation, both dated October 19th.  It did not set forth the agreement in
haec verba in the decree, but approved in general terms "the property settlement
agreement of the parties executed by them on October 19, 1948, filed herein." It
becomes apparent that the court was also approving the stipulation as an
amendment to and as a part of that agreement.

   At one of the hearings on October 18, 1957, defendant testified at the time
of the negotiations leading up to the property settlement agreement it was her
understanding that she had grounds for a divorce and a right to obtain one, and
at that time it was her intention to seek alimony or the right to support from
Mr. Carr; that she considered the agreement and stipulation entered into as
binding upon them; that she conditionally forwarded these documents to plaintiff
for acceptance or disapproval and he accepted them; that he relied upon the
decree, remarried, abided by the terms of the order for several years, and
recognized the judgment for alimony by endeavoring to have it modified on
several occasions; that he was successful in reducing said amount to $ 80 per
month but failed in his attempt to set aside the judgment and some of the orders
here under consideration on the same grounds as here contended; and that no
appeal was taken from those orders.  There was considerable showing that
defendant is in serious ailing health and in need of money to support her, and
that plaintiff is able to pay the amount required by the support order.

   Although the original property settlement agreement did contain a clause
waiving the right to alimony or support money, it is quite apparent from the
record that this agreement was not acceptable to defendant unless it contained
some provision for her support.  Accordingly, it was thus amended and adopted by
plaintiff as such.

   Plaintiff's prior pleadings on a "Motion to Vacate the Order to Show Cause Re
Contempt Proceedings and to Terminate Order Requiring Alimony," alleged that "On
the 19th day of October, 1948, defendant Edna J. Carr entered into a Property
Settlement Agreement with plaintiff, approved by her counsel, supplemented on
the same date by a 'Stipulation, Appearance and Waiver' entered into between
plaintiff and defendant and approved by their respective counsel, providing as
follows: . . .  The intent of said Stipulation, amending the  Property
Settlement Agreement, was to provide support for defendant. . . ."

   The trial court, in the instant proceedings, so found and also found that the
stipulation was incorporated into said main agreement.  This finding has
evidentiary support, and the court had jurisdiction and power to enter the order
contained in the interlocutory and final decrees.

     Plaintiff further argues that the stipulation or amendment was not a valid
or enforceable agreement because it had no valid consideration to support it,
citing  Bishop v. Bishop (Mo.App., 1942), 162 S.W.2d 332; Loveren v. Loveren,
106 Cal. 509 [39 P. 801]; and sections 1607, 1667, 3513 and 3539, Civil Code.
We see no merit to this claim.  It does not appear that there was any collusion
between the parties in reference to obtaining the divorce. For all that appears,
both parties claimed they had a just cause of action for divorce. The agreement
and stipulation, in respect to the property rights and support, did not depend
on the outcome of the divorce action but if one was granted to plaintiff it
should provide for her support in the amount named and for the period provided.
The compromise of a disputed claim or default right has always been regarded as
a sufficient foundation for an agreement.  ( Silver v. Shemanski, 89 Cal.App.2d
520, 531 [201 P.2d 418]; Craft v. Craft, 49 Cal.2d 189, 192 [316 P.2d 345].)
In Bennett v. Bennett, 219 Cal. 153 [25 P.2d 426], it was held that a wife has a
right to enter into a compromise agreement with her husband pending an action
for separate maintenance and while her rights are still finally undetermined,
and such an agreement is valid, although the court ultimately grants the husband
a divorce; and that a doubtful right is sufficient consideration for a contract,
even though it afterwards turns out the right was on the other side.

   It is also contended that the stipulation was not a contract and no part of
the original agreement, citing Goldstein v. Goldsmith, 276 N.Y.S. 861; Gaudio v.
Gaudio, 138 Cal.App. 289 [32 P.2d 156]; Johnson v. Superior Court, 128 Cal.App.
584 [17 P.2d 1055]; and Marrs v. Superior Court, 137 Cal.App. 579 [30 P.2d 1030]
. As heretofore said, and as the court found, the stipulation modified the terms
of the written agreement to the extent that the court was authorized to award
support money under it.  ( Main Street etc. Co. v. Los Angeles Traction Co., 129
Cal. 301 [61 P. 937].)

     There is no material variation between the order and the agreement as to
the dates when the alimony should be  paid.   Where the agreement itself
provided for modification of the support provisions, the court can modify it
unless the support is integrated with the property division.  ( Adams v. Adams,
29 Cal.2d 621 [177 P.2d 265]; DeLeshe v. DeLeshe, 80 Cal.App.2d 517 [181 P.2d
931].)   Apparently the parties have accepted the power of the court to modify
the support provisions and the court has acted consistently upon the provisions
for support as severable from the provisions for division of the general
community property.

   Finally, defendant argues that plaintiff should be estopped from now
questioning the interlocutory decree, final decree and subsequent orders on the
ground that such decrees and orders have become final and are res judicata on
the appeal before us.   It is true that where there is error in awarding alimony
in an interlocutory decree for lack of power or jurisdiction, and it is not
urged by a timely appeal, or motion for relief under section 473 of the Code of
Civil Procedure, it may be attacked at any time if void, and where such error
appears on the face of the record.  ( Craft v. Craft, 49 Cal.2d 189 [316 P.2d
345].) Under the findings and conclusions here reached the interlocutory
judgment became final, as well as the orders subsequently made, which plaintiff
attempts to reach on this appeal from the order refusing to vacate them.
Ordinarily, where there is a right of appeal from a judgment or order, a party
cannot take an appeal from a subsequent order denying a motion to vacate the
judgment or order complained of, under such circumstances that the motion merely
calls upon the court to repeat or overrule the former ruling on the same facts.
(3 Cal.Jur.2d, p. 490, § 57; 49 C.J.S. p. 559, § 306.)

   It might well appear that plaintiff could have appealed from the
interlocutory and final decrees and failed to do so; that he subsequently
recognized their validity and made payments under them; that he subsequently
attacked their validity on the same grounds without success, and without appeal;
and that he subsequently secured a reduction in the amount of alimony. This may
have been sufficient to terminate these proceedings.  However, on the merits of
the case, we are convinced that the order from which this appeal has been taken
should be affirmed.  ( Hough v. Hough, 26 Cal.2d 605 [160 P.2d 15].)

     Defendant claims that this court should award her suit costs because she
believed the trial court erred in its reasons for denying her application for
such costs in that  court.  Apparently she did not appeal from that order.  A
request for attorney's fees for services rendered on appeal in a divorce action
should ordinarily be addressed to the trial court.  ( Craft v. Craft, supra, p.
194.)

   Order denying motion to set aside provisions of interlocutory decree and
final decree awarding alimony, and later orders pertaining to alimony are
affirmed.


                              95 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          DOLORES L. HARLEY, Plaintiff, Cross-defendant and Appellant,
              v. EARL B. WHITMORE, as Sheriff, etc., Defendant and
          Respondent; BLANCHE J. STILLER, Defendant, Cross-complainant
                                 and Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 22801

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

            242 Cal. App. 2d 461; 51 Cal. Rptr. 468; 1966 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1144


                                  May 25, 1966

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of San Mateo
County.  W. Howard Hartley, Judge.

   Action to enjoin defendants from causing the sale of, or offering to sell
property allegedly subject to a valid homestead.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Homesteads--Declaration--Declaration by Wife.  --A wife's declaration of
homestead which fails to state that her husband has not made a prior homestead
declaration and that she is doing so for their joint benefit is fatally
defective.

(2) Id.--Declaration--Declaration by Wife.  --A homestead declaration should be
liberally construed, and a wife's failure to expressly state that a homestead is
for the joint benefit of herself and her husband does not invalidate a
declaration complying with all other requirements of Civ. Code, § 1263, and
containing statements clearly implying that she acts for her husband as well as
herself.

(3) Id.--Declaration--Declaration by Wife.  --Where a wife had obtained neither
an interlocutory nor a final decree of divorce when she made a declaration of
homestead, she was not the head of a family and had no alternative but to file a
declaration required of a wife under Civ. Code, § 1263.

(4) Id.--Declaration--Declaration by Wife.  --A wife who has separated from her
husband and who had filed a complaint for divorce but had not yet obtained an
interlocutory divorce decree did not have the right to declare a homestead as a
person other than the head of a family rather than as a wife as required by Civ.
Code, § 1263.

(5) Id.--Persons Entitled--Married Persons.  --Civ. Code, §§ 1300-1302,
establish that a married person cannot declare a homestead in a manner other
than that specified in Civ. Code, § 1263, unless a decree of separate
maintenance or an interlocutory decree of divorce was entered and the spouse
makes the declaration either on his or her separate property or on property
awarded to him or her by such decree.

(6) Id.--Declaration--Declaration by Wife.  --A wife was not entitled to declare
a married person's homestead as head of a family or otherwise on property in her
name and her husband's name before she obtained a decree of separate maintenance
or an interlocutory divorce decree, and the trial court correctly found that her
declaration of homestead without compliance with Civ. Code, § 1263, was invalid.


(7) Divorce--Disposition of Property--Finality of Decree Determining Property
Rights--Interlocutory Decree.  --Though an interlocutory divorce decree should
not purport to make an immediate disposition of the parties' property, the
divorce court has jurisdiction to render such a decree and where no appeal is
taken from the decree and it becomes final, it is a conclusive adjudication and
is res judicata with respect to awards of community property.

(8) Id.--Disposition of Property--Finality of Decree Determining Property Rights
--Interlocutory Decree.  --Where a husband did not appeal from an interlocutory
divorce decree awarding community property to his wife and the decree became
final prior to entry of a default judgment against the husband, the trial court
erred in finding that on entry of the judgment the husband and wife were joint
owners of the property. Though the husband initially refused to comply with the
court's directive to execute documents to carry out the property award, his
failure to comply could not place him, or a creditor claiming through him, in
any better position.

(9) Id.--Disposition of Property--Rights of Third Parties.  --A husband and wife
take community property distributed under a divorce decree subject to prior
liens and community debts not reduced to liens.

(10) Id.--Disposition of Property--Rights of Third Parties.  --Though community
debts are not defined by statute or decision, liability of community property is
not limited to debts incurred for the material benefit of the community, and
when the phrase is used to denote the debts enforceable against community
property awarded to a former wife under a divorce decree, such debts would
appear to encompass all debts that the husband incurred during marriage.

(11) Id.--Disposition of Property--Rights of Third Parties.  --Where a judgment
against a former husband was based on a promissory note executed by him during
marriage as security for a personal loan, the judgment constituted a lien
against community property awarded to his wife to the extent that the judgment
did not exceed the equity that the wife and her former husband had in the
property on the date of entry of the divorce decree making the award to the
wife.

COUNSEL: E. C. Mahoney for Plaintiff, Cross-defendant and Appellant.

No appearance for Defendant and Respondent.

Gerald R. Barrick for Defendant, Cross-complainant and Respondent.

JUDGES: Shoemaker, P. J.  Agee, J., and Taylor, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: SHOEMAKER

OPINION

     This is an appeal from a judgment declaring plaintiff's declaration of
homestead void, dissolving the temporary restraining order, and declaring that
the execution sale of the subject property by defendant Stiller might proceed.

   Plaintiff Dolores Harley, in this action for injunction and other relief,
alleged that she was the owner of certain residential property in San Mateo
County and was in possession of same; that she was married to defendant Robert
Harley but had separated from him, and had commenced an action for divorce on
October 18, 1962; that she and her minor son had thereafter continued to occupy
the said premises and on December 21, 1962, she had filed with the Recorder of
San Mateo County her declaration of homestead on said premises; that plaintiff
had never abandoned or terminated said homestead and that the same was still in
full force and effect; that title to the property homesteaded by her stood in
the names of plaintiff and defendant Robert Harley, as joint tenants, but was
actually community property; that on July 17, 1963, plaintiff obtained an
interlocutory decree of divorce which awarded her said property and directed
defendant Robert Harley to execute a deed conveying his interest therein to
plaintiff; that he had ever since refused to execute such conveyance, although
an order to show cause why he should not do so was still pending in the superior
court; that on September 20, 1963, defendant Robert Harley allowed his mother,
defendant Blanche Stiller, to take a default judgment against him; that
plaintiff was also a defendant in said action but that it was never brought to
trial against her; that on November 14, 1963, defendant Stiller, in her capacity
as a  judgment creditor of defendant Robert Harley, caused a writ of execution
to issue, and on November 18, 1963, the defendant Sheriff of San Mateo County
levied said writ upon the premises homesteaded by plaintiff; that the Stiller
judgment was not obtained in a case falling within the classes enumerated in
Civil Code, section 1241, and that defendant Stiller had not applied to the
superior court for the appointment of appraisers, as required under Civil Code,
section 1245; that defendant sheriff had nevertheless advertised said property
for sale on February 13, 1964, and unless enjoined, would proceed to sell such
property to satisfy the Stiller judgment.

   Plaintiff prayed for a temporary restraining order and a permanent injunction
prohibiting defendants and their agents from causing the premises in question to
be sold or offered for sale, and terminating the interest of defendant Robert
Harley in said property.

   Defendant sheriff answered, admitting the levy of a writ of execution upon
the property and notice of sale thereunder.  He alleged his acting in his
official capacity and requested the court's instructions.

   Defendant Robert Harley answered, admitting that he and plaintiff were
married, that she had commenced an action for divorce, and that she and her
minor son had continued to occupy the premises in question subsequent to the
parties' separation.  He denied the remaining allegations of the complaint.

   Defendant Stiller also answered, admitting obtaining the judgment alleged and
causing a writ of execution to be levied upon the property in controversy.  She
also admitted that the judgment in her favor was not obtained in a case falling
within the classes enumerated in Civil Code, section 1241, and that she had not
applied for the appointment of appraisers, as required under Civil Code, section
1245.  She further admitted that plaintiff was the owner of the property in
question but affirmatively alleged that plaintiff owned the property as a joint
tenant with defendant Robert Harley.  With regard to the remaining allegations
of the complaint, defendant Stiller alleged that she was without sufficient
information upon which to form a belief and on this basis denied all said
allegations.

    By way of cross-complaint, defendant Stiller alleged that on September 20,
1963, she had obtained a money judgment in the amount of $ 1,645.43 against
defendant Robert Harley; that on September 26, 1963, an abstract of said
judgment was filed with the Recorder of San Mateo County; that the declaration
of homestead filed by plaintiff did not comply with Civil Code, section 1263, in
certain specified particulars, and she prayed for a judgment declaring that
plaintiff's declaration of homestead was null and void and that
cross-complainant was entitled to execute upon the property subject to such
declaration.

   In her answer to the cross-complaint, plaintiff denied that her husband had
any interest in the property or that her declaration of homestead was invalid.

   Prior to the commencement of the hearing, a show cause order which had been
issued against Robert Harley in the divorce action was upheld by the District
Court of Appeal, 1 and he executed a deed releasing his interest in said
property to plaintiff.  The instant action was then dismissed as against him.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Robert
Harley had petitioned the District Court of Appeal for a writ of prohibition
commanding the trial court in the divorce action to desist from proceeding
further in certain contempt proceedings arising from his failure to comply with
an order for plaintiff's support.  The appellate court rejected his contention
that the California divorce decree could be collaterally attacked by a prior
Nevada judgment of divorce and, on April 20, 1964, denied his petition.  (
Harley v. Superior Court, 226 Cal.App.2d 432 [38 Cal.Rptr. 72].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    At the trial, the deed from Robert Harley to plaintiff and the declaration
of homestead recorded by plaintiff were admitted into evidence.  No oral
evidence was introduced, but counsel for defendant and cross-complainant Stiller
stipulated that all of the allegations of the complaint were true except for the
allegation that plaintiff's declaration of homestead was valid and the
allegation that the property in controversy was owned by plaintiff only and was
not the joint tenancy property of herself and Robert Harley.  The case was
submitted for decision upon this stipulation, the pleadings, the two documentary
exhibits and the court records of the action brought by cross-complainant
Stiller and the divorce action between plaintiff and Robert Harley.

   The trial court found that on September 26, 1963, plaintiff and Robert Harley
were the owners in joint tenancy of the property in controversy; that on
December 21, 1962, plaintiff had recorded a declaration of homestead upon said
premises, but that said declaration did not comply with Civil Code, section 1263
, in that it failed to state her husband's name, failed to state that no former
declaration had been made, and failed to state that the homestead declaration
was for the benefit of herself and her husband; that by reason of these
omissions, no valid homestead was created; that cross-complainant Stiller was
awarded a money judgment and on September 26, 1963, caused an abstract of said
judgment to be recorded in San Mateo County; that cross-complainant also caused
an execution to be issued, but that defendant sheriff was temporarily enjoined
from selling the real property owned by plaintiff and her husband; that all of
the facts alleged in the cross-complaint were true, except as to those items
specified and modified, and that all of the facts alleged in the complaint were
false, except as to those allegations which were not in conflict with the
allegations of the cross-complaint.

   The court concluded that on September 26, 1963, Robert Harley had an interest
as a joint tenant with plaintiff in the property subject of the action; that the
declaration of homestead previously recorded by plaintiff was void; that the
abstract of judgment which cross-complainant caused to be recorded on September
26, 1963, constituted a valid lien upon Robert Harley's interest in the subject
property.

   Plaintiff contends that the court erred in three particulars: (1) in finding
that her declaration of homestead was invalid;  (2) in finding that Robert
Harley had any interest in the property in question on September 26, 1963; and
(3) in declaring that cross-complainant Stiller, who was not a bona fide
creditor of Robert Harley, might cause the property to be sold under a writ of
execution.

   The answer to plaintiff's first contention is found in the following
provisions of the Civil Code.

   Section 1263 provides in pertinent part that "The declaration of homestead
must contain: 1. A statement showing that the person making it is the head of a
family, and if the claimant is married, the name of the spouse; or, when the
declaration is made by the wife, showing that her husband has not made such
declaration and that she therefore makes the declaration for their joint benefit
. . ."

   Section 1261 provides in part that "The phrase 'head of a family,' as used in
this title, includes within its meaning: 1. The husband, when the claimant is a
married person. 2. Every person who has residing on the premises with him or
her, and under his or her care and maintenance, either: (a) His or her minor
child .  . ."

   Section 1266 provides that "Any person other than the head of a family, in
the selection of a homestead, must execute and acknowledge, in the same manner
as a grant of real property is acknowledged, a 'declaration of homestead.'"

    Plaintiff's declaration of homestead stated that she was the head of a
family; that she was married; that her minor son was residing with her and under
her care and maintenance on the premises sought to the homesteaded; that her
family consisted of her son and herself; and that no former declaration of
homestead had been made.

   Plaintiff tacitly concedes that her declaration did not fulfill the statutory
requirements applicable to a declaration filed by a wife.   It is well
established that a wife's declaration which fails to state that her husband has
not made a prior declaration of homestead and that she is doing so for their
joint benefit is fatally defective.  ( Strangman v. Duke (1956) 140 Cal.App.2d
185, 189 [295 P.2d 12]; Schuler-Knox Co. v. Smith (1943) 62 Cal.App.2d 86, 98
[144 P.2d 47].)

     It is true that a homestead declaration should be liberally construed and
that a wife's failure to expressly state that the homestead is for the joint
benefit of herself and her husband does not invalidate a declaration which
complies with all the other requirements of section 1263 and which contains
statements clearly implying that the wife is acting for her husband as well as
herself.  ( Johnson v. Brauner (1955) 131 Cal.App.2d 713 [281 P.2d 50].)

   However, the statements of plaintiff's declaration not only fail to imply
that she was acting for the joint benefit of herself and her husband but, to the
contrary, clearly negate any such inference.  Although plaintiff did state that
she was married, she did not give her husband's name and described herself as
the head of a family consisting solely of herself and her minor son. By omitting
her husband's name and failing to list him as a member of the family to be
benefited by the homestead, plaintiff indicated that she was not acting on his
behalf but only on behalf of herself and her son.  Although her declaration did
contain a blanket statement to the effect that no former declaration had been
made, it is not clear whether plaintiff was undertaking to speak for herself
alone or for her husband as well.  In view of the overall tenor of the
declaration,  it would appear most reasonable to assume that plaintiff was not
speaking for her husband, to whom no prior reference had been made, and that her
declaration thus failed to state that her husband had not made a former
declaration of homestead.

   Plaintiff argues that since she was separated from her husband when the
declaration was made, had filed a complaint for divorce and had obtained from
the court in which said action  was pending an order awarding her temporary
custody of her minor son and temporary possession of the  family home, she was
not required to file a homestead declaration for the joint benefit of herself
and her husband, but was entitled to file such declaration in her own right as
the head of a family.  She also asserts for the first time in her reply brief
that if she did not qualify as the head of a family, her declaration should be
deemed to have been made under section 1266, by "[any] person other than the
head of a family."

     Plaintiff's contention that she qualified as the head of a family is
obviously without merit, since section 1261 expressly provides that when the
homestead claimant is married, the husband is the head of the family.  Since
plaintiff had obtained neither an interlocutory nor a final decree of divorce
when her declaration was made, she was not the head of a family and had no
alternative but to file the type of declaration required of a wife under section
1263.

     Plaintiff's belated claim that she was entitled to declare a homestead as a
"person other than the head of a family" rather than as a wife is similarly
untenable.  McGaffey v. Sudowitz (1961) 189 Cal.App.2d 215 [10 Cal.Rptr. 862],
upon which she relies, is readily distinguishable, since in that case, the
homestead declaration which was held to be valid under section 1266 was filed by
a wife who had first obtained an interlocutory decree of divorce awarding her
the property subject of the homestead. The court concluded that she could not
have filed a wife's declaration, under section 1263, unless she claimed the
homestead for the benefit of her husband and herself and thereby surrendered the
property rights granted her by the divorce decree. The court went on to hold
that the homestead legislation, when properly construed, required a wife to file
on behalf of the family only during coverture and that after the entry of an
interlocutory decree of divorce, she assumed, for homestead purposes, the status
of a single person.  In the instant case, plaintiff obviously had not assumed
such status at the time her declaration was filed.

   Although neither side has made any mention of the fact, certain 1959 statutes
pertaining to a married person's separate homestead make it abundantly clear
that a husband or wife who merely separates from his or her spouse and files a
complaint for divorce does not thereby obtain the right to declare a homestead
in a manner other than that specified in section 1263.

     Civil Code, section 1300, provides that following the entry of a decree of
separate maintenance or an interlocutory decree of divorce, each spouse may
declare a married person's separate homestead from his or her separate property
or from property awarded to him or her by such decree. Section 1301 specifically
requires that there be included in the declaration a statement that there is in
existence a decree of separate maintenance or an interlocutory decree of divorce
between the declarant and his or her spouse. Section 1302 provides that a
married person declaring such a separate homestead may qualify as the head of a
family and receive an exemption on that basis if the declarant has residing with
him or her and under his or her care and maintenance a minor child or one or
more of the other persons enumerated in section 1261.

     These sections establish that a married person cannot declare a homestead
in a manner other than that specified in section 1263 unless a decree of
separate maintenance or an interlocutory decree of divorce has been entered and
the spouse makes the homestead declaration either upon property which is his or
her separate property or which was awarded to him or her by such decree.  In the
instant case, plaintiff's declaration of homestead was made at a time when she
had not yet obtained a decree of separate maintenance or an interlocutory decree
of divorce. In addition, her declaration was made upon property which stood in
the names of herself and her husband and which had not yet been awarded to her.
It follows that said declaration did not entitle her to a married person's
homestead as the head of a family or otherwise.  Since she also failed to comply
with the applicable requirements of section 1263, the trial court was correct in
finding that her declaration of homestead was invalid.

   Plaintiff claims that the trial court erred in finding that her husband had
any interest in the property in question on September 26, 1963, when
cross-complainant Stiller's abstract of judgment was recorded. Plaintiff
properly points out that the interlocutory decree of divorce was entered on July
18, 1963, and that the Stiller judgment was not entered until September 20,
1963.  She asserts that since the interlocutory decree purported to make an
immediate division of the community property and awarded the property subject of
this action to her, it effectively divested her husband, and all creditors
claiming through him, of any interest in the property.

   Cross-complainant Stiller attempts to meet this argument by asserting that
the divorce court ought not to have made an  immediate disposition of property
in the interlocutory decree and that such disposition cannot be held to have
become effective until the entry of the final decree. Since the final decree was
not entered until after the Stiller judgment had been entered and the abstract
of such judgment recorded, she asserts that plaintiff took the property subject
to the lien of that judgment.

    An examination of the record in the divorce action reveals that the
interlocutory decree, which was rendered on July 17, 1963, and entered on July
18, 1963, did undertake to make an immediate disposition of the property subject
to this action.  The court found such property to be community property (as
alleged by plaintiff and admitted by her husband), awarded it to plaintiff and
directed that the parties should execute forthwith whatever documents were
necessary to carry out the award.   Although cross-complainant Stiller is
correct in asserting that an interlocutory decree of divorce should not purport
to make an immediate disposition of property ( Gudelj v. Gudelj (1953) 41 Cal.2d
202, 214 [259 P.2d 656]), it is settled that a divorce court does have
jurisdiction to render such a decree and that if it does so and said decree is
not appealed and becomes final, it is a conclusive adjudication and is res
judicata with respect to awards of community property. ( Leupe v. Leupe (1942)
21 Cal.2d 145, 147-150 [130 P.2d 697]; Darter v. Magnussen (1959) 172 Cal.App.2d
714, 717-718 [342 P.2d 528].)

     Plaintiff's husband did not appeal from the interlocutory decree of
divorce, and the same had already become final and conclusive prior to the entry
of the Stiller judgment.  Under such circumstances, the trial court erred in
finding that on September 26, 1963, plaintiff and her husband were the owners in
joint tenancy of the property in controversy.  The interlocutory decree awarding
said property to plaintiff was res judicata and clearly divested her husband of
all interest therein.  Although cross-complainant Stiller places some reliance
upon the fact that plaintiff's husband initially refused to comply with the
divorce court's directive that he immediately execute whatever documents were
necessary to carry out the property award, his failure to comply with the lawful
mandate of said court could not place him, or a creditor claiming through him,
in any better position.

   Although the trial court did not reach this question, it must be noted that
cross-complainant Stiller's right to execute upon the property in controversy is
not necessarily incompatible  with the existence of the interlocutory decree
which finally adjudicated that said property was awarded to plaintiff.   Where
community property is divided under a divorce decree, the former husband and
wife each take the part awarded subject to prior liens and to community debts
not reduced to liens.  ( Mayberry v. Whittier (1904) 144 Cal. 322, 325 [78 P.
16]; Greene v. Wilson (1962) 208 Cal.App.2d 852, 856 [25 Cal.Rptr. 630].) In the
instant case, the Stiller judgment did not constitute a prior lien upon the
property awarded to plaintiff.  Hence Stiller would not be entitled to execute
upon said property unless  her judgment against plaintiff's husband was for a
community debt.

     The phrase "community debts" is not defined either by statute or decision
in this state.  (See Wilson v. Wilson (1948) 33 Cal.2d 107, 110-111 [199 P.2d
671].) However, it has been held that under the California system, the liability
of community property is not limited to debts incurred "'"for the material
benefit of the community"'" and that the phrase "community debts," if so
defined, is not appropriate in this state.  ( Grolemund v. Cafferata (1941) 17
Cal.2d 679, 688 [111 P.2d 641].) When the phrase is used to denote those debts
which are enforceable against community property which has been awarded to a
former wife under a divorce decree,  it would appear to encompass all debts
which the husband incurred during marriage. ( Vest v. Superior Court (1956) 140
Cal.App.2d 91, 95 [294 P.2d 988]; Ryan v. Souza (1957) 155 Cal.App.2d 213, 215
[317 P.2d 655].)

     The record of the action which cross-complainant Stiller brought against
plaintiff's husband shows that the judgment therein was based upon a promissory
note which he had executed on June 15, 1960, as security for a personal loan in
the amount of $ 2,000.  The judgment was in the total amount of $ 1,645.43 and
consisted of the unpaid principal due under the note; interest on said sum from
the date of demand; attorney's fees, as provided for in the note; and costs.

   Since the record in the divorce action reveals that plaintiff and her husband
were married on October 28, 1952, it is apparent that the Stiller judgment was
for a debt which he incurred during marriage. Under these circumstances, the
Stiller judgment constitutes a lien against the property subject of this action
to the extent that said judgment does not exceed the equity which plaintiff and
her husband had in the property on the date the interlocutory decree of divorce
was entered.  (See Ryan v. Souza, supra, at pp. 215-216.)

    Plaintiff's third and final contention that cross-complainant Stiller was
not a bona fide creditor of Robert Harley is based upon the bald assertion that
he allowed the default judgment to be rendered against him in order "to help his
mother collect a debt" by executing upon plaintiff's home.  It suffices to point
out that since plaintiff offered no evidence on this point, the record furnishes
no support whatever for a finding that plaintiff's husband was not acting in
good faith.

   The trial court is directed to strike its finding that on September 26, 1963,
plaintiff and Robert Harley were the owners in joint tenancy of the property
subject of this action, and in place thereof to find that on September 26, 1963,
the property subject of this action was plaintiff's separate property; further,
that the trial court modify its judgment to provide that cross-complainant
Stiller may satisfy her judgment by execution sale of said property only to the
extent that her judgment does not exceed the equity which plaintiff and Robert
Harley had in the property on July 18, 1963.  The judgment, as so modified, is
affirmed.


                              96 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              DORIS CARMICHAEL, Plaintiff and Respondent, v. FRANK
                      CARMICHAEL, Defendant and Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 10482

            Court of Appeal of California, Third Appellate District

            216 Cal. App. 2d 674; 31 Cal. Rptr. 514; 1963 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2070


                                  May 28, 1963

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied June 26, 1963, and
Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court was Denied July 24,
1963.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Yuba County.
J. F. Good, Judge.  *

*   Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

   Action for divorce.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Foreign Decrees--Collateral Attack.  --A foreign divorce decree is
not entitled to full faith and credit where neither party had a domicile in the
divorce state, and the attacking party was not served within the jurisdiction
and did not appear in the action.

(2a) (2b) Id.--Foreign Decrees--Bona Fides of Domicile.  --In a divorce action,
the evidence supported the trial court's determination that defendant had not
been domiciled in a sister state when granted a divorce decree in that state,
where defendant testified that he was in this state almost every day during the
period in question and that he could not remember his first street address in
the sister state and had no record of the name of the person to whom the rent
was paid, and where the owner of his next purported residence testified that
defendant had never lived there but had used such residence merely as a mailing
address.

(3) Id.--Foreign Decrees--Bona Fides of Domicile.  --In a divorce proceeding in
which defendant offered in evidence a foreign divorce decree, the court had the
right to examine the question of defendant's domicile in the state granting such
decree.

(4a) (4b) Id.--Proceedings--Findings.  --In a divorce proceeding, the court's
failure to make a finding on the validity of a foreign divorce decree granted
defendant was not prejudicial where defendant failed to request a specific
finding, where the court impliedly found the decree invalid by granting
plaintiff a divorce, and where it was apparent from the record that a finding of
invalidity was the only finding that could have been made.

(5) Id.--Proceedings--Findings--Requests.  --In a divorce proceeding,
defendant's objection "generally to the proposed Amended Findings of Fact in
that said proposed Amended Findings of Fact in no way whatsoever make any
finding with reference to defendant's Answer to the Complaint on file herein"
did not constitute a request for a specific finding, as required by Code Civ.
Proc., § 634, as to the validity of a foreign divorce decree granted defendant,
and an adverse finding could therefore be implied.

(6) Trial--Findings--Where Findings Made Dispose of Issues.  --A judgment will
not be set aside because of a failure to make an express finding on an issue if
a finding thereon, consistent with the judgment, results by necessary
implication from the express findings that are made.

(7) Divorce--Foreign Decrees--Res Judicata.  --In a divorce proceeding, an
invalid foreign divorce decree cannot change the status of the parties'
community property and thereby affect the disposition of such property.

(8) Id.--Foreign Decrees.  --In a divorce action in a foreign state on
constructive service, the court there, while having authority to adjudicate the
status of a person residing in that state, does not have authority to adjudicate
vested property rights of the absent spouse, such as his or her interest in the
community property of the marriage (Civ. Code, § 161a), where the absent spouse
does not reside in such state, does not appear in such action, and is not served
within such state.

(9) Id.--Disposition of Property--Rights of Third Parties.  --On appeal from a
divorce decree, appellant cannot complain that the court erred in disposing of
partnership property where appellant could have made the other partner a party
to the action and where, since the partner was not a party, no binding
adjudication could be made as to his rights in the property.

(10a) (10b) Id.--Proceedings--Reference.  --In a divorce proceeding, the court
did not err in failing to have an accounting before awarding the wife as
community property a sum representing her share of her husband's interest in
partnership property where there was sufficient evidence before the court to
enable it to evaluate the partnership interest, the husband's counsel had not
sought such accounting at the trial, and complex problems would arise from an
allocation in kind of the wife's interest in the partnership assets.

(11a) (11b) Partnership--Property--Interest of Partners.  --An interest in a
partnership is not a mere expectancy; it is personal property. (Corp. Code, §
15026.)

(12a) (12b) Id.--Rights of Creditors--Pursuit of Firm Assets.  --A partner's
interest is subject to a charging order.

(13) Words and Phrases--"Expectancy."  --An expectancy is a chance, a mere hope,
unfounded in any limitation, provision, trust, or legal act whatever. It is no
right at all, in contemplation of law, because nothing has been done to create
an obligation in any event, and where there is no obligation, there can be no
right.

(14) Divorce -- Disposition of Community Property -- Decree.  -- Although the
trial court erred in making, on entry of an inter-interlocutory divorce decree,
an absolute disposition of community property not conditional on the entry of
the final decree, it was proper for the trial court to determine in its
interlocutory decree the status of the property and how it ought to be assigned
on entry of the final decree, and justice may be served by amending the
interlocutory decree so as to provide that the disposition of the property and
the judgment relating thereto shall become effective on entry of the final
decree.

(15) Id.--Disposition of Community Property--Review.  --In a divorce proceeding,
the trial court did not abuse its discretion in its award of the community
property to the respective parties where the record showed the court's
disposition to be more than fair to appellant, and where, even if appellant had
been awarded less than half the community property as contended, respondent had
been granted the divorce on the ground of extreme cruelty, shown by the record
to be of an aggravated nature.

(16) Id.--Disposition of Community Property--Extreme Cruelty.  --If a divorce is
granted on the ground of extreme cruelty, the nonoffending party is entitled to
be awarded more than one half of the community property. (Civ. Code, § 146,
subd. (a).)

COUNSEL: Bradford, Cross, Dahl & Hefner, Rogers, Clark & Jordan, Lawrence W.
Jordan, Jr., Ted W. Isles and John H. Laugenour for Defendant and Appellant.

Steel & Arostegui and John R. Hetland for Plaintiff and Respondent.

JUDGES: Schottky, J.  Pierce, P. J., and Friedman, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: SCHOTTKY

OPINION

     Frank Carmichael has appealed from an interlocutory decree of divorce
granted his wife, Doris Carmichael, for extreme cruelty.

   No attack is made on the sufficiency of the evidence to sustain the finding
of extreme cruelty so it is unnecessary to set forth the evidence relating to
that issue.

      The first major contention of appellant is that the trial court failed to
give full faith and credit to a decree of divorce granted Frank in Nevada on
October 25, 1960.  The evidence shows that around the middle of August 1960
Frank left his marital residence in California and ostensibly went to Nevada
where he allegedly established residence.

   On September 7, 1960, Doris filed an action for divorce in California.  Frank
was served the same day.  In his answer filed on October 18, 1960, Frank alleged
he was a resident of Washoe County, Nevada, and also that an action for divorce
was pending in Nevada.  (This action was apparently filed on September 29,
1960.) Frank received an ex parte divorce on October 25, 1960.  Doris was served
in California but did not appear in the Nevada action.  At the trial Frank
introduced a  copy of the Nevada decree in evidence.  He testified that he went
to Nevada in August 1960 to establish a permanent residence and that at the time
of the trial (May 1961) he was still a Nevada resident and that he lived at 20
Fairview Avenue, Reno.  But he also testified that he was in Portola,
California, almost every day during September and October and that occasionally
he remained in California overnight but never over a 24-hour period.

   Frank testified that when he first went to Reno in August he lived on
University Terrace, a street in Reno.  He could not remember the street number
of the apartment building, or the name of the apartment building, or the number
of the apartment in which he resided.  He paid his rent in cash and had no
record of the name of the person to whom the rent was paid.

   His next residence, and according to his testimony his residence at the time
of the trial, was at 20 Fairview Avenue, Reno.  This he contended had been his
abode since October 25, 1960.  He testified that he rented the single family
residence from Nick Jackson, the owner, who was a friend of his.  Nick Jackson
testified that he had lived at 20 Fairview  Avenue for over two years with his
wife and two children.  Jackson testified that he had never rented the house to
Frank and that neither Frank nor his second wife ever slept in the house.

   Mr. Jackson also testified that pursuant to a request he permitted Frank and
his second wife to use his address as their mailing address.  He forwarded all
their mail to their home in Clio, California, as instructed.

   The trial court properly refused to give full faith and credit to the Nevada
decree. In order that the decree in Nevada may be entitled to full faith and
credit, it must appear that Frank was domiciled in Nevada, or that Doris
participated in the Nevada action.  A decree is not entitled to full faith and
credit where neither party had a domicile in the divorce state ( Cook v. Cook,
342 U.S. 126 [72 S.Ct. 157, 96 L.Ed. 146]; Crouch v. Crouch, 28 Cal.2d 243 [169
P.2d 897]), and the attacking party was not served within the jurisdiction and
did not appear in the action.  ( Williams v. State of North Carolina, 325 U.S.
226 [65 S.Ct. 1092, 89 L.Ed. 1577, 157 A.L.R. 1366]; Cook v. Cook, supra.)

     There can be no doubt that the California court had the right to examine
the question of appellant's domicile in Nevada.   There is also no question that
the evidence supports a determination that appellant was never domiciled in
Nevada.  These points are really conceded, but appellant asserts that respondent
relied entirely on section 150.2 of the Civil Code to prove her contention, and
he contends that section is invalid. Section 150.2 provides:

   "Proof that a person hereafter obtaining a divorce from the bonds of
matrimony in another jurisdiction was (a) domiciled in this State within twelve
months prior to the commencement of the proceeding therefor, and resumed
residence in this State within eighteen months after the date of his departure
therefrom, or (b) at all times after his departure from this State and until his
return maintained a place of residence within this State, shall be prima facie
evidence that the person was domiciled in this State when the divorce proceeding
was commenced."

   California also provides in section 150.4 of the Civil Code: "The application
of this article is limited by the requirement of the Constitution of the United
States that full faith and credit shall be given in each state to the public
acts, records and judicial proceedings of every other state."

   There are several answers to this contention of appellant.   In the first
place, it was not necessary for respondent to rely on section 150.2 to prove
that appellant was domiciled in California as there was ample other evidence, as
hereinbefore set forth, to prove the court's determination that he was.  And it
is clear from the record that respondent did not rely on the statute alone.
Evidence was adduced to show that appellant never had a domicile   in Nevada and
therefore the decree was subject to attack.  (Crouch v. Crouch, supra.)

   Secondly, it is unnecessary to discuss the question of whether or not said
section is unconstitutional because the evidence that appellant was not a Nevada
domiciliary was overwhelming, and so far as the case at bench is concerned it is
immaterial whether or not the section is unconstitutional.

     Appellant also contends that the court erred in not finding on the validity
of the Nevada decree. No direct finding was made nor was a specific finding
requested.  Impliedly, however, the trial court found the Nevada decree invalid
because it granted Doris a divorce.

     The objection made by appellant was the "Defendant objects generally to the
proposed Amended Findings of Fact in that said proposed Amended Findings of Fact
in no way whatsoever make any finding with reference to the defendant's Answer
to the Complaint on file herein." This is hardly a request for a specific
finding as required by section 634 of the Code of Civil Procedure, and therefore
an adverse finding may be implied.

     As stated in Richter v. Walker, 36 Cal.2d 634, 640 [226 P.2d 593]: "[While]
full findings are required upon all material issues a judgment will not be set
aside on appeal because of a failure to make an express finding upon an issue if
a finding thereon, consistent with the judgment, results by necessary
implication from the express findings which are made.  . . ."

     Furthermore, it is apparent from the record that the only finding that
could have been made as to the validity of the Nevada decree would have been
that it was invalid. It is apparent that such was the view of the trial court,
as the memorandum of decision of the trial court states that "The evidence
clearly establishes the jurisdiction of this court over the subject of this
action as well as plaintiff's right to the divorce." Therefore under the power
given to this court by section 956a of the Code of Civil Procedure, and to
remove any possible doubt in the matter, we hereby order that the findings be
amended by adding thereto a finding that the  Nevada decree of divorce obtained
by appellant is invalid.

     Appellant next contends that the court erred in awarding as community
property "that which had become tenancy in common property by reason of the
Nevada decree of divorce." The fallacy of this contention is that it is based on
the erroneous premise that the Nevada decree is valid.   Furthermore, while in a
divorce action in a foreign state upon constructive service the court there has
authority to adjudicate status of a person residing in that state, it does not
have authority to adjudicate vested property rights of the absent spouse who
does not reside in such state, who does not appear in such action or is not
served within such state.  ( Hudson v. Hudson, 52 Cal.2d 735, 742 [344 P.2d 295]
.) The wife has a present interest in the community property. (Civ. Code, § 161a
.)

     Appellant contends also that the court erred in disposing of specific items
of partnership property. As pointed out by appellant the cattle business and the
equipment thereof was property of a partnership in which Francis Carmichael, a
son of the parties, owned a half interest.  Francis Carmichael was not made a
party to the action and did not participate therein.  Appellant argues that "by
awarding all of the ranch equipment on the various ranches to either Doris or
Frank the Court obviously disposed of specific items of partnership property."

   There is no merit in this contention.  If appellant believed Francis had an
interest that would be affected, he could have made Francis a party to the
action.  Furthermore, Francis not being a party to the action no binding
adjudication could be made as to his rights in the property.  What was said in
Melny v. Melny, 90 Cal.App.2d 672 [203 P.2d 588], at page 676 is apposite:

    "The obvious answer to this contention, and it is one heretofore expressed
by the courts, is that the judgment of the trial court, when and if it becomes
final, is a binding adjudication only as to the rights of appellant and
respondent in the property, and in no way affects the rights of Harry, if any,
in the property.  Of course, the trial court could make no adjudication that
would be binding on Harry without making him a party to the proceeding.  ( Towne
v. Towne, 6 Cal.App. 697 [92 P. 1050]; Moffitt v. Moffitt, 128 Cal.App. 676 [18
P.2d 387].) It would have been much better practice for either the appellant or
respondent, or the trial court, to have brought in Harry Melny as a party, and
all rights in the  property could then have been adjudicated.  [Citations.] But
Harry was not an indispensable party.  The complaint alleged, and the answer
denied that the property in question was community.  The trial court had
jurisdiction as between the husband and wife to adjudge the character of any
property claimed to be community.  ( Scarpa v. Scarpa, 40 Cal.App. 345 [180 P.
637].) The fact that a third party claimed an interest in the property is a
false factor.  ( Hiltscher v. Wagner, 96 Cal.App. 66 [273 P. 590].) It is true
that appellant may be adversely affected by the decree if it should ultimately
be held in an action between appellant and his son that his son is the owner of
the property, because the value of the Novato property was considered in
dividing the community property and undoubtedly the value of this property
influenced the court in determining the appellant's ability to pay alimony.  But
appellant has no one but himself to blame.  He had it within his power to join
his son as a party, but elected not to do so.  He cannot now be heard to
complain.  ( Long v. Long, 88 Cal.App.2d 544 [199 P.2d 47].)"

     Appellant contends also that the court erred in making an award of
partnership property without an accounting. The court found:

   "The parties own as community property of their marriage an undivided
one-half interest in a partnership for the production and sale of livestock,
principally cattle. The son of the parties, Francis Carmichael, is the remaining
partner, and has a one-half interest in said partnership. Said partnership and
each of its partners individually, is indebted to American Trust Company-Wells
Fargo Bank in the principal sum of $ 450,000.00, and in the additional sum of
approximately $ 12,000.00 on account of interest.  Said partnership owns assets,
principally livestock and equipment used in connection therewith, the value of
which is in excess of $ 850,000.00.  That liquidation of said partnership
interest will require considerable time and could not be accomplished without
continued stress and unhappiness to plaintiff; that in lieu of assigning the
whole of said community interest in said partnership to plaintiff it is fair and
equitable to assign the whole thereof to defendant conditioned upon payment to
plaintiff of the sum of $ 125,000.00 payable in installments and secured as
hereinbelow set forth and upon the further condition that defendant indemnifies
and holds plaintiff harmless from any partnership liability, present or future;
. . ."

   This finding is fully sustained by the evidence and particularly  by the last
financial statement of the partnership prior to the filing of the instant
action.  In lieu of awarding respondent an interest in the partnership, the
court awarded her the sum of $ 125,000 for the following reasons stated in the
court's memorandum opinion:

   ". . .  The problems concerning liquidation of the partnership and the third
party rights of the son as the owner of a one-half interest therein therefore
involves only the cattle and the rights to continued use of the real property in
whatsoever manner it is allocated for the reasonable period required to
liquidate the partnership. Because of the complexities of this problem this
court is of the opinion that in lieu of allocation in kind of the wife's
interest in the partnership assets (cash and cattle) it is fairer and more
expedient for all parties concerned to allocate the partnership interests  to
the husband and to award the wife the sum of $ 125,000 in lieu thereof.  It
should be explained that this figure is predicated upon evaluations supplied by
the defendant representing a one-fourth interest in the cattle but substantially
reduced to meet costs that would accrue if liquidation was presently ordered.  .
. ."

   We believe that a wife should be able to receive as community property a sum
representing a portion of her husband's partnership interest without an
accounting.  A partner's interest in the partnership is his share of the profits
and surplus, and the same is personal property. (Corp. Code, § 15026.)  A
partner's interest is subject to a charging order.  ( Baum v. Baum, 51 Cal.2d
610 [335 P.2d 481].)   Both of the cases on which appellant relies state that a
partner's interest is a mere expectancy. ( Hill v. Hill, 82 Cal.App.2d 682 [187
P.2d 28]; Speer v. Speer, 209 Cal.App.2d 233 [25 Cal.Rptr. 729].) The latter
term has been defined as a "chance, a mere hope, unfounded in any limitation,
provision, trust, or legal act whatever; . . .  [It] is no right at all, in
contemplation of law, . . .; because . . . nothing has been done to create an
obligation in any event; and where there is no obligation, there can be no
right; . . ." (Ballentine's Law Dictionary (2d ed. 1948).)  But an interest in a
partnership is not a mere expectancy. It is personal property. It is a present
interest.   In Baum v. Baum, supra, an order making payments for support (under
Civ. Code, § 139) of a divorced wife a lien on the property, an interest in a
partnership of the husband, was recognized as proper.

     We believe that the trial court in the case at bench made a just and
practicable determination that the best way to divide the interests of appellant
and respondent in the partnership was to award a cash sum to respondent and
permit appellant to keep the interest of respondent and himself in the
partnership cattle business.  We believe further from a careful study of the
record that this division was perhaps more fair to appellant than to respondent.
So as far as an accounting was concerned, we do not believe that one was
necessary as there was sufficient evidence before the court to enable it to
evaluate the partnership interest. Furthermore, it is apparent that at the trial
the then counsel for appellant (not his present counsel) did not seek any
further accounting as the following appears in the record:

   "Mr. Manwell: If the court please, Francis Carmichael makes no claim to the
moneys that were used out of the partnership funds on the other properties.  In
other words there is going to be no conflict here I don't believe between the
partners. Francis owns certain ranches and owns a certain interest in the
livestock. He is not making any claim on any of the other properties.  I can
speak because that is what he has told me, he makes no claim on any of the other
property, so there will be no necessity of any accounting."

     Appellant contends further that the court erred in making an absolute
disposition of community property on entry of the interlocutory decree not
conditional on the entry of the final decree of divorce. Respondent concedes the
correctness of this contention and points out that this court in denying a
petition for supersedeas by appellant stated:

   "[That] the clear implication of the decree is that plaintiff should have
immediate occupancy of the property in question.  While her title to the
property would not be complete until the decree became final and would be
defeated by death or reconciliation during the interlocutory period, we hold
that reason, common sense and authority entitle her in the meantime to the right
to possession of the property awarded to her.  . . ." ( Carmichael  v.
Carmichael, 198 Cal.App.2d 304 [17 Cal.Rptr. 558].)

   "'. . .  It would appear that a proper solution of this problem would be to
hold that the interlocutory may make a present disposition of the community
property, but that the title thus conveyed is limited and  conditional until the
entry of the final decree. . . .  In the present case it was, of course,  proper
for the trial court to determine in its interlocutory the status of the property
and how it ought to be assigned upon the entering of the final decree.' In the
present case justice will be best served by amending the decree so as to provide
that the disposition of the property and the judgment relating thereto shall
become effective upon the entry of the final decree." ( Dallman v. Dallman, 164
Cal.App.2d 815, 820 [331 P.2d 245].)

     Appellant's final contention is that the trial court abused its discretion
in its award of the community property to the respective parties and that
respondent wife was awarded a disproportionate share.  Appellant strongly urges
a revision of the award by this court under section 148 of the Civil Code which
reads: "The disposition of the community property,  of the quasi-community
property and of the homestead, as above provided, is subject to revision on
appeal in all particulars, including those which are stated to be in the
discretion of the court."

   Appellant argues that "Doris was given easily twice as much property as
Frank" and has made a chart which appears to show that appellant received about
$ 394,000 and respondent about $ 600,000.  Respondent disputes the accuracy of
appellant's figures and argues that in fact the record shows that appellant
received property of the value of more than $ 735,000, while respondent received
property of the value of approximately $ 725,000.  We are not disposed to
attempt to analyze the figures and calculations of respective counsel because a
careful study of the record convinces us that the disposition the court made of
the community property was more than fair to appellant.  And even if appellant's
figures were correct, we would still hold that we would not be disposed to
revise the disposition of the property made by the trial court.  For it must be
borne in mind that respondent was granted a divorce upon the ground of extreme
cruelty and that the record abundantly shows that said cruelty was of an
aggravated nature.   As stated by this court in Harrold v. Harrold, 100
Cal.App.2d 601 [224 P.2d 66], at page 608:

   ". . .  Where a divorce is granted on the ground of extreme cruelty, as here,
the nonoffending party is entitled to be awarded more than one-half of the
community property. ( Faust v. Faust, 91 Cal.App.2d 304 [204 P.2d 906]; Arnold
v. Arnold, 76 Cal.App.2d 877 [174 P.2d 674], and cases therein cited.) Section
146, subdivision 1, of the Civil Code, provides  that where the divorce is
granted on the ground of adultery, incurable insanity, or extreme cruelty, the
community property shall be assigned 'in such proportions as the court, from all
the facts of the case, and the condition of the parties, may deem just.' In all
other cases the community property must be divided equally between the parties.
(Civ. Code, § 146, subd. 1.) The inference derived from this code section is
that the nonoffending party is entitled to more than one-half of the community
property where the divorce is granted on the ground of extreme cruelty. ( Tipton
v. Tipton, 209 Cal. 443 [288 P. 65]; Crouch v. Crouch, 63 Cal.App.2d 747 [147
P.2d 678]; Quagelli v. Quagelli, 99 Cal.App. 172 [277 P. 1089].)"

   The interlocutory decree is modified by striking therefrom all words
presently disposing of the community property and inserting words to the effect
that the final decree shall assign to the parties the portions of the community
property mentioned in the interlocutory decree. As so modified the judgment is
affirmed.  Respondent will recover her costs upon this appeal.


                              97 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             MARGARET M. ANTHONY, Respondent, v. MYRTLE ANTHONY, as
                        Administratrix, etc., Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 17234

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division One

          94 Cal. App. 2d 507; 211 P.2d 331; 1949 Cal. App. LEXIS 1564


                                November 7, 1949

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court
was Denied January 4, 1950.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  Alfred L. Bartlett, Judge.

   Action on claim against estate for money owing decedent's former wife under a
property settlement agreement.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Husband and Wife--Transactions Inter Se--Property Settlement Agreements--
Enforcement.  --Where a husband undertakes in a property settlement agreement to
pay to the wife periodic sums until her remarriage, and where such agreement is
not referred to in a subsequent decree awarding the wife a divorce, the
agreement remains a valid, independent contract to make payments in the nature
of property division rather than alimony, and upon the death of the husband will
support an action against his personal representative for the amount of the
payment accruing before the wife's remarriage.

(2) Id.--Transactions Inter Se--Property Settlement Agreements--Enforcement.
--A valid property settlement agreement made between spouses under authority of
Civ. Code, §§ 158, 159, is enforceable as any other contract between persons
occupying a fiduciary relationship, without approval of a divorce court, and may
be enforced against the estate of a deceased party. The rule that an order for
payment of alimony terminates on the death of either party is not applicable to
an obligation on a contract, where performance consists simply of payment of
money, and where the personal representative can sufficiently perform all the
deceased could have performed.

(3) Id.--Transactions Inter Se--Property Settlement Agreements--Enforcement.
--In an action by a divorced wife to recover from her former husband's personal
representative periodic payments which were to be made to her until her
remarriage under the terms of a written property settlement agreement, the trial
court properly excluded evidence pertaining to the nature of the division of the
property and the value of the assets divided. (Civ. Code, § 1639; Code Civ.
Proc., § 1865.)

COUNSEL: Harry C. Cogen for Appellant.

Carson B. Hubbard for Respondent.

JUDGES: White, P. J.  Doran, J., and Drapeau, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: WHITE

OPINION

     Respondent is the former wife of decedent, L. Vern Anthony.  They began
living separate and apart September 20, 1944, and a written property settlement
agreement, dated November 3, 1945, was signed by them.  The agreement contained
the following recital:

   "Whereas, it is the desire of the parties hereto to make a complete and final
settlement of all of their property, affect property now owned by the parties
hereto, and property which may hereafter be acquired by either of them, and all
rights and obligations either of the parties hereto may have one to the other
for support, maintenance, alimony, attorney's fees or court costs."

   The agreement stated that both parties thereto had had advice of counsel but
the name of decedent's counsel was in  blank.  Respondent testified that her
attorney prepared the agreement.

   Decedent by the agreement was to hold as his separate property a 1936 Ford
sedan automobile and any United States War Savings Bonds and bank accounts in
his possession or in his name.

   The respondent by the agreement was to hold as her separate property two
parcels of real property; all community household furniture and furnishings; a
life insurance  policy in the sum of $ 5,000 in which respondent and the minor
child were named as beneficiaries, and another life insurance policy conditioned
upon the change of beneficiary from respondent to L. Vern Anthony, Jr.; seven
United States War Savings Bonds; and a 1940 Oldsmobile sedan.  The agreement
contained a further provision for the benefit of respondent upon which the
present litigation is based:

   [EDITOR'S NOTE: TEXT WITHIN THESE SYMBOLS [O> <O] IS OVERSTRUCK IN THE
SOURCE.]

     "Second Party herewith agrees to pay to First Party the sum of/thirty-five
dollars ($ 35.00) L.V.A. M.A. [O> forty dollars ($ 40) <O] per week for the
support and maintenance of First Party until such time as First Party shall
remarry; said payments to begin on the 6th day of November, 1945; and continue
on the 3rd day of each week thereafter.  In addition to all other payments
Second Party shall pay to First Party the sum of seven hundred dollars ($ 700)
prior to the fifteenth (15th) day of December, 1945."

   The agreement also provided:

   "It is further understood and agreed that the terms and provisions of this
Property Settlement Agreement may be incorporated in any decree of divorce which
may hereafter be obtained by either party, and enforceable by contempt
proceedings if necessary."

   Subsequent to the execution of the agreement and on or about January 31,
1946, respondent obtained a decree of divorce in the State of Nevada.  The
decree of divorce made no reference to the property settlement agreement. The
agreement was not presented to the court and none of its provisions were
incorporated in the decree.

   Decedent made the $ 35 weekly payments according to the terms of the written
agreement until January 7, 1947.  He died January 29, 1947, and Myrtle Anthony,
his widow, whom he married March 2, 1946, was appointed as administratrix of his
estate.  The estate was appraised at $ 7,569.03.

   Subsequent to the date of death and within the time allowed  by law,
respondent filed her creditor's claim against the estate for the sum of $ 35 per
week from January 7, 1947, to the date of filing such claim and for such
additional amount as would accrue during the lifetime of the respondent or until
she remarried. The claim was rejected by the administratrix of the estate for
all amounts in excess of $ 140, the amount accrued from January 7, 1947, to the
date of death. Respondent then filed this action on her rejected creditor's
claim to recover $ 35 per week from the date of death for the remainder of her
lifetime or until she remarried.

   At the beginning of the trial, it was stipulated by both parties that
respondent had remarried May 15, 1948, so the action became one to recover $ 35
per week from date of death to May 15, 1948.  The court found for the respondent
and rendered judgment for $ 2,515.81, being the sum of $ 35 per week from date
of death to May 15, 1948, plus interest.  Appellant has appealed from the whole
of said judgment.

   Appellant does not seek to set the agreement aside on the basis of fraud,
collusion, undue influence or as contra bonos mores, nor does she contend that
there is any ambiguity in the contract.  She asserts that the periodic payments
provided for in the agreement were intended by the parties in the nature of
alimony and not as a division of property and therefore terminated on the death
of the decedent. Respondent argues that a property settlement agreement which
provides for periodic payments to the wife until she remarries, and which is not
made a part of the divorce decree in any manner, is not subject to modification
by the court in an action on the contract brought against the estate of the
deceased husband, and the ordinary laws of contract should be followed.

   During the trial, the court agreed with the respondent that the action being
solely on the agreement itself and the appellant admitting there was no
ambiguity, the evidence presented by appellant as to the nature of the periodic
payment provision was inadmissible as an attempt to vary the terms of the
written agreement. However, sufficient offer of proof was made for the record
for purposes of review.

   All of the cases cited by appellant in support of her contention are cases in
which the divorce decree referred to a property settlement agreement or to a
stipulation by the parties as to property division and alimony or the divorce
decree alone made such  provision.  Inasmuch as the present action is confined
to the contract alone, cases other than those involving in essence modification
of divorce decrees must be considered.

    "Notwithstanding the contrariety of opinion as to whether, under provisions
in divorce decrees for regular periodic payments of alimony, the obligations
thereunder survive the death of the husband and become binding on his estate, it
is generally recognized that the husband may, under a separation agreement,
provide for periodic payments during the life of the wife so as to make such
payments a continuing charge on his estate after his death." (17 Am.Jur. 550.)

   While it is true no intent is specifically expressed in the agreement that
the periodic payments were to be binding on the husband's estate, on the other
hand the condition subsequent of the respondent's remarriage could not be held
to have been contemplated as an event certain to happen before the death of
decedent.

   We are satisfied that the agreement here in question was a binding executed
contract between the parties.  By it they settled their property interest upon a
basis agreeable to both.  It bears no relation to alimony and is to be construed
according to the ordinary rules of contracts.  In our opinion it continued to be
a legal charge against the estate the same as any other unfilled contractual
obligation of decedent at the time of death.

     In the case now engaging our attention the property settlement agreement
was in no sense made part of a divorce decree. While the approval of a divorce
court is not required to make effective a valid contract settling property
rights between married persons ( Green v. Green, 66 Cal.App.2d 50, 56 [151 P.2d
679]) the distinction between the rule governing in an action other than divorce
and the one applicable to such contracts when presented to a divorce court is
thus stated in Sanborn v. Sanborn, 3 Cal.App.2d 437, 441, 442 [39 P.2d 830]
(hearing denied by the Supreme Court): "There is a marked distinction between
the rule which governs in an action, other than divorce, on a contract executed
under authority of sections 158 and 159 of the Civil Code and the rule which
governs such contracts when presented to a divorce court.  In the former
instance they are judged by the same rules as any other ordinary contracts
between individuals occupying fiduciary relations, and if found to be valid are
binding on the parties and are recognized and enforced by courts; while in the
latter instance, because of the unlimited power vested in the divorce court to
make disposition of community property and to award support, such contracts,
when  pleaded and relied upon, are not binding or conclusive on the divorce
court until subjected to examination of the court in the divorce action and
approved.  ( Moog v. Moog, 203 Cal. 406 [264 P. 490].) Contracts between husband
and wife under the provisions of sections 158 and 159 of the Civil Code, being
authorized by law, are valid if untainted by fraud, collusion, undue influence
or not contra bonos mores, or the like.  ( Hogarty v. Hogarty, 188 Cal. 625 [206
P. 79]; Murray v. Murray, 28 Cal.App. 533 [153 P. 248].) It has never been held
that to acquire and possess validity such contracts must necessarily first be
approved by a divorce court.  The effect of the decisions relied on by appellant
is simply that, as against the power of the divorce court in the matter of
disposition of community property and awarding support, such contracts have no
effect or control in the divorce case until sanctioned and adopted by the court
either in whole or in part.  Such sanction, however, is not necessarily a
prerequisite to validity of such an agreement when sued upon in an independent
action to enforce its terms."

   It is fundamental that the jurisdiction of a court to modify a property
settlement, even assuming that it could decide that what purported to be a
property settlement agreement was meant and intended to be alimony, would be
derived from its original jurisdiction in the divorce action. Here, the property
settlement agreement was never made part of a divorce decree.

   As pointed out by respondent in her brief: "The action in the present case is
one brought on a contract, and should not be confused with the law applicable to
divorce. The question of a divorce is not involved in this litigation;
therefore, the question of alimony cannot be involved in this litigation, since
alimony is an order of court, and incident of divorce, and not a contract.
There is no requirement that a divorce cannot be granted without a determination
and settlement of the property rights of the parties and determination of their
support and maintenance. A divorce is a dissolution of the contract of marriage
by the judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction.  Cal. Civ. Code, Sec. 90.
Matters of property rights, alimony and support and maintenance are often
settled in divorce actions, but none of such matters are within the issues of
the pleadings of this case."

   Although an order of court for payment of alimony terminates upon the death
of either of the parties, such rule is not applicable to an obligation under a
contract, where performance  consists simply of payment of money and where the
personal representatives can sufficiently perform all the deceased could have
performed.  In such cases, the personal representative of the decedent is bound
to fulfill and complete such a contract.

   The contract pleaded by both parties in the case at bar should be "judged by
the same rules as any other ordinary contracts between individuals occupying
fiduciary relations" ( Sanborn v. Sanborn, supra), and not by rules applicable
to modification of divorce decrees. (See, also, Estate   of Caldwell, 129
Cal.App. 613 [19 P.2d 9].)

   The terms of the contract now before us are clear.  Concededly, there is no
ambiguity therein.  The contract was performed according to its terms by both
parties without question, up to the time of L. Vern Anthony's death, and
performance may be completed simply by a payment of money.  Under familiar
rules, the holding of the trial court that evidence pertaining to the nature of
the division of property and the value of the assets divided was not admissible
was correct ( Civ. Code, § 1639; Code Civ. Proc., § 1856).

   For the foregoing reasons, the judgment is affirmed.


                              98 of 100 DOCUMENTS

                                CONANT v. CONANT

                            [NO NUMBER IN ORIGINAL]

                          SUPREME COURT OF CALIFORNIA

                        10 Cal. 249; 1858 Cal. LEXIS 224


                                  October 1858

PRIOR-HISTORY:      Appeal from the District Court of the Twelfth Judicial
District, County of San Francisco.

   This was a suit for divorce from the bonds of matrimony, brought by the wife
against her husband.

   The complaint alleges that the plaintiff was married to the defendant on the
twenty-fourth of May, 1854, at San Francisco, and as grounds of divorce charges:

   1. That after the marriage of the parties, the defendant became, and has been
for the space of two years last past, and still is, habitually intemperate,
idle, and profligate;

   2. That the defendant has willfully neglected to provide the plaintiff the
common necessaries of life for the period of three years next before the
commencement of this suit, he having the ability to provide the same;

   3. That the defendant, since their marriage, has treated the plaintiff with
extreme cruelty, by frequently drawing a pistol on her, and threatening to shoot
and kill her, and by falsely and maliciously slandering and injuring her
reputation by declaring that he never was married to her, and that she was not
his wife, and that she only lived with him as his mistress;

   4. That during the time she lived and cohabited with the defendant,  as she
is informed and believes, the said defendant, disregarding the solemnity of his
marriage vows, committed adultery at the city of San Francisco, at divers time,
with persons whose names are to plaintiff unknown; that about the ninth of July,
a. d. 1856, the said plaintiff and defendant ceased to live and cohabit together
as husband and wife, and have not so lived or cohabited since that time; and
that since the time last mentioned the said defendant, as the plaintiff is
informed and verily believes, committed adultery, at the said city of San
Francisco, with divers other persons whose names are to the plaintiff unknown,
and that all said acts of adultery were committed by the defendant without the
consent, connivance, privity, or procurement of the plaintiff, and without any
collusion by or between the plaintiff and defendant, and that plaintiff has not
voluntarily cohabited with the said defendant since the commission of said acts
of adultery by him, and with knowledge thereof.

   The answer of the defendant denies the several charges of the plaintiff, and
then avers that said plaintiff lived with him, apparently happy and contented,
from the time of their marriage aforesaid,  until about the month of July, a. d.
1856, when, without cause or provocation from the defendant, and contrary to his
wishes and express desire, she left his bed and board and the comforts of the
house and home he had provided for her, and which was supplied and furnished
with the necessaries and comforts of life for her convenience and enjoyment
fully equal to his (defendant's) means and ability, forsaking him and utterly
refusing to live with him, or to perform any of the duties of a good and
virtuous, or true and lawful wife, and has ever since her said departure refused
to return and conduct herself as the wife of said defendant, although he has
always been, and still is, willing to receive and treat her affectionately.

   The case was referred to a referee, before whom evidence was introduced,
against the objection of the defendant, proving adultery in one instance,
committed by him in August, 1857. The ground of the objection was that no
specific acts of adultery could be proved under the vague and general
allegations of the complaint. No attempt was made or evidence introduced to
establish any other of the charges made against the defendant. It also appeared
in evidence that the plaintiff left the residence of her husband on the ninth of
July, 1856, and had ever since lived apart from him. No evidence was introduced
to explain her conduct in leaving her husband.

   This suit was commenced on the twenty-ninth day of September, 1857.

   The plaintiff obtained a decree dissolving the marriage between the parties,
and the defendant appealed.

COUNSEL: S. Heydenfeldt, for Appellant.

1. The allegations in the complaint as to the charge of adultery against the
defendant, are too vague and uncertain to authorize evidence of any specific act
of adultery. (Richards v. Richards, Wright, 302; Bird v. Bird, Id. 98; Adams v.
Adams, 16 Pick. 256; Wright v. Wright, 3 Tex. 168; Byrne v. Byrne, 3 Tex. 336.)

2. The wife having deserted her husband, his adultery does not entitle her to a
divorce. (Foy v. Foy, 13 Ire. 90; Moss v. Moss, 2 Id. 55; Wood v. Wood, 5 Id.
674; Whittington v. Whittington, 2 Dev. & B. 64.)

J. W. Winans, being retained as counsel in a case involving the same questions
which are raised on this appeal, asked and obtained permission to file a brief
on the part of the respondent.

1. Separationor desertion cannot be pleaded by way of recrimination as a bar to
a suit for a divorce. (Bishop on Marriage and Divorce, § 397, and notes 1, 2, 3;
Beely v. Beely, 4 Eng. Eccl. 358, note a, Forster v. Forster, 1 Hagg.; 4 Eccl.
Rep. 364.)

2. Malicious desertion will not justify adultery in the wife. (Eldred v. Eldred,
2 Curt. 376; 7 Eng. Eccl. 146; Morgan v. Morgan, 7 Eng. Eccl. 260; 2 Kent's Com.
100, and note a; Peckford v. Peckford, 1 Paige, 274; Richardson v. Richardson, 4
Port. 467 and 478. In which case the husband sought to plead the wife's
desertion in bar. (Sullivan v. Sullivan, 2 Eccl. 314.)

3. In contravention of these authorities, four cases are cited from the North
Carolina Reports, of which I will briefly say: first, that they declare a
doctrine differing toto coelo from that of any of the Courts of either England
or the United States; second, that they take their character and tone from
certain special statutes of North Carolina respecting divorces; third, that they
appear to lean to the conclusion, that where a divorce is denied to the wife for
adultery of the husband on account of her separation, it must be shown that she
positively refuses to live with him; fourth, that the statutes of North Carolina
draw a distinction between divorces a mensa and divorces a vinculo, allowing the
former in adultery cases where the latter is denied; while our statute allows a
divorce in either form, without distinction, at the option of the applicant.
(Act of March 25th, 1851, § 4, Wood's Dig. 491.)

[A preliminary objection was also taken to the hearing of the appeal, that the
Supreme Court has no appellate jurisdiction, under the Constitution, in a case
of divorce, where no question of property is involved. In the present case,
there is no allegation in the complaint that there is any common property which
can be the subject of division on the dissolution of the marriage. Act of
Husband and Wife, § 12, Wood's Dig. 488.]

JUDGES: Field, J., delivered the opinion of the Court. Baldwin, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: FIELD

OPINION

    The plaintiff charges in her complaint, as grounds of divorce, the habitual
intemperance of the defendant; his neglect to provide  for her the common
necessaries of life, for the period of three years next preceding the
commencement of this suit, having the ability to provide the same; extreme
cruelty on his part; and adultery committed whilst she was living with him, "at
the city of San Francisco, at divers times, with persons to the plaintiff
unknown;" and adultery committed since she ceased to live with him, "at the said
city of San Francisco, with divers other persons, whose names are to the
plaintiff unknown." No attempt was made to substantiate any of these charges,
except that of adultery in one instance, committed after the plaintiff had
ceased to live with her husband; and objection was taken to any evidence on this
head, under the pleadings. It appeared in proof that the plaintiff had deserted
the residence of her husband more than a year previous to the act of adultery;
and this fact, and the defective allegation in the pleadings, constituted the
principal grounds upon which the defendant relied to defeat the plaintiff's
application. A decree dissolving the marriage was rendered, and the defendant
appealed.

   A preliminary objection is taken to the hearing of the appeal that this Court
possesses no appellate jurisdiction, in a case of divorce, when a question of
property is not involved in its determination. The fourth section of article
sixth of the Constitution provides that "the Supreme Court shall have appellate
jurisdiction in all cases when the matter in dispute exceeds two hundred
dollars; when the legality of any tax, toll, or impost, or municipal fine is in
question; and in all criminal cases amounting to felony, on questions of law
alone." We do not understand the last words of the first clause of the section
as restricting the jurisdiction only to those cases which involve questions of
property, or the legality of a tax, toll, impost, or municipal fine. As we read
the section, the Court possesses appellate jurisdiction in all cases; provided,
that when the subject of litigation is capable of pecuniary computation, the
matter in dispute must exceed in value or amount two hundred dollars, unless a
question of the legality of a tax, toll, impost, or municipal fine is drawn in
question. Similar language, as to the amount, is used in defining the original
jurisdiction of the District Courts. The sixth section of the same article
declares that "the District Court shall have original jurisdiction, in law and
equity, in all civil cases,  when the amount in dispute exceeds two hundred
dollars exclusive of interest."

   It could never have been the intention of the framers of the Constitution to
deny to the higher Courts, both original and appellate, any jurisdiction in that
large class of cases where the relief sought is not susceptible of pecuniary
estimation--such as suits to prevent threatened injury--respecting the
guardianship of children--honorary offices, to which no salary is attached, and
the like. And yet, to this result, the position of the respondent  directly
leads. We think the construction contended for too narrow, and not imperatively
required by the language of the Constitution.

   The allegations of the complaint as to the adultery are vague and uncertain;
and the complaint might have been demurred to successfully on this ground. The
charge should have been stated with reasonable certainty as to time and place,
so as to have enabled the defendant to prepare to meet it on the trial.

   In Heyde v. Heyde, (4 Sand. 693,) the charge in the complaint was, that "the
defendant, since the marriage, viz., in the month of November, 1851, committed
adultery with a female in the city of New York, whose name is unknown to the
plaintiff, and the particular circumstances whereof are unknown to the
plaintiff, but which she expects to be able to prove at the trial of this
cause."

   "The Judge said it would be dangerous to proceed on such an indefinite
allegation. If the party have information sufficient to warrant the belief that
the offense has been committed, or the expectation that it can be proved on the
trial, that information must extend at least to the particular place or locality
where it occurred, though the name of the person with whom may be unknown." (
Codd v. Codd, 2 John. Ch. 224; Wood v. Wood, 2 Paige, 113; Wright, 98; Richards
v. Richards, Id. 302; Stokes v. Stokes, 1 Mo. 322; Wright v. Wright, 3 Tex. 168
.)

   The defendant, by failing to demur, waived the objection, so far as the want
of specification of the acts constituting the charge is concerned. The statute
has not altered any of the ordinary rules of pleading for cases of divorce,
except that nothing can be taken by admission or default. The object of this
exception is to prevent collusion between the parties;  and when this is
accomplished, the ordinary rules apply.

   It appears in proof that the plaintiff left the residence of her husband more
than a year previous to the act of adultery on the part of the defendant, and
has ever since lived apart from him. No cause is assigned or explanation
attempted for her conduct; and the legal inference follows that she was guilty
of nothing less than willful desertion; and this is urged as a bar to the
application of the plaintiff, not on the ground that it justified the adultery
of the defendant, but that it deprived her of all right to a cancelation of the
marriage contract, whose obligations she had herself disregarded.

   It is a general principle of the common law that whoever seeks redress for
the violation of a contract resting upon mutual and dependent covenants, to
obtain success must himself have performed the obligations on his part.
Something analogous to this principle is found in the doctrine of recrimination
or compensatio criminum, which was originally borrowed from the canon law, by
which the defendant is permitted to contest the plaintiff's  application on the
ground of his own violation of the marriage contract--to set off, to use the
language of the cases, the equal guilt of the plaintiff. "The doctrine,"
observes Lord Stowell, "that this, if proved, is a valid plea in bar, has its
foundation in reason and propriety; it would be hard if a man could complain of
the breach of a contract which he has violated; if he could complain of an
injury when he is open to the charge of the same nature. It is not unfit, if he
who is the guardian of the purity of his own house has converted it into a
brothel, that he should not be allowed to complain of the pollution which he
himself has introduced; if he, who has first violated his marriage vow, should
be barred of his remedy, the parties may live together, and find sources of
mutual forgiveness in the humiliation of mutual guilt." (Beeby v. Beeby, 1 Hagg.
790.)

   In England, until a recent period, divorces from the bonds of matrimony were
never granted but by act of Parliament. Divorces from bed and board were decreed
by the Ecclesiastical Courts, and then only for adultery or cruelty; and it is
the settled doctrine of those Courts that proof of adultery of the plaintiff
will bar a suit on the ground of the adultery of the defendant, but that cruelty
furnishes no bar to such suit. (Proctor v. Proctor, 2 Hagg. 292; Dillon v.
Dillon, 3 Curt. 86.)

   The ground upon which the distinction between recrimination by reason of the
adultery and recrimination by reason of the cruelty of the plaintiff, is placed,
is, that the offenses are not of the same kind. Thus, in Chambers v. Chambers,
(1 Hagg. 439,) where the defendant pleaded in bar to the suit, among other
grounds, the cruelty of the plaintiff, Lord Stowell said: "It is certain that
the wife has a right to say, 'You shall not have a sentence against me for
adultery, if you are guilty of the same offense yourself.' The received doctrine
of compensation would have that effect, because both parties are in eodem
delicto; but this is not so in recrimination of cruelty. The delictum is not of
the same kind. If the wife was the prior petens in a suit of cruelty, I do not
know that she would be barred by a recrimination of that species, for the
consideration would be very different. The Court might not oblige her to
cohabitation, which would be dangerous. Here the husband is the prior petens in
a suit of adultery, and I take the general doctrine to be that a wife cannot
plead cruelty as a bar to divorce for her violation of the marriage bed."

   The soundness of the distinction thus taken by Lord Stowell was doubted in
Dillon v. Dillon, (3 Curt. Eccl. 86,) when Dr. Lushington said, in referring to
that decision: "I candidly say I entertain doubts whether the reason given is
the most satisfactory that could be adduced, because, if this effect arises out
of the difference in the nature of the two offenses, it follows, e converso,
that when the wife has brought a suit on account of cruelty, the  husband cannot
plead her adultery in bar, a proposition which I am not aware has ever been laid
down in these Courts."

   Although the distinction alluded to was asserted and maintained in the
Ecclesiastical Courts, which possessed only authority to decree a divorce a
mensa et thoro, it was the settled course of Parliament, in determining on the
propriety of granting a petition of divorce a vinculo matrimonii, to allow both
adultery and cruelty to be pleaded in recrimination as an absolute bar; and in
the matter of Simmons' Divorce Bill, (12 C. and F. 339,) where the husband had
separated from his wife for many years without making any provision for her
maintenance from his means, which were sufficient, it was held by the House of
Lords that he was not entitled to a divorce, though the adultery of the wife was
clearly proved. Lord Brougham, in moving the postponement of the bill, observed,
"that he wished it to be clearly understood that he did so, not on the ground of
the husband's adultery, but wholly independent of that charge, and as if there
was no ground whatsoever for it; on the evidence that this person neglected his
wife, and threw her on the world without caring what became of her, or how she
was supported, or allowing her anything towards her support," and Lord Campbell,
in expressing a concurrence in the views taken by Lord Brougham, said, "that he
thought this person's conduct in neglecting his wife, while he was carrying on a
large business, and paying servants large wages, did disentitle him to the
relief he asked of their lordships."

   In this State, the statute has specified certain acts or conduct which shall
constitute grounds of divorce, and so far as the matrimonial contract is
concerned, the Courts cannot distinguish between them, whatever difference there
may be in a moral point of view. The several offenses must, therefore, be held
equally pleadable in bar to the suit for divorce--the one to the other, within
the principle of the doctrine of recrimination.

   Aside from this consideration, it would seem to be correct in principle, that
where the matter pleaded is such as would entitle the defendant to a decree, had
it been presented in a bill brought by himself, the relief should be denied.
Certain consequences are attached to the decree, independent of the dissolution
of the marriage contract, and they are generally more favorable to the party
obtaining the relief than to the contestant; but a decree cannot be granted in
favor of one, and afterwards in favor of the other, as the first would dissolve
the marriage, and then no marriage would subsist, upon which the second decree
could act; and a decree granting a divorce in favor of each would be an
anomalous proceeding. (Bishop on Div. 401; Dejarnet v. Dejarnet, 5 Dana, 499.)

   In Missouri, the statute authorizes a divorce from the bonds of matrimony,
like the statute of this State, on several grounds,  and in Nagel v. Nagel, (12
Mo. 53,) it was held that when both parties are found guilty of any of the
enumerated offenses for which a divorce may be granted, the bill should be
dismissed. In that case, the evidence sustained the charge of adultery on the
part of the defendant, and the charge of cruel and inhuman treatment on the part
of the plaintiff. ( Ryan v. Ryan, 9 Mo. 539.)

   The cases in which the doctrine of recrimination has been generally applied,
have been those in which the adultery of the plaintiff was established, (Mattox
v. Mattox, 2 Ham. 234,) but as our statute attaches to other offenses the same
consequences as to adultery, there is reason and propriety in extending to them
the same principle. It is eminently fit that he who seeks a divorce should
himself be guiltless of conduct which would entitle the other party to similar
relief.

   The only difficulty in the position of the appellant arises from the period
to which the desertion of the plaintiff extended. Had it existed for two years,
the time provided by statute to constitute a ground of divorce, we should have
no doubt that the bill should have been dismissed. But to an absolute bar, the
conduct of the plaintiff must be such as to constitute a proper basis for
judicial decree against her, had suit been instituted by the defendant. This is
not the present case, and we cannot fix a period other than that designated by
the statute.

   The desertion of the plaintiff was without excuse, and her conduct is by no
means relieved by the imputations of cruelty, neglect, and habitual
intemperance, cast upon the defendant in her complaint, none of which has she
attempted to establish, and which we must therefore presume to have been
wantonly made. Still it is not sufficient, under the statute, to bar a decree,
the adultery of the defendant being established, but it furnishes a proper
subject for consideration by the Court in determining the character of the
divorce to which she is entitled. The statute says divorces may be granted from
bed and board, or from the bonds of matrimony, but it was never intended that
either should be indifferently granted according as the prayer of the applicant
asked for one or the other modes of relief. It was intended that a certain
discretion should be exercised by the Courts, according to the special
circumstances of each suit, acting upon the settled principles of the common law
as applicable to this class of cases. And the true rule which should govern the
Courts in the exercise of its discretion in this respect is this, that to
entitle to a decree for an absolute divorce from the bonds of matrimony, the
applicant must be an innocent party-- one who has faithfully discharged the
obligations of the marriage relation, and seeks relief because really aggrieved
or injured by the misconduct of the other; and, on the other hand, where there
are circumstances showing a disregard of those obligations, though not carried
to  such a degree as to constitute itself a ground for divorce, the decree
should be only for a divorce from bed and board. To obtain a release a vinculo
matrimonii, the applicant must be without reproach, and however guilty the
defendant, if the applicant is chargeable either with similar guilt, or an
offense to which the law attaches similar consequences, the relief must be
denied; and if the applicant, though not thus guilty, is still not blameless,
the relief must be limited to a divorce a mensa et thoro.

   It follows, from the views we have taken, that the decree of the District
Court, dissolving the marriage between the parties,  must be reversed, and the
Court directed to enter a decree granting a divorce to the parties only from bed
and board.

   Ordered accordingly.


                              99 of 100 DOCUMENTS

                THE MUTUAL LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY OF NEW YORK (a
             Corporation), Plaintiff, v. CORAL LA FONTAINE FRANCK,
                      Respondent; BEULAH FRANCK, Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 5353

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, THIRD APPELLATE DISTRICT

           9 Cal. App. 2d 528; 50 P.2d 480; 1935 Cal. App. LEXIS 1182


                           October 17, 1935, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:      APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County. Caryl M. Sheldon, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Appeal--New Trial--Order Denying--Notice.  --An appeal does not lie from an
order denying a motion for a new trial, and a notice of appeal from such an
order is ineffectual.

(2) Life Insurance--Irrevocable Beneficiary--Attempted Change--Husband and Wife
--Contracts--Vested Interest--Pleading.  --In this action to determine the title
to the proceeds of an endowment life insurance policy, where the cross-complaint
of the insured's first wife alleged that said policy, in which she was named as
beneficiary, was procured during their marriage, that in contemplation of a
divorce they entered into a property settlement agreement which stipulated that
the insured would constitute her sole, irrevocable beneficiary, that it was
agreed she was to have a vested interest in said policy and that at no time
would he cause any change of beneficiary to be made, and that thereafter without
her consent he attempted to deprive her of her vested interest by purporting to
change the beneficiary, and there was no indication that the policy was not in
full force and effect at the time of the insured's death, said cross-complaint
stated a good cause of action, and a demurrer thereto was properly overruled.

(3) Id.--Husband and Wife--Irrevocable Beneficiary--Contracts--Judgments--Vested
Interest--Findings--Evidence.  --In said action, where it appeared that
insured's first wife entered into a property settlement agreement which
stipulated that insured was to pay alimony and constitute her the irrevocable
beneficiary of said policy unless she remarried, and that a Nevada divorce
decree provided that she was to be made sole, irrevocable beneficiary of said
policy, it was unnecessary for said decree to formally adopt the terms of the
agreement, and the agreement itself was sufficient to irrevocably vest the
beneficiary with the interest in the policy, and the findings that she acquired
a vested interest in the proceeds of the policy were supported.

(4) Id.--Payment of Premiums--Contracts--Community Property--Separate Property.
--In said action, where by agreement the insured was to keep up the payments of
premiums on the policy, it was immaterial whether the premiums were paid from
the community funds of insured and his first wife or from his separate property.


(5) Id.--Vested Interest--Change of Beneficiary--Gifts--Findings--Construction.
--In said action, a finding that the first wife was given a vested interest in
the policy did not conflict with another finding that the insured "without any
right and without the will, permission or consent" of his first wife, changed
the beneficiary in said policy to his second wife and made a gift thereof to the
latter, where the evident meaning of the latter finding was that the insured, in
violation of his contract with his first wife, wrongfully, "without any right"
so to do, changed the beneficiary and delivered the policy to his second wife,
which act was an unlawful breach of his contract and therefore void.

(6) Id.--Right to Change Beneficiary--Waiver--Contracts.  --While the interest
of a beneficiary in a policy which authorizes a change thereof is not ordinarily
a vested right, but on the contrary merely an expectancy of an inchoate gift
which may be consummated upon the death of the insured and is revocable at the
option of the insured during his lifetime, nevertheless the insured may waive
his right to change the beneficiary and by contract he may convert the
contingent interest in the policy into a vested equitable interest which may not
be subsequently defeated by an effort to change the beneficiary without his
consent.

(7) Id.--Gifts--Omitted Finding--Evidence--Appeal.  --A failure to adopt
findings upon an issue raised by the answer is not reversible error, when the
finding, if made to support the judgment, would necessarily be adverse to the
appellant; and in said action, the failure to specifically find that the insured
gave the policy to his second wife by making her the beneficiary thereof and
delivering the policy to her was harmless, where a specific finding on that
subject would have been adverse to her, and the court did find that the insured
wrongfully changed the beneficiary before he gave the policy to his second wife,
which meant that the purported gift to her was void, and also found that, while
she had possession of the policy at the time of insured's death, she was not the
sole owner of the policy and had no right or interest therein.

(8) Id.--Foreign Judgment--Evidence.  --In said action, where the proceeds of
the policy were in the custody of the local court, and the suit was one to
determine title thereto, the Nevada decree of divorce between the insured and
his first wife, although not reduced to a judgment in this state, was competent
evidence of the determination of the Nevada court with respect to the disposal
of the property rights of the spouses as an incident to the divorce proceeding.

(9) Id.--Judgments--Jurisdiction.  --The effect of a judgment in a sister state
may be rebutted by proof that the court which rendered it was without
jurisdiction.

(10) Id.--Foreign Judgment--Jurisdiction--Presumptions.  --In said action, where
the jurisdiction of the Nevada court was not challenged, and the parties to the
divorce proceeding therein were bona fide residents of that state, and both of
them appeared in that action, it was to be presumed on appeal that that court
had jurisdiction of both the persons and the property it assumed to dispose of,
that the objection to the introduction of the Nevada divorce decree in this
action was properly overruled, and that it was competent evidence of the
disposal by that court of the policy in question of which it had jurisdiction.

(11) Id.--Foreign Judgment--Evidence--Harmless Error.  --In said action, if it
were to be assumed that the Nevada decree of divorce was not competent proof of
the disposition of the policy in question or of the vested right of the
insured's first wife thereto, its admission was harmless where it was merely
cumulative of the oral evidence that the proceeds of the policy were vested in
the first wife by the terms of the previous agreement settling their property
rights, and without said decree there was sufficient evidence to support the
findings and judgment to the effect that the first wife was vested with an
interest in the policy and that she was entitled to the proceeds thereof.

(12) Id.--Statute of Limitations--Laches--Judgments--Fraud.  --In said action,
although more than six years elapsed after the rendition of the Nevada judgment
before the instant action was commenced, and the Nevada statute required an
action on a judgment to be commenced within six years, the instant action was
not barred by laches nor by statutory limitation where it was not founded on
that judgment, but was based on the insured's fraud in wrongfully changing the
beneficiary of his policy and attempting to transfer it to his second wife
contrary to his agreement with his first wife, and the breach of contract was
not discovered by the latter until a little more than one year before
commencement of this action.

COUNSEL: W. H. Douglass and John M. Atkinson for Appellant.

Bicksler, Parke & Catlin and W. G. Dannelson for Respondent.

JUDGES: THOMPSON, J. Pullen, P. J., and Plummer, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: THOMPSON

OPINION

     The facts are stated in the opinion of the court.

    THOMPSON, J. -- The defendant and cross-complainant Beulah Franck has
appealed from the judgment rendered against her in a suit to determine the right
and title to the proceeds of an endowment policy.

   Albert J. Franck and the respondent Coral La Fontaine Franck were married
July 13, 1917. They established their home in Nevada. Two fifteen-year endowment
life insurance policies numbered 2658767 and 2658771, respectively, for the sum
of $ 5,000 each were issued to him October 22, 1919. The annual premium on each
policy was the sum of $ 348.80. His wife Coral was named as beneficiary in each
of these policies. During their married life the premiums thereon were paid from
their community property. In 1921 domestic trouble arose between them on account
of which they executed an agreement settling their property rights by the terms
of which he promised to pay his wife in the event of a divorce the sum of $ 250
per month as alimony and covenanted to make her the sole, irrevocable
beneficiary of the policies above mentioned. The policies were then delivered to
the respondent. These covenants were conditioned upon her remaining unmarried.
The respondent never remarried.

   February 14, 1921, upon proceedings duly had in the District Court of Nevada
a decree of divorce was rendered by that court in favor of the respondent in
which she was awarded $ 250 per month alimony, together with title to the
proceeds of both insurance policies. This decree directed that Albert J. Franck
should constitute his wife sole, irrevocable beneficiary of both policies and
pay all premiums thereon. This divorce became final. July 5, 1923, without the
knowledge or consent of the respondent, contrary to the provisions of the
agreement settling their property rights and in violation of the decree of
divorce, Mr. Franck purported to change these policies so as to constitute his
executors, administrators and assigns the beneficiaries thereof.

   October 19, 1923, Mr. Frank borrowed from the appellant Beulah Franck (then
Wheeler) the sum of $ 348.80 to pay  the annual premium on Policy No. 2658767.
The insured thereafter defaulted in the payment of premiums on both policies,
whereupon the duration of each policy was automatically extended pursuant to the
terms of the contracts so as to keep them in force. Both insurance policies
remained in force until the time of the death of the insured, obligating the
insurance company to pay the lawful beneficiary thereof the principal sums due.

   June 14, 1924, Albert J. Franck and Beulah Wheeler, this appellant, were
married. November 26, 1926, without the knowledge or consent of the respondent,
Coral Franck, the insured purported to change the beneficiary of these policies
contrary to the terms of the agreement settling property rights and of the
decree of divorce and designated this appellant as beneficiary thereof. The
insured wrongfully procured the policies and delivered them to the appellant.
December 31, 1931, Albert J. Franck died, leaving the policies in full force and
effect.  Both the appellant and the respondent thereupon demanded of the
plaintiff insurance company the proceeds due under the terms of these policies.
The Mutual Life Insurance Company of New York then commenced this action against
the respondent and the appellant paying into court the proceeds of the policies
and asking the court to determine their respective rights thereto and that
plaintiff be discharged from further liability under the contracts. The
appellant and the respondent filed separate answers and crosscomplaints in this
action. The demurrer of the appellant to the cross-complaint of the respondent
was overruled. September 12, 1932, on motion of the appellant, judgment on the
pleadings was rendered against the respondent with respect to Policy No.
2658771. No appeal therefrom was perfected and that judgment became final.

   This suit was tried by the court on the remaining issue regarding the title
to insurance Policy No. 2658767 for the sum of $ 5,000. Findings were adopted
favorable to the respondent and judgment was rendered in favor of the appellant
for the reimbursement of the annual premium which was paid by her, as
hereinbefore mentioned, in the sum of $ 348.80. Judgment was rendered in favor
of the respondent for the balance of the proceeds of the last-mentioned
insurance policy in the sum of $ 4,666.45. From this judgment the defendant
Beulah Franck has appealed.

    The appellant contends that the court erred in overruling her demurrer to
the respondent's amended cross-complaint; that the judgment and findings are not
supported by the evidence, and that the Nevada decree of divorce is incompetent
as proof of title to the proceeds of the insurance policy for the reason that it
has not been reduced to a judgment in a California court.

   The appellant also assigns as erroneous the order of the court denying her
motion for a new trial.  It has been frequently held that an appeal does not lie
from an order denying a motion for a new trial. ( Nordin v. Eagle Rock State
Bank, 139 Cal. App. 584, 589 [34 P.2d 490]; sec. 963, Code Civ. Proc.) The
notice of appeal from that order is therefore ineffectual.

     The demurrer to the respondent's cross-complaint was properly overruled. It
is contended the amended cross-complaint of the respondent fails to state a
cause of action for the reason that it appears therefrom that the insurance
policy was not "in full force and effect", and that the California court was
without jurisdiction to render judgment determining title to the proceeds of the
policy since the Nevada decree of divorce has not been reduced to judgment in
this state. This cross-complaint alleges the marriage of the respondent with
Albert J. Franck and his subsequent procuring of the insurance policies in
question in which she was named as beneficiary; that domestic trouble arose
between the spouses and that in contemplation of a future divorce they had an
agreement settling their property rights which, among other things, stipulated
that the insured would constitute the cross-complainant sole, irrevocable
beneficiary of these policies; that a decree of divorce was thereafter awarded
to her by the Nevada court, in which she was granted alimony in the sum of $ 250
per month, and the defendant was directed to make and retain her as sole,
irrevocable beneficiary of the policies according to the terms of the contract,
but that, contrary to the agreement and to the provisions of the decree of
divorce, and without the knowledge or consent of the cross-complainant, the
insured did purport to change the beneficiary of these policies in an attempt to
deprive her of her vested interest therein. The prayer then asked for a decree
declaring her to be the owner and entitled to the proceeds of Policy No.
2658767 which is involved on this appeal. Paragraph III of this pleading is in
the following language:

   "That on or about . . . February 14th, 1921, this crosscomplainant and Albert
J. Franck entered into a property settlement by the terms of which, among other
things, it was agreed that said Albert J. Franck was to constitute and make this
cross-complainant an irrevocable, sole beneficiary under said policies of
insurance and that it was further agreed that this cross-complainant as of that
date would have a vested and definite right and interest in and to said policies
of insurance and that at no time would said Albert J. Franck cause any change to
be made in the beneficiary in any of the policies; that this cross-complainant
relied and depended upon said property settlement and agreement and that she was
to be the irrevocable, sole beneficiary in said policies and surrendered
valuable property rights to said Albert J. Franck because of such reliance."

    The cross-complaint of the respondent sufficiently alleges that she has a
vested equitable interest in the proceeds of Policy No. 2658767 by virtue of the
agreement settling property rights independently of the determination of the
Nevada decree of divorce. But it is alleged that the divorce decree also vested
her with an equitable interest in that policy by providing that "said plaintiff
shall irrevocably be made the sole beneficiary under said policies". It has been
determined that while a named beneficiary of a policy which provides for a
change thereof by the insured, secures only a contingent interest therein, a
subsequent agreement of the insured in consideration of a settlement of property
rights in contemplation of a divorce by the terms of which he covenants to make
her sole, irrevocable beneficiary of the policy, vests her with an equitable
interest therein which may not be defeated without her consent. ( Shoudy v.
Shoudy, 55 Cal. App. 344, 352 [203 P. 433]; McEwen v. New York Life Ins. Co., 42
Cal. App. 133, 141 [183 P. 373].) The facts of the Shoudy case were very similar
to those which appear in this proceeding, except that the decree of divorce did
not direct that the wife should be made the irrevocable beneficiary. The
insurance policy was not mentioned in the Shoudy decree. It appears in that case
that, pending the divorce proceedings,  the insured wrote a letter to his sister
saying: "Referring to our conversation settlement between Mrs. Shoudy and myself
you  are at liberty to say to her, . . . She will have an alimony as long as
Ruth is with her of $ 125.00 per month. . . . I have a policy in the Bankers
Life Association, $ 4,000.00, which I will keep in effect for her as long as she
remains single." It does not appear that the decree approved or adopted this
agreement. But the decree awarded the wife alimony upon the same terms
stipulated in the agreement and failed to mention the policy or the contract to
make her the irrevocable beneficiary thereof. After the divorce was granted Mr.
Shoudy wrote to the insurance company saying, "This is to advise that we have
just been divorced a few days ago, and I agreed to keep these (policies) in
force for her until she may remarry." The company notified him there was no
necessity for a change in the policy.  Regarding the effect of the property
settlement agreement in that case the court said:

   "When Dexter Shoudy, in anticipation of the divorce between himself and his
wife, offered as one of the terms of settlement of their property rights 'to
keep in effect for her as long as she remained single' said policies, and when
this offer was accepted by her the quality of her interest as a beneficiary in
said policies became changed from that of a mere expectancy to a more fixed and
permanent relation. She had thenceforth an equitable interest in said policies
of which she could not be divested by the mere act of the insured in changing
the name of the beneficiary."

   There is nothing in this cross-complaint to indicate that the policy in
question was not in full force and effect at the time of the death of the
insured. Neither the fact that some person other than the insured paid one of
the annual premiums on the policy, nor the fact that the insured wrongfully
attempted to thereafter change the beneficiary contrary to his agreement,
destroyed the validity of the policy nor avoided the binding effect of the
agreement.

   The cross-complaint of the respondent therefore states a good cause of
action, and the demurrer thereto was properly overruled.

     The appellant contends that the evidence fails to support the findings of
the court to the effect that the respondent acquired a vested interest in the
proceeds of the policy either by virtue of the agreement settling the property
rights or by the decree of divorce which was rendered. The court specifically
found that:

   "It was mutually agreed that the decedent would pay to Coral (the respondent)
the sum of $ 250.00 per month as alimony for her life unless she remarried and
that he further would constitute and make her the irrevocable and sole
beneficiary in and to said policies of insurance and that she would have the
sole, full and complete right to the proceeds thereof upon his death unless she
remarried."

   The court also separately found that the decree of divorce was awarded to the
respondent together with alimony in the sum of $ 250 per month while she
remained unmarried and that the decree also directed the defendant to make the
respondent sole irrevocable beneficiary of the policies, although the decree did
not specifically approve or adopt in terms the former property agreement. But it
was unnecessary for the decree to formally adopt the terms of the property
agreement. The contract itself was sufficient to irrevocably vest the
beneficiary with the interest in the policies.  That is precisely what the
Shoudy case holds. The evidence in support of the findings that the agreement
was made as above related is not as definite or conclusive as it might have
been. However, the recitations of the decree in that regard are in almost the
exact language which was employed in the former agreement. It is apparent the
respondent relied chiefly on the terms of the decree of divorce to establish her
claim of title to the policy in question. Nevertheless, there is substantial
evidence to support the finding that the agreement was made. Coral Franck
testified in that regard: "Q. . . . You finally settled upon accepting the $
250.00 per month alimony and being made the irrevocable beneficiary in the two
policies of insurance? A. That was it. Because I was entitled to a share of the
community property, on property that he had. Q. After this decree of divorce was
obtained, what if anything was said or done with regard to these policies of
insurance? A. Well, I had them. Q. How did you get them? A. Well, that was the
arrangement -- I had them -- and I had with him that arrangement. Q. You mean,
upon the obtaining of the decree, the policies were delivered over to you? A.
Yes."

   The decree, which is in evidence, provides in unequivocal language that the
respondent was to be made sole, irrevocable  beneficiary of the policies. These
findings are adequately supported by the record.

     We are of the opinion it is immaterial whether the premiums on the
insurance policies were paid from the community funds of the respondent and her
husband or from his separate property. By agreement he was to keep up the
payments of premiums on these policies. There is evidence to support the
findings of the court that subsequent to the divorce and after the marriage of
Mr. Franck and the appellant she loaned him large sums of money, and that prior
to their marriage she loaned him the sum of $ 348.80 for the purpose of paying
one annual premium on this policy. But the judgment reimbursed her for that
particular amount, and on her motion she was given judgment on the pleadings for
the proceeds of Policy No. 2658771. There is evidence that, except as above
stated, the premiums on these policies were paid from the community funds of the
respondent and her husband until the time of the divorce, after which the
obligation to pay the premiums, by agreement, rested on the insured.

     The appellant asserts that the findings of court are in irreconcilable
conflict by determining that the respondent was given a vested interest in
Policy No. 2658767, and upon the contrary:

   "That on or about November 26, 1926, the insured without any right and
without the will, permission or consent of Coral, changed the beneficiary in
said policy to Beulah and made a gift thereof to her."

   We are of the opinion these findings are not in conflict. The language of the
preceding finding may be construed to mean that a lawful gift of the policy was
not made to Beulah, but that, in conformity with other findings, he vested the
title thereto in the respondent by delivering the policy to her with the promise
to make her sole, irrevocable beneficiary thereof. The evident meaning of the
foregoing finding is that the insured, in violation of his contract, wrongfully,
"without any right" so to do, changed the beneficiary and delivered the policy
to his wife Beulah. This was an unlawful breach of his contract and therefore
void.

     It is true, as the appellant contends, that the interest of a beneficiary
in a policy which authorizes a change thereof is not ordinarily a vested right
but on the contrary merely an  expectancy of an inchoate gift which may be
consummated upon the death of the insured, but which is revocable at the option
of the insured during his lifetime. ( Blethen v. Pacific Mutual Life Ins. Co.,
198 Cal. 91, 98 [243 P. 431]; McEwen v. New York Life Ins. Co., 42 Cal. App. 133
[183 P. 373].) But the insured may waive his right to change the beneficiary and
by contract he may convert the contingent interest in the policy into a vested
equitable interest which may not be subsequently defeated by an effort to change
the beneficiary without his consent. ( Shoudy v. Shoudy, supra.) The insured may
make an absolute gift of the policy to the beneficiary, as the court found that
he did in this case. In the case of Lo Presti v. Manning, 125 Cal. App. 442, 445
[13 P.2d 1002], the court said:

   "While a life insurance policy may be made the subject of a gift, and the
beneficiary to whom the gift has been made may acquire a vested interest
therein, such transaction must meet all the requirements of the law in regard to
the making of a gift. A verbal gift is not valid unless the means of  obtaining
possession or control of the thing are given, nor, if it is capable of delivery,
unless there is an actual or symbolical delivery of the thing to the donee." (
Sec. 1147, Civ. Code.)

   In the present case the insured, for a valuable consideration, not only
agreed to make the respondent sole, irrevocable beneficiary of the policy, but
he also delivered the documents to her. The fact that he subsequently procured
the policies and wrongfully changed the beneficiary and delivered them to the
appellant did not confer title upon her, for he was powerless to thus deprive
the respondent of her vested right therein. The court found he did this "without
any right" so to do. The findings are not conflicting in that regard.

     The appellant contends that the court erred by failing to find in
accordance with the evidence that the insured gave the policies to the appellant
by making her the beneficiary thereof and delivering the instruments to her. The
omission is harmless. It is apparent that specific findings on that subject
would be adverse to the appellant. A failure of the court to adopt findings upon
an issue raised by the answer is not reversible error, when the finding, if made
to support the judgment would necessarily be adverse to the appellant. ( Jianou
v. Pickwick Stages   System, 111 Cal. App. 754, 758 [296 P. 108]; 2 Cal. Jur.
1033, sec. 614.) Moreover,  in effect, this issue was found adversely to the
appellant. Finding IX, heretofore referred to, determines that the insured
wrongfully changed the beneficiary named in the policies before he gave them to
the appellant. This would necessarily mean that the purported gift to her was
void. In finding XIII the court determined that while it was true the appellant
had possession of the policies at the time of the death of the insured, "it is
not true that she was the sole owner of said policy or that she had any right or
interest therein". The omission to more specifically adopt findings on that
issue is not reversible error.

     The admission in evidence of the Nevada decree of divorce is assigned as
reversible error for the asserted reason that it is incompetent, not having been
first reduced to judgment in this state.

   We are of the opinion there is no merit in this contention. This is not a
suit to enforce the Nevada decree of divorce. It is a suit to determine the
title to the proceeds of an endowment policy which funds are in the custody of
the California court from which this appeal emanates.  The authenticated copy of
the Nevada decree was received in evidence to support the respondent's claim of
title. While its terms may not be enforced by contempt proceedings or by process
without the state of Nevada, under article IV, section 1, of the federal
Constitution which guarantees "full faith and credit" to judicial proceedings in
every other state, it becomes competent evidence of the determination of that
court with respect to the disposal of the property rights of the spouses as an
incident to the divorce proceeding. It is said in 3 Freeman on Judgments, fifth
edition, page 2936, section 1425:

   "It may be laid down as a general rule that a decree of divorce rendered in
one state or territory is entitled to full faith and credit, under the Federal
Constitution, in every other state and territory under the same circumstances
and subject to the same limitations as any other judgment."

   The judgment of a court in a sister state, having jurisdiction of the persons
and property involved in the litigation is competent evidence in a proper
proceeding in another state of the issues necessarily determined thereby. In 4
Jones Commentaries on Evidence, second edition, page 3497, section 1879, it is
said regarding this subject:

    "It is elementary that neither a judgment nor a decree can be directly
enforced beyond the state in which it was entered. The effect of process thereon
is restricted to the state in which it was issued; and the benefit of a judgment
or decree, outside of the state in which it was pronounced, can be secured only
by some action thereon, or by presenting it as a defense in some action, or by
offering it in evidence to control the determination of the same issue upon
which it is relevant."

     It is true that the effect of a judgment in a sister state may be rebutted
by proof that the court which rendered it was without jurisdiction of the
persons or property involved. ( Estate of Hancock, 156 Cal. 804 [106 P. 58, 134
Am. St. Rep. 177]; Carlton v. Miller, 114 Cal. App. 272 [299 P. 738].)  But the
jurisdiction of the Nevada court is not challenged in this case. The parties to
that divorce proceeding were bona fide residents of that state. Both of them
appeared in that action. It must be presumed that court had jurisdiction  of
both the persons and the property which it assumed to dispose of. A decree of
divorce rendered by a court of a sister state, which appears to be regular on
its face, is entitled to the presumption that it is valid. In the absence of
proof to the contrary, it will be assumed that the court which renders such a
decree is invested with jurisdiction of the persons and the property affected
thereby. ( Delanoy v. Delanoy, 216 Cal. 27, 37 [13 P.2d 719, 86 A. L. R. 1321];
34 C. J., p. 1140, sec. 1615.) We therefore assume that the objection to the
introduction of the Nevada divorce decree in this proceeding was properly
overruled, and that it is competent evidence of the disposal by that court of
the policy in question of which it had jurisdiction.

   The familiar case of Haddock v. Haddock, 201 U.S. 562 [26 S. Ct. 525, 50 L.
Ed. 867, 5 Ann. Cas. 1], relied upon by the appellant in her challenge to the
application of the principle of the "full faith and credit" clause of the
federal Constitution, is not controlling in this case, for the reason that
substituted service upon the defendant in this divorce proceeding is not
involved as it was in that case. That opinion was rendered, as the syllabus
indicates, on the theory that the judgment of divorce of a sister state when
jurisdiction of the defendant is procured only by constructive service, and he
does not appear in the case, is not entitled to full faith and credit under the
constitutional guaranty. To that decision  a very formidable dissenting opinion
was rendered by Justices Harlan, Holmes, Brewer and Brown. The syllabus of the
prevailing opinion of the court reads:

   "The mere domicil within the state of one party to the marriage does not give
the courts of that state jurisdiction to render a decree of divorce enforceable
in all the other states by virtue of the full faith and credit clause of the
Federal Constitution against a nonresident who did not appear and was only
constructively served with notice of the pendency of the action."

   This opinion was based on the theory that there was a defect of jurisdiction
on account of constructive service and the failure of the defendant to appear or
answer the complaint, which distinguishes such a judgment from one which is
rendered in a case based upon personal service of the defendant. The rule which
is announced in the Haddock case has not been extended so as to deny the
application of the full faith and credit clause under the circumstances which
exist in this case where both parties were before the court which had
jurisdiction of the persons and the property involved. We are of the opinion the
Haddock case had no application to the present case in that regard.

     Assuming, however, without so deciding, that the authenticated copy of the
decree of divorce in the Nevada case was not competent proof of the disposition
of the policy in question or of the vested right of the respondent thereto, its
admission is harmless for it is merely cumulative of the oral evidence
heretofore quoted to the effect that the proceeds of the policy were vested in
the respondent by the terms of the previous agreement settling their property
rights. If the divorce decree be deemed to be incompetent as evidence in this
case, still there is adequate testimony to support the findings and judgment to
the effect that the respondent is vested with an interest in the policy in
question and that she is entitled to the proceeds thereof.

     Finally it is contended this suit is barred by the statute of limitations
of both Nevada and this state, and by laches for failure to prosecute this
action for more than six years after the rendering of the Nevada judgment of
divorce. We are of the opinion this suit is not barred by laches nor by
statutory limitation for the reason that this action is not based on the Nevada
judgment. The statute of limitations  of the state of Nevada upon which the
appellant relies is very similar to section 336 of the California Code of Civil
Procedure which she also cites as a bar to this action. The lastmentioned
section provides that: "An action upon a judgment or decree of any court of the
United States or of any state within the United States" must be commenced within
five years of the rendition of the judgment. The Nevada statute requires such an
action to be commenced within six years. These statutes are not applicable for
the reason that this action is not founded on the Nevada judgment. On the
contrary, it is based on the fraud of the insured in wrongfully changing the
beneficiary of his policies and attempting to transfer them to the appellant
contrary to his agreement with the respondent. This breach of contract was not
discovered by the respondent until the death of the insured in December, 1931,
which was little  more than one year before the commencement of this action.

   The judgment is affirmed.

   Pullen, P. J., and Plummer, J., concurred.


                              100 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          E. E. HEATHMAN, as Special Administrator, etc., Respondent,
                           v. WALTER VANT, Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 23533

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Three

            172 Cal. App. 2d 639; 343 P.2d 104; 1959 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      2001


                                 August 6, 1959

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from an order of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County denying motion to set aside and annul interlocutory and final judgments
of divorce.  John F. Aiso, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Divorce--Appeal--Review of Judgment on Default.  --Evidence at a default
divorce hearing with respect to residence could not be considered on appeal from
an order denying defendant's motion to set aside and annul the interlocutory and
final divorce decrees.

(2) Id.--Appeal--Review of Judgment on Default.  --On appeal from a default
judgment awarding an interlocutory divorce decree, a review of the sufficiency
of evidence is not available.

(3) Id.--Appeal--Review of Judgment on Default.  --The mere fact that a
defaulting defendant appealing from an interlocutory divorce decree has filed a
reporter's transcript showing the evidence taken by the trial court at the
default hearing does not warrant the appellate court in reviewing or considering
such evidence for any purpose.

(4) Id.--Judgment--Vacation of Decree.  --Interlocutory and final divorce
decrees may be attacked by motion for new trial, by appeal, by motion for relief
pursuant to Code Civ. Proc., § 473, or by independent suit in equity.

(5a) (5b) Id.--Proceedings--Jurisdiction.  --The trial court had jurisdiction to
enter default interlocutory and final divorce decrees despite the fact that
defendant's attorney filed a document entitled "Appearance de bene esse for the
purpose of calling attention of this honorable court to a fraud of record" and
that no notice of any proceedings other than personal service of the summons and
complaint was given defendant, since such document constituted a waiver of
notice of further proceedings in the action unless a demurrer or answer was
filed and since defendant was not entitled to notice that his default would be
entered after service of summons had been made on him.

(6) Appearance--Notice of Appearance.  --The written notice of appearance
provided for in Code Civ. Proc., § 1014, is a document drawn up especially for
that purpose.

(7) Divorce--Default Judgments--Admissions.  --Where defendant in a divorce
action is personally served and defaults, the default admits all the allegations
of the complaint, and he is estopped from thereafter challenging them.

(8) Id.--Judgment--Vacation of Decree.  --A motion under Code Civ Proc., § 473,
to be relieved from interlocutory and final judgments of divorce, made more than
four years after defendant's default had been entered, was too late, § 473
providing that such motions must be made within "six months, after such
judgment, order or proceeding was taken."

(9) Judgments--Default Judgment--Effect.  --Defendant against whom a default is
regularly entered is out of court, and until the default is set aside he cannot
file pleadings, move for a new trial or demand notice of subsequent proceedings.


(10) Id.--Opening and Vacating--Time for Application for Relief.  --Generally,
where a judgment has been entered after the default of a party has been taken,
the six-month period for setting aside such judgment under Code Civ. Proc., §
473, runs from the date of the default, not from the date of the judgment.

(11) Id.--Default Judgment--Effect.  --A default cuts off the defendant from
making any further opposition or objection to the relief that plaintiff's
complaint shows he is entitled to demand.

(12a) (12b) Divorce--Judgment--Vacation of Decree.  --Civ. Code, § 130,
declaring that no divorce can be granted on defendant's default without
corroboration of plaintiff's evidence, does not give defendant in a divorce
action any greater rights after his default than in any other action, and the
time to make application under Code Civ. Proc., § 473, for relief from an
interlocutory decree entered after such default runs from the date of the
default, not from the date of the decree.

(13) Id.--Evidence--Policy of Law.  --Civ. Code, § 130, providing that no
divorce can be granted on defendant's default without corroboration of
plaintiff's testimony, merely declares the policy of the law that in divorce
cases, whether defendant suffers default or not, the relief shall not be granted
until the facts on which it is sought are established by proof.

(14a) (14b) (14c) Id.--Judgment--Relief From Fraudulent Decrees.  --It was not
an abuse of discretion to deny a motion to set aside interlocutory and final
divorce decrees, made on the ground that plaintiff perpetrated an extrinsic
fraud on the court by wilfully misrepresenting her residence, where if there was
fraud, it was intrinsic, not extrinsic, and where defendant was guilty of
laches, having waited nearly five years after he had been divorced and until
plaintiff had died before becoming conscious that he had been defrauded.

(15) Judgments--Opening and Vacating--Fraud.  --Independently of Code Civ.
Proc., § 473, the court has inherent power, on motion seasonably made, to set
aside a judgment on the ground of fraud, and such power may be exercised after
the lapse of the statutory time that limits the entertaining of applications
based on § 473; but in such cases the fraud must be extrinsic, the limitations
in this respect being the same as those imposed on the granting of equitable
relief to set aside a judgment.

(16) Id.--Equitable Relief--Extrinsic Fraud.  --When alleged fraud or coercion
is of such a nature that it may reasonably be presented to the court at the
trial so as to afford full and fair protection to the rights of the interested
parties and they fail or neglect to avail themselves of that opportunity, a
court of equity will not disturb the judgment, but will leave the parties in the
position in which they placed themselves.

(17) Id.--Equitable Relief--Extrinsic Fraud.  --A judgment will not be set aside
because it is based on perjured testimony or because material evidence is
concealed or suppressed, such fraud both as to the court and the party against
whom judgment is rendered not being extrinsic to the record for which relief may
be had. The rule is the same whether the judgment sought to be set aside is a
default judgment or one rendered after answer and contested trial.

(18) Id.--Opening and Vacating--Time for Application for Relief.  --A motion to
set aside and annul a judgment on the ground of fraud can only be made within a
reasonable time.

(19) Id.--Opening and Vacating--Discretion of Court.  --Whether a motion to set
aside a judgment should be granted or denied on the ground of laches is
addressed to the trial court's sound discretion, and in the absence of a clear
showing of abuse of discretion the court's order will not be disturbed.

(20) Id.--Opening and Vacating--Discretion of Court.  --All presumptions will be
indulged in favor of the correctness of an order granting or denying a motion to
set aside a judgment, and the burden is on appellant to show that the court's
discretion was abused.

COUNSEL: Sidney Traxler for Appellant.

Robert E. Rosskopf for Respondent.

JUDGES: Vallee, J.  Shinn, P. J., and Wood (Parker), J., concurred.

OPINION BY: VALLEE

OPINION

     Appeal from an order denying defendant's motion to set aside and annul
interlocutory and final decrees of divorce.

    On June 4, 1953, Evelyn Vant filed this action for divorce against
defendant.  She alleged that for more than one year last past and immediately
preceding the commencement of the action she had resided in the County of Los
Angeles, State of California.  An order was made for publication of summons. The
order stated that defendant resided in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.  Copies of the
complaint and summons were personally served on defendant in Pittsburgh on June
17, 1953.

   On July 15, 1953, a Pennsylvania attorney filed in the action what he
denominated "Appearance de bene esse for the purpose of calling attention of
this honorable court to a fraud of record." In this document the attorney stated
he "asks leave to appear specially on behalf of Walter Vant, defendant in the
within proceedings, for the purpose of bringing to the attention of the Court a
patent fraud perpetrated in the filing of the Complaint in the within
proceedings, and without submitting to the jurisdiction of this honorable court
for any other purpose avers as follows: . . .  On or about the 27th day of
January, 1953, plaintiff herein instituted divorce proceedings in the Court of
Common Pleas of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, at No. 1135 April Term, 1953,
and therein averred as follows: 'Plaintiff has resided in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania thirty-three (33) years immediately previous to the filing of this
Complaint,' and therein sets out that her legal residence is 401 Morewood
Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania."

   On November 3, 1953, Evelyn filed an affidavit in this action in which she
stated: "That she has resided in Los Angeles County, California for about Four
(4) years; that she has not been in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania for about Seven (7)
years.  That divorce complaint was filed in her behalf in 1135 April, 1953 Term
in the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
under the erroneous impression that Plaintiff herein was a resident of
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, because she had previously been in said City and
State, and said place had been the residence of her family for many years.  That
said action was discontinued  May 8, 1953, on the ground that Plaintiff's legal
residence was in California and not Pennsylvania." On November 6, 1953, the
court made a formal written order entering the default of defendant.

   Defendant has succeeded in filing, in connection with this appeal, a
reporter's transcript showing the evidence taken by the trial court at the
default hearing held on November 30, 1953.  It appears that Evelyn testified:
"Q. Mrs. Vant, how long have you lived in California?  A. Approximately four
years.  Q. When did you leave [Pittsburgh]?  A. About six years ago." A
corroborating witness testified: "Q. Mrs. Quentmeyer, how long of your own
knowledge do you know that Mrs. Vant has lived here in the County of Los
Angeles?  A. Four years." An interlocutory decree was entered on December 1,
1953, and a final decree was entered on December 16, 1954.

   Evelyn died on October 15, 1957.  On April 16, 1958, defendant filed a motion
to set aside and annul the interlocutory and final decrees. The motion was made
on the grounds the court had no jurisdiction to entertain the action in that
Evelyn had not "at the time of the filing of her complaint been a resident of
the State of California for one year, nor had she been a resident in the County
of Los Angeles for three months"; that she fraudulently misrepresented to the
court facts pertaining to her residence; and that, after entering an appearance
by an attorney for the purpose of contesting jurisdiction, defendant "did not
receive notice of proceedings in this action subsequent to the entry of said
appearance, and specifically did not receive notice that the matter had been set
for hearing as a default, that a default had been granted, and that
Interlocutory and Final Decrees of Divorce had been granted and entered." E. E.
Heathman, special administrator of the estate of Evelyn, was substituted as
party plaintiff in her stead.  The motion was denied.  Defendant appeals.

    The specifications of error are: (1) Evelyn had not been a resident of the
State of California and of the County of Los Angeles for the required period of
time at the time the complaint was filed, and the evidence on residence
submitted at the trial of the action was insufficient as a matter of law; (2)
notwithstanding the appearance of defendant through an attorney, his default was
entered and evidence and proceedings were had against him without further notice
to him or to his attorney; (3) Evelyn perpetrated an extrinsic fraud on the
court by wilfully misrepresenting her California residence.  None of the
specifications of error is well taken.

     The argument with respect to the first specification of error is that
neither the fact of residence nor the intent was proven by the testimony of
Evelyn or the corroborating witness.  Defendant relies on sections 128 and 130
of the Civil Code.  1 The evidence at the default hearing with respect to
residence may not be considered on this appeal.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Section
128: "A divorce must not be granted unless the plaintiff has been a resident of
the state one year, and of the county in which the action is brought three
months, next preceding the commencement of the action; . . ."

   Section 130: "No divorce can be granted upon the default of the defendant or
upon the uncorroborated statement, admission, or testimony of the parties.  . .
."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      "On an appeal from the judgment rendered on default a review of the
sufficiency of the evidence is not available.  . . .   Nor is this rule affected
by the fact that appellant has succeeded in filing in connection with this
appeal a reporter's transcript showing the evidence taken by the trial court at
the default hearing. In Crackel v. Crackel, 17 Cal.App. 600, 601-602 [121 P.
295] (hearing denied by Supreme Court), the court said: 'The defendant urges
four grounds upon which she seeks a reversal of the judgment, all of which
depend upon and require an examination of the evidence taken at the hearing of
the case.  This, however, being an appeal from the judgment in a default case,
and therefore no issue of fact having been raised by the pleadings, the
defendant was not entitled to have the testimony incorporated in the transcript
. . .; and the mere fact that the evidence is inserted in the record here does
not warrant the court in reviewing or considering it for any purpose.
[Citations.]' But appellant argues that in divorce actions the appellate court
can review the evidence taken for the reason that section 130 of the Civil Code
provides that 'No divorce can be granted . . . upon the uncorroborated
statement' of the parties and appellant then argues that the record as presented
by him here discloses that there was no sufficient corroboration and that,
therefore, the court lacked jurisdiction to enter the decree appealed from.  The
contention is answered by Crackel v. Crackel, supra [17 Cal.App. 600], pp.
602-603, as follows:

   "'The defendant concedes that, as a general rule, these propositions are
true, but she contends on the other hand, that, as section 130 of the Civil Code
provides that the court shall, in defaults in divorce causes, require proof of
the facts alleged  before granting the relief, the law thereby raises an issue
of fact, and consequently provides for a trial.  But the contrary of this was
expressly held in the case of Foley v. Foley, 120 Cal. 33, 37 [52 P. 122, 65
Am.St.Rep. 147].'" ( Lukasik v. Lukasik, 108 Cal.App.2d 609, 613-614 [239 P.2d
497].)

   The argument with respect to the second specification of error is that the
court was without jurisdiction to enter the decrees because no notice of any of
the proceedings, other than the service of summons and complaint, was given to
defendant.

    It will be noted that the motion was directed only to the interlocutory and
final decrees of divorce and not to the default previously entered on November
6, 1953.   "A judgment may be attacked in  four ways: (1) by motion for new
trial; (2) by appeal; (3) by motion for relief pursuant to Code of Civil
Procedure § 473; and (4) by independent suit in equity.  In addition, the court
has inherent power to protect the sanctity of its judgments against extrinsic
fraud, or to set aside a judgment that is void on its face." (29 Cal.Jur.2d 24,
§ 112.) The rule applies to interlocutory and final judgments of divorce. (
Suttman v. Superior Court, 174 Cal. 243, 244 [162 P. 1032]; Bancroft v. Bancroft
, 178 Cal. 367, 368 [173 P. 585]; Borg v. Borg, 25 Cal.App.2d 25, 29 [76 P.2d
218]; Estate of Hughes, 80 Cal.App.2d 550, 555 [182 P.2d 253]; Deyl v. Deyl, 88
Cal.App.2d 536, 539 [199 P.2d 424].)

    Section 1014 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides: "A defendant appears
in an action when he answers, demurs, files a notice of motion to strike, or
gives the plaintiff written notice of his appearance, or when an attorney gives
notice of appearance for him.  After appearance, a defendant or his attorney is
entitled to notice of all subsequent proceedings of which notice is required to
be given.  . . ."

    Section 1010 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides: "No bill of
exceptions, notice of appeal, or other notice or paper, other than amendments to
the pleadings, or an amended pleading, need be served upon any party whose
default has been duly entered.  . . ."

    Section 585 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides: "Judgment may be had,
if the defendant fails to answer the complaint, as follows: . . .

   "3. In all actions where the service of the summons was by publication the
plaintiff, upon the expiration of the time for answering, may, upon proof of the
publication, and that no answer or demurrer or notice of motion to strike (of
the  character hereinafter specified) or notice of motion to quash service of
summons pursuant to Section 416.1 of this code or notice of the filing of a
petition for writ of mandate as provided in Section 416.3 of this code has been
filed, apply for judgment; . . ."

     The court obtained jurisdiction over defendant by the publication and the
personal service of the summons upon him.  The filing of the document
denominated "Appearance de bene esse for the purpose of calling attention of
this honorable court to a fraud of record" was merely the equivalent of the
service of summons on defendant which already had been effected.  In legal
effect it constituted a waiver of notice of further proceedings in the action
unless a demurrer or answer was filed.  The document did not deny that Evelyn
was a resident of California and did not controvert any fact alleged in the
complaint.  The only fact stated was that in January 1953 Evelyn filed a
complaint for divorce in Pennsylvania in which she alleged domicile in
Pennsylvania.  The document did not ask for any relief and did not constitute a
demurrer or an answer.  It expressly stated it was filed solely for the purpose
of bringing to the attention of the court "a patent fraud" and that defendant
was not submitting to the jurisdiction of the court.   The written notice of
appearance provided for in section 1014 is a document drawn up especially for
that purpose.  ( Davenport v. Superior Court, 183 Cal. 506, 509 [191 P. 911].)
The summons directed defendant to appear and answer the complaint within 30 days
after it was served upon him; and told him that if he did not Evelyn would apply
to the court for the relief demanded in the complaint.  ( Code Civ. Proc., § 407
.) When defendant failed to demur or answer, the court properly entered his
default. After the service of summons on defendant he was not entitled to notice
that his default would be entered.  After the entry of his default, notice of
subsequent proceedings was not required to be given.  ( Code Civ. Proc., §§ 585,
1010.)  Where the defendant in an action for divorce is personally served and
defaults, the default  admits all the allegations of the complaint, and he is
estopped from thereafter challenging them.  ( Christiana v. Rose, 100 Cal.App.2d
46, 50 [222 P.2d 891].)

     The motion was made more than four years after defendant's default was
entered.  Under section 473, Code of Civil Procedure, an application to be
relieved from a judgment, order or other proceeding taken against a party
"through his mistake, inadvertence, surprise or excusable neglect," must be made
within "six months, after such judgment, order or proceeding was taken."

     "A defendant against whom a default has been regularly entered is out of
court and is not entitled to take any further steps in the cause affecting the
plaintiff's right of action.  He may not thereafter, until and unless the
default is set aside, file pleadings, move for a new trial, or demand notice of
subsequent proceedings." (28 Cal.Jur.2d 644, § 24; Taintor v. Superior Court, 95
Cal.App.2d 346, 350-351 [213 P.2d 42].)

     "It is the general rule that where a judgment has been entered after the
default of a party has been taken the six-month period runs from the date of the
default and not from the date of the judgment.  . . .

     "'A default cuts off the defendant from making any further opposition or
objection to the relief which plaintiff's complaint shows he is entitled to
demand.' . . .

     "It was the trial judge's theory that because of the language of section
130, Civil Code -- 'No divorce can be granted upon the default of the defendant
. . .' -- this general rule does not apply in divorce actions, and the time
within which to apply for relief runs from the date of the interlocutory decree
of divorce and not from the date of the default. The cases do not support this
theory.  The effect of section 130, Civil Code, is not to give the defendant in
a divorce action any greater rights after his default than in any other action.
'The provision of the Civil Code merely declares the policy of the law to be
that in divorce cases, whether the defendant suffer default or not, the relief
shall not be granted until the facts upon which it is sought are established by
proof.' ( Foley v. Foley, 120 Cal. 33, 37 [52 P. 122, 65 Am.St.Rep. 147].) But
the proceeding, after defendant's default, is no longer an adversary proceeding
in the sense that defendant has the right to plead or otherwise appear therein
in opposition to plaintiff.  [Citations.]  It would seem to follow that the
effect of defendant's default in a divorce action is to foreclose defendant from
the right of contest as in other actions; that the default must be set aside to
afford defendant any effective relief; and that for that reason the time to move
for relief runs from the date of the default and not from the date of the
interlocutory decree. This was apparently the view of the Supreme Court in
Bowman v. Bowman, 29 Cal.2d 808, the court saying at page 813 [178 P.2d 751, 170
A.L.R. 246]:

    "'The trial court could not relieve defendant from the entry of the default
because the motion under section 473 was not made within six months after the
entry of default.'" ( Holsinger v. Holsinger, 95 Cal.App.2d 835, 836 [214 P.2d
412]; Lowenthal v. Lowenthal, 130 Cal.App.2d 527-528 [279 P.2d 119].)

     The third specification of error is that Evelyn perpetrated an extrinsic
fraud on the court by wilfully misrepresenting her California residence.  The
argument is that the interlocutory decree was obtained by perjury, false
evidence, and concealment of other evidence.

     Independently of section 473, Code of Civil Procedure, the court has
inherent power, on motion seasonably made, to set aside a judgment on the ground
of fraud, and the same may be exercised after the lapse of the statutory time
which limits the entertaining of applications based upon section 473.  But in
such cases the fraud must be extrinsic, the limitations in this respect being
the same as those imposed on the granting of equitable relief to set aside a
judgment.  ( McGuinness v. Superior Court, 196 Cal. 222 [237 P. 42, 40 A.L.R.
1110]; Boust v. Boust, 205 Cal. 186, 187 [270 P. 209]; Thompson v. Thompson, 38
Cal.App.2d 377, 380 [101 P.2d 160]; McKeever v. Superior Court, 85 Cal.App. 381,
384 [259 P. 373]; Tomb v. Tomb, 120 Cal.App. 438, 441 [7 P.2d 1104]; Kronman v.
Kronman, 129 Cal.App. 10, 13 [18 P.2d 712].)

     In Godfrey v. Godfrey, 30 Cal.App.2d 370 [86 P.2d 357], where the evidence
was held not to show the existence of extrinsic fraud which would justify a
court of equity in setting aside the decree, the court said (p. 379): "When the
alleged fraud or coercion is of such nature that it may reasonably be presented
to the court at the trial so as to afford full and fair protection to the rights
of the interested parties and they fail or neglect to avail themselves of that
opportunity, a court of equity will not disturb the judgment rendered under such
circumstances, but will leave the parties in the position in which they placed
themselves." Also see Hendricks v. Hendricks, 216 Cal. 321 [14 P.2d 83]; Estate
of Bell, 153 Cal. 331 [95 P. 372]; Short v. Short, 106 Cal.App. 210 [288 P.
1111]; 25 Cal.L.Rev. 79.)

     It is settled in this state that a judgment will not be set aside because
it is based upon perjured testimony or because material evidence is concealed or
suppressed, that such fraud both as to the court and the party against whom
judgment is rendered is not fraud extrinsic to the record for which  relief may
be had.  ( Burch v. Hibernia Bank, 146 Cal.App.2d 422, 432 [304 P.2d 212].) The
rule is the same whether the judgment sought to be set aside is a default
judgment or rendered after answer and contested trial.  ( Horton v. Horton, 18
Cal.2d 579, 585 [116 P.2d 605]; Westphal v. Westphal, 20 Cal.2d 393, 397 [126
P.2d 105]; Harvey v. Griffiths, 133 Cal.App. 17, 22-23 [23 P.2d 532].) The court
in Kelsey v. Miller, 203 Cal. 61 [263 P. 200], specifically held (p. 88) that
"Any fraud committed as to the issue of residence was intrinsic and not
extrinsic."  If there was fraud it was intrinsic, not extrinsic. (See In re
Griffith, 84 Cal. 107, 112-113 [23 P. 528, 24 P. 381]; McLaughlin v.
Security-First Nat. Bank, 20 Cal.App.2d 602, 606 [67 P.2d 726].)

   As an additional reason why the order should be affirmed, plaintiff asserts
the motion was not made within a reasonable time and that defendant was guilty
of laches. The interlocutory decree was entered December 1, 1953, and the final
decree was entered December 16, 1954.  Evelyn died on October 15, 1957.  The
motion was filed April 16, 1958.  Defendant had full opportunity to come in and
contest the action.  There was no inhibition against his personal presence in
the action.  He had knowledge of its pendency.  He had the benefit of
independent legal advice.  He had a lawyer who made the so-called appearance for
him.  He was not kept in ignorance of the proceedings, as he now asserts.  So
far as appears, he had sufficient funds to enable him to travel.  Instead of
acting with diligence, he waited nearly five years after he had been divorced
and until Evelyn had died before becoming conscious he had been defrauded.

     A motion to set aside and annul a judgment on the ground of fraud can only
be made within a reasonable time. ( McKeever v. Superior Court, 85 Cal.App. 381,
384 [259 P. 373]; Thompson v. Thompson, 38 Cal.App.2d 377, 380 [101 P.2d 160];
Cowan v. Cowan, 72 Cal.App.2d 868, 871 [166 P.2d 21].)  It is trite to say that
whether a motion to set aside a judgment should be granted or denied on the
ground of laches is a matter addressed to the sound discretion of the trial
court, and that in the absence of a clear showing of an abuse of such discretion
the order will not be disturbed.  ( Alderman v. Jacobs, 128 Cal.App.2d 273, 276
[274 P.2d 930].)   All presumptions will be indulged in favor of the correctness
of the order, and the burden is on the appellant to show that the court's
discretion was abused.  ( Lukasik v.  Lukasik, 108 Cal.App.2d 609, 611 [239 P.2d
497].)   No abuse of discretion is shown at bar.  We must assume that one of the
grounds on which the court denied the motion was that defendant was guilty of
laches and it  cannot be said that it abused its discretion in the ruling.  (
Beckett v. Kaynar Mfg. Co., Inc., 49 Cal.2d 695, 700 [321 P.2d 749]; Davis v.
Schneider, 91 Cal.App. 631, 635-636 [267 P. 352]; Smith v. Sheffey, 113
Cal.App.2d 741, 744 [248 P.2d 959].) "The law helps the vigilant, before those
who sleep on their rights." ( Civ. Code, § 3527.)

   Affirmed.
