
                               1 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             IN THE MATTER OF THE ESTATE OF FREDERICK A. WOODWORTH

                            [NO NUMBER IN ORIGINAL]

                          SUPREME COURT OF CALIFORNIA

                        31 Cal. 595; 1867 Cal. LEXIS 11


                                  January 1867

PRIOR-HISTORY:      Appeal from the Probate Court, City and County of San
Francisco.

COUNSEL: Daniel Rodgers, for Appellants. At common law, rent is incident to the
reversion, and the executor is entitled as against the heir or devisee to all
rents that may be due at the time of his death, but rent becoming due thereafter
descends with the land to the heir or devisee. Has our statute changed this
principle? Section one hundred and fourteen of the Probate Act allows the
executor to receive the rents and profits of the real estate, but this does not
allow him to apply these rents and profits to the payment of debts irrespective
of the personal estate. The Act further subjects both personal and real estate
to the payment of debts, but the real estate only after the personal estate is
exhausted. It will be urged upon the part of the respondent that when the rents
are collected they become personal estate, and are then, and as such, subjected
to the payments of debts. By the common law, the order of payment of debts was
as follows: 1st, personal estate; 2d, land specificallydevised for the payment
of debts; 3d, land descended; and 4th, land devised. Our statute preserves the
same order for payment. Section one hundred and fifteen, Probate Act, declares
that "the personal estate of the deceased, which shall come into the hands of
the executor or administrator, shall be first chargeable with the payment of the
debts." Section one hundred and sixty-three, same Act, provides: "If it appears
that any part of such real estate has been devised and not charged in such
devise with the payment of debts or legacies, the Court shall order that part
descended to heirs to be sold before that so devised." Thus it may be seen that
the Probate Act substantially enacts the principle of the common law in this
matter of the order of payment. The bequest of personal estate does not exempt
it from its liability to the payment of debts, unless a clear intention to that
effect appears on the face of the will, nor does it exempt the personal estate
from its liability to exonerate the real estate, unless a like intention is
apparent. (12 Price, 324.) "It is a general rule, in the absence of a contrary
intention, that the personal estate is the first and natural fund for thepayment
of debts." (3 Rawle, 237-239.)

Crockett, Whiting & Naphtaly, for Respondent. The rule at common law that the
devisee of land encumbered with a mortgage made by the testator might call on
the executor to exonerate the land out of the personalty, applied only to cases
where the personal estate was not specifically devised. Personal estate, not
specifically devised, was not made to exonerate encumbered real estate, unless
it was apparent from the will that the testator so intended. We contend that the
devise of the personalty in this case was specific. Is this rule varied by our
statute? At common law the real estate went directly to the heir or devisee, and
the personal estate only was a fund in the hands of the executor for the payment
of debts. This is changed by statute. Under our system the real estate also is a
fund out of which the executor may pay the debts and expenses. The only change
made in the common law by sections one hundred and fourteen and one hundred and
fifteen of the Probate Act is, that the real estate and its rents and profits
constitute a fund in the hands of he executor for the payment of debts in
default of personalty. The order of priority inwhich the real and personal
estates are chargeable is not changed, except that for the purpose of paying the
debts and expenses, the rents and profits of the real estate become a part of
the personal estate, and must be exhausted before the real estate can be sold.
It will be observed, the executor is to receive the rents and profits "until the
estate is settled, or until delivered over to the heir or devisee, by order of
the Probate Court." This last provision was inserted to meet the contingency
resulting from an order of distribution made before a final settlement of the
estate. What were the ends to be accomplished by this innovation on the common
law? Only these, to wit: 1st. To enable the executor to apply the rents and
profits to the payment of debts, and thus, if possible, preserve the real
estate; and 2d. To enable the real estate to be applied to the payment of debts
when necessary, in an expeditious, safe and economical manner, without following
it into the hands of the heir or devisee. These provisions only enlarge the fund
in the hands of the executor, but do not in any way change the order of
priority, except in respect to the rents and profits, which become apart of the
personal estate, for the purpose of paying debts and expenses. The rents and
profits must be exhausted before the real estate can be sold. But if the real
estate is not to be charged with the entire incumbrance, and if the personal
estate which was devised must first liquidate the debt, it is quite evident
under sections one hundred and eighty and one hundred and eighty-one of the Act
to regulate the settlement of the estates of deceased persons, that all the
devisees must contribute "in proportion to the value or amount of the several
devises or legacies" on a proceeding for distribution, to reimburse the devisee
of the personalty.

JUDGES: Sawyer, J. Rhodes, J., concurring specially. Sanderson, J., concurring
specially.

OPINION BY: SAWYER

OPINION

    In 1855 Frederick A. Woodworth made his will, by which he left "all" his
"personal property," and "one half of all the real estate of which" he might
"die possessed," to his brother, Selim E. Woodworth, and appointed him sole
executor. The remaining half of the real estate, he left to his mother, sisters
and others--the appellants in this proceeding. No reference to, or provision
for, debts is made in the will. Long after making the will, in 1864, said F. A.
Woodworth mortgaged portions of his real estate to the "Savings and Loan
Society" to secure the sum of something over thirty thousand dollars and
accruing interest, and soon after died, leaving the same incumbered by said
mortgage. His personal estate, at the time of his decease, was more than
sufficient to pay all his debts, including said mortgage. The said Selim E.
Woodworth qualified as executor, took possession of the estate and collected
rents of the real estate accruing subsequent to the testator's decease, to the
amount of over fifty thousand dollars. A large portion of the rents of the real
estate thus collected were applied in payment of the debt secured by said
mortgage. The executor, in his accounts, charged himself with the rents
collected and credited himself with the amount paid in satisfaction of the
mortgage and other debts, and claimed to have his accounts allowed, and finally
settled, on that basis. The other devisees filed exceptions to the account,
alleging, as a ground of objection, that the personal estate ought to have been
applied to the extinguishment of the mortgage and other debts in exoneration of
the real estate--at all events,  that the rents of the real estate should not be
applied in exoneration of the personalty. The Probate Court held that the rents
were properly applied to the payment of the mortgage, and the correctness of
this ruling is the only question presented by the record on appeal.

   Under the common law, where no different order is prescribed or indicated in
the will, as between executors, devisees and heirs, the assets of the deceased,
for the purpose of  paying the debts of the estate, will be marshalled, and the
debts paid out of them, in the following order: Firstly--The general personal
estate--that is to say, personal estate not specifically bequeathed, or
expressly, or by implication excepted. Secondly--Lands expressly devised for the
payment of debts. Thirdly--Lands descended to the heir; and fourthly--Lands
devised. (Redf. on Wills, Part I, p. 868 et seq. and notes; 2 Jar. on Wills,
554; 4 Kent's Com. 421.) And it is also the settled rule of English and American
law, that this order is not to be disturbed by the fact that lands are devised
subject to the mortgage or incumbrance thereon. The personal estate is first to
be applied and exhausted, even for the payment of the debts charged upon the
real estate by mortgage, or other incumbrance, if the debt so charged upon it
was a personal debt of the testator; for the mortgage is regarded as merely a
collateral security for the personal obligation. And when the testator devises
lands expressly subject to a mortgage, he is considered as using the terms
merely as descriptive of the incumbered condition of the property, and not for
the purpose of subjecting his devisees to the burden. (2 Jar. on Wills, 553-4; 2
Will. on Ex. 1,461-2, 1,443 and note O; 4 Kent Com. 420-1.) It requires express
words, or an intent clearly manifest upon an examination of the entire will, to
disturb this order. There must be a manifest intent, not merely to charge the
real estate, but to discharge the personalty. (4 Kent, 421; Ancaster v. Mayer, 1
Bro. Ch. C., 462; Stephenson v. Heathcote, 1 Eden, 43; Bootle v. Blundell, 1
Mer. 230; Lord Inchiquin v. O'Brien, 1 Wills. 88; Tait v. Lord Northwicke, 4
Ves. Jr. 823.) As to what provisions in the will shall be regarded as indicating
an intent to discharge the personalty, or a specific portion of personal
property, or a contrary intention, there is a multitude of cases in which the
question is discussed. The distinctions taken are numerous, and in many cases,
it must be confessed, exceedingly "attenuated." We have examined a large number
of authorities, but shall cite but few; for, so far as this case is concerned,
it will be unnecessary to consider the many nice distinctions taken.

    A specific legacy is considered as taken out of the general personal estate
and exonerated from the payment of the debts. The making of a specific bequest
is regarded as indicating an intention to discharge the article or particular
portion of personal property specifically bequeathed from the debts of the
testator. What is a specific bequest, within the meaning of the rule?

   Mr. Roper, the learned author of the standard work on Legacies, says a
specific legacy may be defined: "The bequest of a particular thing, or money,
specified and distinguished from all others of the same kind, as of a horse, a
piece of plate, money in a purse, stock in a public fund, a security for money,
which would immediately vest with the assent of the executor." (1 Roper on
Legacies, 191.) He then illustrates his definition by an examination of, and
reference to, a multitude of authorities bearing upon the question.
Substantially the same definition is given in Ram on Assets, 467: "A specific
legacy, as its term imports, is a bequest of a particular article or articles
capable of being designated and identified." ( Bradford v. Haynes, 30 Me. 108;
Pierce v. Snaplin, Atk. 508.) Mr. Williams says: "The bequest of all a man's
personal estate generally is not specific; the very terms of such a disposition
demonstrate its generality. And the circumstances of the bequest of the general
personal estate being in the same sentence with that of the real, the devise of
which is naturally specific, will not be sufficient to make it a specific
legacy." (2 Williams on Executors, 1,006; Redfield on Wills, Part II, 475; Ib.
457.) In Parrott v. Worsfold, 1 Jacob & Walk. 595, where a testator stated that
he had fifteen hundred pounds five per cents, and gave it to A., and then gave
to B. all other stocks that he might be possessed of at his death, the latter
bequest was held not to be specific, and liable in exoneration of the former.
The Master of the Rolls said: "Now the words are in their nature general,
comprehending not only the stock he had at the time of making his will, but all
that he might subsequently acquire; if he had sold out and bought  more, that
would have been included. But has it ever been decided that such words would
constitute a specific legacy? The ordinary criterion of a specific bequest is
that it is liable to ademption; that if the thing bequeathed is once gone, it is
lost to the legatee. That criterion fails here, for it would equally pass stock
acquired afterwards. Can it be said that a will made now can contain a specific
bequest of what may be bought hereafter--of what does not now exist? In a
certain sense it may be said that legacies of this kind are specific; as, a
legacy of all the testator's cattle, or all his personal property at his death;
but it is not specific unless you can fix on the individual thing given. But
here it is general; the testator did not mean it to be confined to the stock he
had at the time; he meant this daughter to be more largely provided for." (601.)
In the case of Walker's Estate, 3 Rawle, 230, the testator bequeathed to his
wife "all his household goods and furniture, money,  bonds, mortgages,
outstanding debts due and owing to him, and all his other personal estate, of
whatever nature or kind soever, to hold to her, his said wife, Elizabeth Y.
Walker, her heirs and assigns forever." This was held, in an able opinion in
which the question was fully discussed, not to be a specific bequest, and not
exonerated from the payment of the debts. The Earl of Strafford, by his will,
gave to his wife "all his personal estate whatsoever, (except the furniture in
Wentworth Castle,) for her life," subject to certain payments. This was held not
to be a specific legacy. ( Howe v. Earl of Dartmouth, 7 Ves. Jr. 147.) John
Blewitt "gave and bequeathed unto his brother, Edward Blewitt, all his moneys,
goods, chattels, rights, credits, personal estate and effects whatsoever and
wheresoever; and appointed his said brother sole executor." This was held not to
be a specific bequest, and not sufficient to exempt the personal estate from the
debts. The Master of the Rolls says: "This is stripped of every circumstance
except that of a devise [of real estate] to a trustee for the payment of debts,
and a general bequest of the personal estate to the executor. There is no case
since French v. Chichester, the first upon the subject, in which such words  as
these have been alone sufficient to exempt the personal estate. It has been over
and over again decided, that such words are not sufficient to raise such a
demonstration as Lord Thurlow says is necessary." ( Brummel v. Prothero, 3 Ves.
Jr. 114.) In Blake v. Lord Wallscoot, 1 Ba. and Bea. 312, Joseph Blake advised
his lands, subject to payment of debts, etc.; then appointed his son executor
and "bequeathed him all his personal estate" in trust for the daughter of the
testator. The Lord Chancellor held that the personal estate was not
exonerated--that is to say, that the bequest was not specific. (See also French
v. Chichester, 2 Vern. 568; Hazlewood v. Pope, 3 P. Williams, 324; Cuttler v.
Coexter, 2 Vern. 302; Clifton v. Burt, 1 P. Williams, 679; Tepping v. Tepping,
Ib. 730; Chester v. Painter, 2 P. Williams, 336; 2 Jar. on Wills, 577; Smith v.
Lampton, 8 Dana, 70; Briggs v. Harford, 22 Pick. 289-90; Davis et ux. v. Caines'
Ex., 1 Ired. Eq. 309; Walton v. Walton, 7 John. Ch. 262.) Courts have always
leaned strongly against construing a legacy as specific when there is any doubt;
and such a rule of construction is usually far more favorable to the legatee;
for a specific legacy is liable to be adeemed, and, therefore, entirely lost.
(See authorities above cited.)

   The position of the respondent's counsel, that the bequest of the personal
estate in this case is specific, cannot be sustained. The bequest is not
specific within the meaning of any authority brought to our notice. The language
is: "I bequeath all my personal estate to my brother Selim E. Woodworth." The
language is as general in its terms as it could well be. And there is nothing
else in the will to indicate any intention to make it in effect
specific--nothing to indicate a design to exempt it from the payment of the
debts or to disturb the order of payment established by the law itself. It is
given to the executor--a circumstance which is regarded as very important in
many cases to show that there was no intent to exempt it, when there are other
circumstances indicating such a purpose. But this circumstance is, perhaps, of
less significance under our law, where the consequences of not  making any
express disposition of the personalty are not the same as at common law. But in
many of the cases cited, other property was expressly charged with payment of
the debts, or devised expressly subject to mortgages, and yet a general bequest
of the personalty, as in this case, was held not to be exonerated, without being
expressly discharged, or discharged by necessary or plain implication upon a
view of the entire will. In this case there is nothing whatever said about
debts, nor does it appear that there were any, or that any were contemplated at
the date of the will. It seems clear that, under the rule at common law, the
personal property would have been first applied in payment of the debts, and it
only remains to be considered whether the order in which the assets are to be
marshalled has been changed by statute.

   By section one hundred fourteen of the Probate Act, the executor or
administrator has a right to the possession of the real as well as the personal
estate, and may receive the rents and profits of the real estate until the
estate is settled up and delivered over to the heirs and devisees by order of
the Probate Court. But this section does not of itself make any change in the
order in which property shall be applied in payment of the debts. The title at
the moment of the death of the testator, or intestate, vests in the heirs and
devisees, subject only to the lien of the executor or administrator, for the
payment of the debts and expenses of administration, with the right in the
administrator of present possession, which continues till the estate is settled
or delivered over to the parties entitled by the order of the Probate Court. (
Beckett v. Selover, 7 Cal. 288; Meeks v. Hahn, 20 Cal. 627; Updegraff v. Trask,
18 Cal. 459; Redfield on Wills, Pt. II, 592.) The possession with the right to
collect rents is only given to the executor or administrator to enable him to
settle up the affairs of the estate in the mode prescribed by law. But no change
necessarily results in the order of application of the funds from this provision
or any provision merely making real estate assets. But section one hundred
fifteen expressly provides that "the personal estate of the deceased which shall
come  into the hands of the executor or administrator shall be first chargeable
with the payment of the debts and expenses," and if the personal estate coming
into his hands is insufficient, then the whole real estate may, if necessary, be
sold.

   This section expressly adopts the order, so far as the personalty is
concerned, established by the common law. The real estate is made assets in case
it should be required, not otherwise, and the order of priority is not changed.
But it does not follow that the rents of the real estate go into the mass of the
general personal estate. Undoubtedly, if required to pay the debts, as between
the creditors and heirs or devisees, the rents received after the death of the
testator would be applied before a sale of the real estate. But it by no means
follows that, as between the general legatee of the personal estate, or the heir
in case it is not bequeathed, and the devisees of the real estate, the rents
would not belong to such devisee. On the contrary, it would seem to follow that,
as the title vests in the devisee at the moment of the death of the testator,
subject only to payment of the debts in the order prescribed by law, the rents
of the land would belong to the owner of the land, subject to payment of the
debts in the same order; and this, we think, is the case, unless there is some
other provision affecting the question; that is to say that the rents of the
real estate accruing subsequent to the death of the testator, for the purpose of
marshalling the assets, should be regarded as belonging to the realty from which
they were derived. Such was the rule at common law, and no change in this
respect appears to be intended. Even specific legacies of personalty carry any
accessions by way of increase or interest accruing after the death of the
testator. (Redf. on Wills, Pt. II, 566, par. 4.) But if it should be necessary
to resort to the realty, then the rents collected from it should first be
exhausted before a sale of the realty itself. There is nothing in sections one
hundred fifty and one hundred fifty-one in conflict with these views. The
executor has no more right to sell personal than real estate, unless necessary
for its preservation, or to pay charges upon it. Personal estate not
bequeathed, like real estate, goes to the heir, under our statute, and not to
the executor, except for the purpose of settling the estate and paying the debts
and charges upon it. He no more owns it, as he did at common law, than he does
the real estate; and he is no more authorized to sell it, unless necessary, than
he is to sell real estate. But there may be as great necessity for selling it,
for the purpose of marshalling the assets between the legatees, heirs and
devisees, as to pay debts. These sections only prohibit sales for the purpose of
giving effect to the change which gives the personal estate not disposed of by
will to the heir, without necessarily interfering with the order of priority in
marshalling the assets. They are simply intended to give effect to other
provisions of law relating to descents and distribution, without attempting to
change the law in these particulars.

   Where a sale of real estate is necessary, "if it appear that any part of such
real estate has been devised, and not charged in such devise with the payment of
debts or legacies, the Court shall order that part descended to the heirs to be
sold before that so devised." (Sec. 163.) Thus, in this respect, also, the order
of priority established at common law is rigidly followed. Section one hundred
seventy-six only recognizes the power of the testator, which existed at common
law, to charge legacies upon real estate, and when so charged, and the
personalty, which is to be first appropriated notwithstanding such charge, is
insufficient, provides for enforcing it. Section one hundred seventy-seven
recognizes the power of the testator, which we have seen also existed at common
law, to change the order of priority by express provision or other clear
manifestation of his intent in his will. The section itself does not profess to
change the order, but leaves it to the testator to do so, if he sees fit; just
as he could at common law, and in precisely the same mode; thus, so far,
manifesting no intent on the part of the Legislature to change the order, but on
the contrary, by express recognition, manifesting an intent to leave the matter
just where the experience of ages had established it. Section one hundred
seventy-eight provides for carrying  into execution the direction of the
testator. Section one hundred seventy-nine is supplementary to the preceding
sections, and provides that when the estate thus appropriated out of its order
is insufficient to pay the debts and other expenses mentioned, "such part of the
estate as shall not have been disposed of by will, if any"--that is to say,
estate descended, rather than specific legacies and devisees--shall be
appropriated for that purpose. That is precisely what would have been done under
the common law in similar circumstances.

   These are all the sections of the Act relating to the "estates of deceased
persons" supposed to bear upon the question brought to our notice, except
sections one hundred eighty and one hundred eighty-one, which will be hereafter
considered in the course of this opinion; and thus far it is quite manifest that
the author of these several provisions was profoundly versed in the established
principles of common and equity law applicable to the subject, and that he
cautiously avoided making any change in the order of priority in the marshalling
of the assets as between legatees, devisees and heirs. Such, we are persuaded,
must be the conclusion attained by any jurist who thoroughly and critically
examines the subject.

   It is further claimed that section fifteen of the "Act concerning wills"
requires the devisees of lands incumbered by mortgages to take them cum onere
without any right to have them exonerated out of the personal estate. The
section is as follows: "A charge or incumbrance upon any estate for the purpose
of securing the payment of money or the performance of any covenant or agreement
shall not be deemed a revocation of any will relating to the same estate which
was previously executed, but the devises and legacies therein contained shall
pass subject to such charge or incumbrance." (Belk. Prob. Act, p. 209.) It is
plain, however, that no such object was contemplated or provided for in this
section. The object was simply to provide in express terms that a subsequent
mortgage should not be construed as a revocation of the will as to the mortgaged
land--that it should still go to the  devisees, but subject to the mortgage.
That is to say, that, as to the mortgagee and devisee, neither the mortgage nor
the devise should fail, unless the entire mortgaged estate should be required to
satisfy the debt secured. This is a provision affecting the rights of the
parties to the mortgage and devise. It has no reference whatever to the order of
priority as between legatees, devisees and heirs. The words "subject to such
charge or incumbrance" mean no more nor less, in this connection in a statute,
than in the same connection in a will. And the signification of these words, in
a similar connection in wills, had long been settled by an unvarying line of
decisions. Says Jarman: "Thus it is settled that a devise of lands subject to
the mortgage or incumbrance thereupon, does not so throw the charge on the
estate as to exempt the funds, which by law are preferably liable." (2 Jar. on
Wills, 553-4; Ram on Assets, Ch. XXIX, Sec. 1, last clause, p. 441, 2d Eng. Ed.;
Galton v. Hancock, 2 Atk. 437; Astley v. Tankerville, 3 Bro. Ch. 548; Bickham v.
Crutwell, 3 My. & Craig, 769; Serle v. St. Eloy, 2 P. W. 386; Barnewell v.
Cawdor, 3 Madd. Ch. R. 453.) It was with reference to this settled construction
of similar language in wills that these words were used in the statute. Like
many of the provisions already cited, it only enacted in express terms the rule
of the common law upon the subject. In fact, if any other specific intent can be
inferred from the adoption of this provision, it would seem to be to avoid by
express provision, rather than effect, the result claimed for it by the
respondent; for, at common law, any change in the condition, any alteration or
new modelling of the estate in lands after the making of the will, was a
revocation, except in case of mortgages and charges on the estate for debts,
which were only a revocation quoad the special purpose, and were taken out of
the rule on the ground that they were securities only. ( Walton v. Walton, 7
John. Ch. 272.) When considered with reference to the common law as it stood,
the meaning of the provision under consideration is by no means obscure, and, as
we conceive, the language used is not inapt; for its signification, when used
with reference to  the subject matter, was as well settled as that of any other
equal number of words used in the law. And it would be well if legislators would
more frequently adopt forms of expression, the meaning of which is so well
settled, rather than substitute language entirely new to the law, under the
impression that their intention would be made more clearly manifest. Such
experiments are often troublesome; and confusion, rather than order, not
unfrequently follows in their train.

   Thus far we have seen that the long established rule of priority in
marshalling the assets, as between legatees, devisees and heirs, has not been
disturbed by our statute. It follows that as between the legatee of the
personalty, and the devisees of the realty, the executor was not authorized to
appropriate the rents of the real estate accrued subsequent to the decease of
the testator, to the satisfaction of the mortgage debt in exoneration of the
personalty.

   It is next insisted that if the devisees of the real estate incumbered by
said mortgage did not take it cum onere, as claimed by respondents, then, under
sections one hundred eighty and one hundred eighty-one of the Probate Act, the
legatee of the personal, and devisees of the real, estate must contribute to the
payment of the debts "in proportion to the value or amount of the several
devises or legacies;" and this view we think correct.

   The sections are as follows:

   Sec. 180. The estate, real and personal, given by will to any legatees or
devisees, shall be held liable to the payment of debts, expenses of
administration, and family expenses, in proportion to the value or amount of the
several devises or legacies, except that specific devises or legacies may be
exempted, if it shall appear to the Court necessary, to carry into effect the
intention of the testator, if there shall be other sufficient estate.

   Sec. 181. When the estate given by any will has been sold for the payment of
debts and expenses, all the devisees and  legatees shall be liable to contribute
according to their respective interests, to any devisee or legatee from whom the
estate devised to him may have been taken, for the payment of debts or expenses;
and the Probate Court, when distribution is made, shall, by decree for that
purpose, settle the amount of the several liabilities and decree how much each
person shall contribute.

   At common law it is the settled rule that all devises of real estate are to
be regarded as specific. "Every devise of land is specific. Every legacy of
personal estate is not, because personal fluctuates and varies. Land does not,
for no more passes by a will than the testator had at the time of making his
will." ( Forrester v. Lord Leigh, 1 Amb. 173.) "Every devisee of land is as a
specific legatee, and should not be broken in upon or made to contribute toward
a pecuniary legacy." ( Clifton v. Burt, 1 P. Williams, 679.) [This case also
shows that a specific legacy and a devise of land, which is in its nature
specific, stand upon the same footing as to contribution to pay a pecuniary
legacy; and that neither contribute, for the reason that they are specific.]
"Every devise of land, whether in particular or general terms, must of necessity
be specific from this circumstance--that a man can devise only what he has at
the time of devising, * * * but it is quite different as to personal estate." (
Howe v. Earl of Dartmouth, 7 Ves. Jr. 147; Milnes v. Slater, 8 Ves. Jr. 305;
Redf. on Wills, Pt. II, 471.) The case of Spong v. Spong would seem, at first
view, to make an exception, when the will, in express terms, makes it residuary.
(1 Dow & Clark, 377; 3 Bligh, N. S. 102.) But the exception seems to be
repudiated and the case explained on other grounds in Mirehouse v. Scaife, 2 My.
& Cr. 695. A devise of real estate, then, is always regarded as specific; and it
is said that this must be so of necessity, for no lands will pass except such as
the testator has at the time he makes his will. After-acquired lands will not
pass, but after-acquired personal estate does pass. "The devise of one's
household goods will pass all household goods  that the testator has at the time
of his death; contra of a devise of all one's lands; for that will pass only the
lands which the testator then had. But household goods are always changing and
perishing; and, therefore, the will as to personal estate shall relate to the
time of the testator's death; otherwise it would be very inconvenient, for then
a man must make a new will every day." ( Masters v. Masters, 1 P. W. 424.)

   A bequest of goods in a particular house, or at a particular place--as in a
particular county or town--is specific. (See authorities before cited.) So of
lands, for similar reasons, owned at a particular time, as at the date of the
will. By a sale of the lands or any portion of them owned at the date of the
will, the result to the devise is the same as when an article of personal
property specifically devised is adeemed--it is gone. And this is one of the
criteria of a specific legacy or devise. Other lands purchased with the moneys
derived from the sale cannot be substituted. A republication of the will is
necessary to pass them. So any change, alteration or remodelling of the estate
extinguishes the devise. A devise of land is, therefore, specific, and this
fact, and the reasons upon which it is grounded, are followed by important
consequences, bearing upon the construction of the sections under consideration.
The fact that a devise of land is always specific seems to be the real reason
for placing lands devised after lands descended--in fact, in the class to be
last charged with debts. Says Judge Redfield in his recent work on wills: "The
most obvious and the chief reason why descended estates have been held liable
before devised estates is that every devise of real estate is regarded as
specific." (Pt. II, 870, par. 20.) Specific legacies and specific devises,
therefore, stand upon the same footing, and for the reason that they are both
specific, and, in reality, belong to the same class. Neither is to be charged
till all the rest of the estate, both real and personal, is exhausted. So, also:
"Where the devise of the personal estate, and also of the real, is specific,
both must contribute to the payment of debts pro rata." (Redf. on Wills, Pt. II,
872, par. 23; Long v. Short, 1 P. Will. 403.) In Long v. Short,  the Lord
Chancellor held that, since the Statute of Fraudulent Devises, lands in fee in
England are equally subject to debts by specialty in the hands of the devisee,
as leases in the hands of the executor or legatee to debts by simple contract at
common law. There was a specific bequest of a leasehold interest to one, and a
devise of lands in fee to another, which was of course specific. Both were,
therefore, under the statute, equally subject to the specialty debts, and in
that respect stood on the same footing. There being a deficiency of assets, the
question was upon which the debts should be charged, and with respect to the
specialty debts, "to prevent the disappointment of the testator's intentions,
the Court thought it reasonable that the devisee of the fee simple estate and
the devisees of the lease and annuity should each contribute to the debts by
specialty in proportion to the value of the respective premises;" for "each
being equally specific devises, it would, in this case, be an equal
disappointment of the testator's intent to defeat either by subjecting it to the
testator's debts." (1 P. W. 403.) Thus, it is seen, that when there is a
specific bequest of personalty, and a specific devise of land, and by aid of a
statute as to the latter, both were equally liable to be charged with a certain
class of debts, the Court, without any further statutory provision, thought they
should be required to contribute pro rata, from the fact that both were
specific, and in that respect stood upon the same footing. If this is the
necessary result from the conditions named, it would also seem to follow that if
real estate should, by any change in the law, be made assets in the hands of the
executor for the payment of all the debts of the testator, and a devise of real
estate be made general instead of specific, as it necessarily was at common law,
then a general bequest of personalty, and a general devise of realty, would also
stand upon an equal footing, and, on similar grounds, ought to contribute pro
rata. That is to say, both in such cases would be assets in the hands of the
executor which might, if necessary, be applied to the satisfaction of the debts;
both devises would be general, and no specific intent would be manifested by the
testator  that one, rather than the other, should be first changed,  and both
would stand in the same position.

   Under our statute, if necessary for the purpose, all the estate of the
testator is made assets in the hands of the administrator for the payment of all
debts of every kind, whether simple contract, specialty debts, or otherwise, or
whether charged upon particular estates or not. One class of creditors is not to
look to the executor alone, and another class, in default of assets in the hands
of the executor, is not obliged to follow the heir, devisee or specific legatee.
The entire estate, real and personal, is liable in the hands of the executor to
the charge of all the debts. Again--section twenty-two of the Act concerning
wills provides that "any estate, right or interest in land acquired by the
testator, after the making of his or her will, shall pass thereby and in like
manner as if it passed at the time of making the will, if such shall manifestly
appear by the will to have been the intention of the testator." (Belk. Prob.
Act, 211.) Now a will made under this provision, by which a party should devise
all the land of which he should die seized or possessed, it is obvious, would
have none of the characteristics before stated of a specific devise. A party
might sell and convey land owned at the date of the will, and with the proceeds
purchase others, and repeat the operation continually, and those lands, owned at
the moment he should happen to die, would pass by the will--would take the place
of those conveyed. Personal and real estate would stand upon the same footing in
this respect--a devise of all one's personal, and all of one's real estate of
which he should die possessed, would be equally general, and operate precisely
alike. The grounds upon which a devise of real estate was held to be always
specific have ceased to exist. Judge Redfield says, with respect to the rule
that all devises of real estate are necessarily specific: "But this only extends
to the case of countries where the testator can only dispose by will of such
real estate as he is seized of at the date of his will, and not where, as by the
recent English statute, and those of most of the American States, one may
dispose of all his real estate at  the time of his decease, although acquired
subsequent to the date of the will. In such cases the residuary clause in the
will operating upon subsequently acquired land, no devise of real estate will be
regarded as specific unless it contain a description of the estate sufficient to
enable the devisee to identify the same." (Redfield on Wills, Pt. II, 870, note
35.) He cites no authority, but obviously this must be so, when we consider the
definition of specific devises already given.

   We may have, then, under our statute, the condition of things before
supposed, lands and personalty, both being assets in the hands of the executor,
liable to all the debts, and both generally devised, and, therefore, like
specific legacies and devises, chargeable with the same debts, standing upon
precisely the same footing, so far as the reasons for charging them pro rata are
concerned. We should, therefore, naturally expect that the Legislature, after
having gone thus far, would go still further, and in case of such general
devises of both personal and real estate, wherein the testator has not seen fit
to indicate any preference for one class of devisees over another, provide for a
pro rata contribution. Especially so in a country like this, where real estate
is regarded with little more favor than personalty. And we think this is
precisely what has been done in section one hundred eighty of the Probate Act,
before quoted. It having been provided in the Act concerning wills, that there
might be general devises of real as well as personal estate, the first part of
the section, that "the estate, real and personal, given to legatees or devisees,
shall be held liable to the payment of debts * * * in proportion to the value of
the several devises or legacies," manifestly refers to such general devises; for
it immediately thereafter adds, "except that specific devises or legacies may be
exempted, if it shall appear to the Court necessary to carry into effect the
intention of the testator, if there be other sufficient estate;" thus still
recognizing the right of the testator to make his devises or legacies specific,
and thereby exonerate them, providing his estate is sufficiently ample to admit
of such devises. Indeed, it would seem that a devise of  land would still be
specific under section twenty-two of the Act concerning wills, unless it should
manifestly appear by the will to be the intention of the testator to pass
after-acquired lands. Section one hundred eighty-one is merely supplemental to
the last, and provides that, when the estate devised to one devisee or legatee
has been appropriated to the payment of the debts or expenses, he shall be
reimbursed to the extent which he has improperly suffered by pro rata
contributions from the others to be adjusted by the Court.

   The will now in question is very brief, and very general in its terms. The
testator bequeathed all the personal property and "one half of all the real
estate of which" he should "die possessed," to the respondent, and made him
executor, and the remaining half of the real estate to the appellants. There is
nothing said about debts, no indication of any desire or intention that one
class of devisees should be charged with the debts rather than the other. The
devises are all general. The testator must be presumed to have known the law,
and the consequences which would follow a want of being more specific, and to
have intended the consequence which the law attaches. We think that the real and
personal estate devised must contribute pro rata according to the provisions of
section one hundred eighty. It is the precise case provided for in that section.
Indeed, the consequence would, perhaps, have resulted from the statutory
provision authorizing general devises of real property without the provision
expressly made in section one hundred and eighty.

   Some of these questions were not passed upon by the Probate Court, and do not
properly arise in the present stage of the proceedings, but their determination
is necessary to a proper distribution of the estate about to be made, and they
would, doubtless, soon appear here again on appeal by one side or the other; and
the parties have presented the questions, and expressed a desire to have them
disposed of now.

   There being a large amount of personal property of the estate in the hands of
the executor applicable to payment of the debts, the debt secured by mortgage,
as between the legatee  and devisees, is not all payable out of the rents of the
real estate mortgaged, and the accounts of the executor do not show the proper
amount of moneys on hand subject to distribution. The exception on this point is
well taken, and ought to have been sustained.

   Order overruling exception reversed and cause remanded for further
proceedings.

CONCUR BY: RHODES; SANDERSON

CONCUR

   Rhodes, J., concurring specially:

   I concur in the judgment on the ground that the statute furnishes the rule of
decision of the point in question.

   Sanderson, J., concurring specially:

   Sections fifteen and twenty-two of the Act concerning wills, and sections one
hundred and fourteen, one hundred and fifteen, one hundred and sixty-three, and
hundred and seventy-six, one hundred and seventy-seven, one hundred and eighty,
and one hundred and eighty-one of the Act concerning the settlement of the
estates of deceased persons, supply the law applicable to the general subject,
and section twenty-two of the former and one hundred and eighty of the latter
Act prescribe the rules applicable to the special facts of the present case. By
section twenty-two of the Act concerning wills, lands acquired subsequent to the
publication of the will may be devised in this State, and, by reason of this
provision, devises of real estate are put upon the same level with devises of
personal estate, with respect to the question whether they are to be deemed
specific or general, when the legal effect and operation of a given will comes
to be determined.

   By the one hundred and eightieth section of the Act regulating the settlement
of the estates of deceased persons, it is provided that specific devises or
legacies shall be exonerated from the payment of debts, if the remainder of the
estate is sufficient for that purpose. A testator may in terms charge a portion
of his estate with the payment of his debts, or he may  in terms exonerate a
portion, leaving the remainder to be used for that purpose. In such a case the
provisions of the will furnish the rule of administration, and are to be
observed so far as the exigencies of the case will permit. (Sec. 177.) In view
of these provisions of the statute, the questions presented by a case like the
present are: First, does the will in terms make any provisions for the payment
of the debts? and second, are there any specific devises or legacies which are
to be exonerated from the payment of the debts if the exigencies of the case
will permit?

   It is clear, on inspection, that the will in this case makes no provision for
the payment of debts in terms, for nothing is said upon that subject. It is also
obvious that it contains no specific devises of personal or real estate. The
will disposes of the entire estate, real and personal, of which the testator may
be possessed at the time of his death. No part of it is distinguished in any
manner except by the terms real and personal. The latter, whatever it may chance
to be at the date of the testator's death, is devised in general terms to his
brother Selim. One half of the former, whatever it may chance to be, is also in
general terms devised to Selim, and the remaining half to the other parties
named, share and share alike. To hold that these or either of them are specific
devises within the meaning of the one hundred and eightieth section, and
therefore exonerated from the payment of debts, would be to hold that every
devise is specific unless accompanied by an explanatory statement that it is not
so intended. Such being the true interpretation of the will, it follows that the
debts are to be paid in the mode provided by the statute where such are the
conditions.

   By the one hundred and fifteenth section of the Act regulating the settlement
of the estates of deceased persons, it is provided that the personal estate
shall be first chargeable with the payment of the debts, expenses of
administration and allowances to the family of the deceased, and, if the
personal property is insufficient for that purpose, that the real estate,  or so
much thereof as may be necessary, may be sold in the manner provided by law. To
this end the possession of the entire estate, both real and personal, and the
accruing rents and profits of the former, is given to the executor or
administrator until the final settlement of the estate, or until the estate has
been delivered to the heirs or devisees by order of the Court, which may be done
before final settlement, as provided in sections two hundred and fifty to two
hundred and fifty-seven, both inclusive. (Sec. 114.) Such is the general rule,
and it indicates the general policy and intent of the statute. This general rule
is subsequently modified to suit special conditions. If any part of the real
estate has to be sold, and a portion of it has been devised and not specially
charged with the payment of debts, and a portion has not been devised, the
latter is to be first sold. (Sec. 163.) So the order in which the estate is to
be applied in the payment of debts, under the statute, is: First, personal
estate; second, land specially charged with the payment of debts; third, land
which has not been devised and is taken by the heirs; and fourth, land devised.

   The claim of the respondent in this connection, that the rents and profits of
the real estate, coming in subsequent to the death of the testator, are personal
property, in the hands of the executor or administrator, within the meaning of
the foregoing provisions of the statute, is without foundation. Under the
Statute of Descents, and under the will, if there is one, if not otherwise
provided, the entire estate, both real and personal, with all accretions, vests
in the heirs and devisees immediately on the death of the testator or intestate,
subject only to the lien of the executor or administrator for the purposes of
administration, and hence, if not required for that purpose, the subsequent
rents and profits go to the party who takes the land from which they issue.
Undoubtedly, after the personalty, the rents and profits must be exhausted
before the land can be sold; for although, so far as I have been able to
discover, the statute contains no express provision to that effect, yet an
intent not to sell the lands, except as a last  resort, is shown by the whole
tenor of the Act. This intent is especially shown by the provisions of sections
two hundred and fifty to two hundred and fifty-seven, both inclusive, where it
is provided that the heirs, devisees and legatees may be put in the possession
of their respective shares upon their giving bonds for the payment of their
proportion of the debts, in which event, of course, the executor or
administrator ceases to be entitled to the possession of the land or its rents,
and thereafter each heir, devisee or legatee comes into the perception of the
rents which issue from his share.

   Where, as in the present case, the entire estate, both real and personal, has
been devised without any provision in the will as to the payment of debts, the
course to be pursued is described in the one hundred and eightieth section. It
is there provided that: "The estate, real and personal, given by will to any
legatees or devisees shall be held liable to the payment of debts, expenses of
administration and family expenses, in proportion to the value or amount of the
several devises or legacies, except that specific devises or legacies may be
exempted, if it shall appear to the Court necessary to carry into effect the
intention of the testator, if there shall be other sufficient estate." As we
have already seen, the will contains no specific devises or legacies, and it
results that the devisees under the will, or rather their respective shares,
must contribute to the payment of the debts and expenses in proportion to their
value.

   For these reasons I concur in the judgment.


                               2 of 100 DOCUMENTS

                THE PEOPLE ex rel. W. A. SAVAGE, as Real Estate
            Commissioner, Respondent, v. LOS ANGELES TRUST DEED AND
                      MORTGAGE EXCHANGE et al., Appellants

                                 Civ. No. 24998

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division One

          190 Cal. App. 2d 66; 12 Cal. Rptr. 144; 1961 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      2268


                                 March 14, 1961

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from an order of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County granting a preliminary injunction.  Ellsworth Meyer, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Injunctions--Preliminary Injunction--Application.  --Where a declaration by
a deputy attorney general and a certification by a supervising deputy in the
corporation commissioner's office, both "under penalty of perjury," were filed
in support of an amended complaint seeking issuance of a preliminary injunction,
defendants were not placed in doubt as to whether the certification or the
declaration were additions to the complaint to which they would be required to
plead, since such documents were in lieu of affidavits which would support a
preliminary injunction. (Code Civ. Proc., §§ 527, 2015.5.)

(2) Id.--Preliminary Injunction--Order.  --An order for issuance of a
preliminary injunction rendered the day after defendants' demurrer to the
complaint was argued and overruled but prior to expiration of the time given
defendants within which to answer the complaint was not premature, there being
nothing in the statute governing issuance of injunctions (Code Civ. Proc., § 527
) limiting the time within which the court could issue them.

(3) Brokers--Regulation--Real Property Loan Brokers.  --Although an action to
enjoin defendants buying and selling trust deeds and mortgages from acting as
real estate brokers or real estate salesmen was filed prior to the 1960
amendment of the law relating to real property loan brokers (Civ. Code, §
3081.01 et seq.), defendants were nevertheless required to be licensed as real
estate brokers or real estate salesmen where it was implicit in Civ. Code, §
3081.02, defining real property loan brokers, as originally enacted, that all
real property loan brokers were a fortiori real estate brokers, and where, in
addition, the amended complaint was filed following the statutory amendment and
after it became effective and realleged all allegations of the original
complaint as of the time of the amended complaint.

(4) Id.--Regulation--Real Property Loan Brokers.  --In an action to enjoin
defendants engaged in the business of buying and selling trust deeds and
mortgages from acting as real estate brokers and real estate salesmen without
being licensed, there was no merit to the claim that defendant salesmen could
not be real estate salesmen because the firm for which they worked was not
licensed as a real estate broker, since the salesmen were performing acts
defined as duties of real estate salesmen (Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10132.1) and
were properly regarded, and enjoined, as such by the trial court.

(5) Id.--Regulation--Real Property Loan Brokers.  --In an action to enjoin
defendants engaged in the business of buying and selling trust deeds and
mortgages from so acting until licensed by the Real Estate Commissioner, the
preliminary injunction forbidding defendants from acting as real estate brokers
was not inconsistent with the complaint and amendments thereto alleging that
defendants were acting as real property loan brokers, since all real property
loan brokers are by legal definition real estate brokers and real estate
salesmen, the terms being used interchangeably.

(6) Id.--Regulation--Real Property Loan Brokers.  --The statutes regulating real
property loan brokers (Civ. Code, § 3081.01 et seq.) and requiring them to be
licensed as real estate brokers are not unconstitutional on the ground that they
are arbitrary and capricious, but rest on a reasonable and valid classification,
there being an intimate relationship between dealers in trust deeds and the real
estate industry.

(7) Constitutional Law -- Class Legislation -- Reasonableness of Classification.
--Every presumption is in favor of the validity of a legislative act, and the
legislative classification will not be disturbed unless it is palpably arbitrary
in its nature and neither founded on nor supported by reason.

(8) Brokers--Regulation--Real Property Loan Brokers.  --Although administrative
proceedings for revocation of defendants' real estate brokers' licenses were
pending at the time the Real Estate Commissioner commenced an action to enjoin
such defendants and others from continuing to buy and sell trust deeds and
mortgages without being licensed as real estate brokers, the commissioner was
not barred from proceeding in such action until the administrative case was
concluded, since he is not required to proceed administratively in the first
place, but has discretion which remedy (or remedies) to pursue in a given case.

COUNSEL: Morgan Cuthbertson for Appellants.

Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, Lee B. Stanton and Lynn Henry Johnson, Deputy
Attorneys General, for Respondent.

JUDGES: Lillie, J.  Wood, P. J., and Fourt, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: LILLIE

OPINION

     Defendants have appealed from an order granting a preliminary injunction
which, broadly stated, prohibits each of them from acting as a real estate
broker and/or a real estate salesman, particularly with respect to the buying
and selling of trust deeds and mortgages, until licensed by plaintiff, as Real
Estate Commissioner of California.  1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   The
several defendants were represented by separate counsel below.  The second group
(for convenience so designated), consisting of defendants David Farrell, O. J.
Farrell, Tom Farrell and William F. McGraw, has not filed a brief on this
appeal.  The first group (consisting of the remaining defendants) has not filed
a reply to respondent's brief; through counsel, also, oral argument was waived.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    In addition to other pertinent statutory authority, the commissioner has
proceeded generally herein under sections 10130 and 10081, Business and
Professions Code.  Section 10130 provides: "It is unlawful for any person to
engage in the business, act in the capacity of, advertise or assume to act as a
real estate broker or real estate salesman within this State without first
obtaining a real estate license from the division.  . . ." Section 10081
provides: "Whenever the commissioner believes from evidence satisfactory to him
that any person has violated or is about to violate any of the provisions of
this part . . . he may bring an action in the name of the people of the State of
California in the Superior Court of the State of California against such person
to enjoin such person from continuing such violation or engaging therein or
doing any act or acts in furtherance thereof." It is further provided by section
10081: "In this action an order or judgment may be entered awarding such
preliminary or final injunction as may be proper, but no preliminary injunction
or temporary restraining order shall be granted without at least five days'
notice to the opposite party."

   Directed against all defendants named in the title of this appeal, as well as
25 Does, the present action for an injunction was instituted on March 14, 1960;
the trial court issued an order to show cause, returnable on March 20, 1960,
directed to all the defendants named in the complaint.  Following appearances by
all the named defendants, either by way of answer or demurrer or both, the trial
court on May 20, 1960, sustained a general demurrer interposed by Los Angeles
Trust Deed and Mortgage Exchange, 2 denied the prayer for  preliminary
injunctions and gave plaintiff 15 days to amend.  On June 3, 1960, verified
amendments to the original complaint were filed; pursuant thereto, on June 9,
1960, another order to show cause was issued being directed to the same
defendants and made returnable on June 20, 1960.  On June 20 all of the
defendants save Seeger appeared; a demurrer to the complaint as amended and
motions to strike therefrom were filed and argued; the demurrer was overruled,
the motions to strike denied, and defendants were given 10 days to answer the
amended complaint.  The following day (June 21) the trial court issued its
preliminary injunction imposing the restraints prayed for by the commissioner.
Three days later (June 24) notice of appeal was filed.  None of the defendants,
it is represented to this court, has filed an answer in the trial court to the
complaint as amended.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Referred
to hereinafter as "Exchange."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The following is a summary of the material facts, either as reflected by the
allegations in the complaint as amended or the verified answer of the first
group of defendants (as distinguished from the second group identified in
footnote 1, supra) to the original complaint.

   Defendant Exchange is a California Corporation with the following officers
(defendants herein): David J. Farrell, president and a director, O. J. Farrell,
secretary-treasurer and a director, Thomas Wolfe, Jr., vice president and a
director.  The remaining defendants were real estate salesmen employed by
Exchange.  Prior to September 17, 1959, Exchange held a real estate broker's
license through David J. Farrell, as qualifying officer, and the same Farrell,
individually, also held a real estate broker's license; on that date (September
17, 1959) the licenses of Exchange and David J. Farrell, individually, were
surrendered following the filing of an accusation by the commissioner (Bus. &
Prof. Code, §§ 5, 10100 et seq.).  Continuously thereafter, although unlicensed
to do so, Exchange through its officers and salesmen, for compensation, engaged
in the business of buying for purposes of resale, offering to the public,
selling and exchanging promissory notes of $ 10,000 or less secured by first
trust deeds and first mortgages upon real property, and promissory notes of $
5,000 or less secured by second mortgages or second trust deeds upon real
property. In the sales and exchanges of such trust deeds the corporation acted
pursuant to written contracts; through its officers and salesmen the corporation
also entered into (and performed) collateral contracts for the rendition of
services for and on behalf of the purchasers of  the trust deeds, which services
included the collection of monies due from the makers of the trust deeds,
applying the monies collected to the purchase of other trust deeds and remitting
such collections to the holders of the trust deeds.  Defendant salesmen, during
this same period, solicited funds from prospective purchasers for investment in
trust deeds, solicited signatures of prospective customers to the written
contracts for the sale of trust deeds, and sold the trust deeds to the investing
public.

   The corporation maintained offices in downtown Los Angeles, Pasadena, North
Hollywood, Beverly Hills and Santa Ana, as well as in San Francisco and Oakland.

   The restraints imposed by the preliminary injunction encompass the activities
just described; they are effective as to all defendants until appropriately
licensed by the commissioner.  The form of the decree does not appear to be
challenged.  The questions presented by the instant appeal are five in number
and will be discussed separately; in so doing, we shall consider several
appendices in the respective briefs consisting of matters not included in the
clerk's transcript -- neither party has objected to such augmentation of the
record.

     First, there were filed in support of the amended complaint, which prayed
for the issuance of a preliminary injunction, a certification by a supervising
deputy in the  office of the Commissioner of Corporations and a declaration by a
deputy attorney general both "under penalty of perjury"; appellants claim it was
error for the trial court to permit these documents to be filed, stating that
they were "in doubt as to whether the 'Certification' or the 'Declaration' were
additions to the complaint to which (they) would be required to plead." The
point is without merit.  Manifestly such documents were in lieu of affidavits
which will support the issuance of a preliminary injunction (Code Civ. Proc., §
527); since the addition of section 2015.5 to the Code of Civil Procedure, this
method of establishing the existence of a fact is expressly authorized.

     Second, it is argued that the order for issuance of the preliminary
injunction was "premature." As mentioned earlier, appellants' demurrer to the
complaint was argued and overruled on June 20, 1960, appellants being given 10
days to answer; the following day (June 21) the order appealed from was
rendered.  We agree with respondent that it was proper for the trial court, in
the exercise of its discretion, to issue the injunction before the expiration of
the 10 days for appellants'  answer.  Nothing is found in the governing statute
(Code Civ.  Proc., § 527) which supports appellants' contention: "An injunction
may be granted at any time before judgment upon a verified complaint, or upon
affidavits if the complaint in the one case, or the affidavits, in the other,
show satisfactorily that sufficient grounds exist therefor . . . .  No
preliminary injunction shall be granted without notice to the opposite party . .
." (emphasis added).  The proviso just emphasized appears to be the only
limitation as to time on the power of the court in the premises; nothing is said
about a waiting period of 10 days or longer to permit a defendant (as here) to
file an answer, although a defendant is permitted by statute to file affidavits
in opposition to the granting of the injunction sought -- interestingly enough,
certain appellants availed themselves of this right upon the original order to
show cause but declined to do so with respect to the amended complaint.  Too,
section 527 has never been amended since 1911; acquiescence in its provisions by
the Legislature during the succeeding 50 years is indeed significant.
Furthermore, in Riviello v. Journeymen Barbers etc. Union, 88 Cal.App.2d 499
[199 P.2d 400], where a preliminary injunction was sought, the defendant union
filed an affidavit in opposition and also demurred; the demurrer was sustained,
plaintiffs given 10 days to amend, and the request for a preliminary injunction
denied.  Although no mention is made in the opinion of any answer being filed,
the appellate court held that denial of the request for an injunction was an
abuse of discretion and reversed the order (denying the injunction) with
instructions to the trial court to issue such injunction. We hold that the order
appealed from was not "premature."

     Third, appellants contend that they were not required by law to be licensed
as real estate brokers or real estate salesmen at the time of the filing of the
original complaint (March 14, 1960).  Pointing to the commissioner's memorandum
of points and authorities in support of the amendments to the complaint, and a
copy of Assembly Bill 80 (attached as an exhibit) which was by declaration
"under penalty of perjury" stated to have been enacted into law on May 4, 1960,
and effective immediately, appellants argue that it appears therefrom that the
commissioner "is relying upon amendments" to the real property loan brokers law
which did not become effective until May 4, 1960; they do not deny, however,
that the law as amended required them to be licensed on June 3, 1960, when the
amended complaint was filed.  Say  appellants: "As the Commissioner had no cause
of action at the time the compaint was filed, the breath of life could not be
breathed into such action by subsequent legislation." An examination of the
pertinent legislation, as well as certain matters  in the record before us, does
not support this contention.

     Section 3081.02, Civil Code, as originally enacted, defines a real property
loan broker as "a real estate broker, other than a lender, who for compensation
payable by a borrower or lender, either directly or indirectly, or from the
proceeds of a loan, negotiates or solicits a prospective borrower or lender, for
the purpose of negotiating a loan to be secured by real property; or who in this
State as principal or agent engages in the business of buying, selling or
exchanging promissory notes, secured by mortgages or deeds of trust on real
property, or makes collateral agreements for buying and selling or for the
performance of services in connection with said mortgages and deeds of trust,
and who engages in such activities as a main or principal business or vocation
or maintains a regular place of business where the public may sell, purchase or
exchange such promissory notes" (emphasis added).  Implicit in the above
statute, the language of which is closely followed in respondent's pleadings, is
the concept that all real property loan brokers are a fortiori real estate
brokers. Other portions of the real property loan brokers law are set forth
below 3  and are here applicable.  In a verified response to the  original order
to show cause, defendant David Farrell, the president of appellant Exchange
stated: "Defendant Los Angeles Trust Deed and Mortgage Exchange is engaged in
buying and selling promissory notes secured by deeds of trust or mortgages of
real property. It acts in these transactions solely as principal.  Defendant
also enters into collateral contracts with the purchasers of such notes to
perform certain services, including the recording of changes of title to trust
deeds and the collecting of moneys due under the secured promissory notes.  The
defendant salesmen are employees of Los Angeles Trust Deed and Mortgage
Exchange.  As salesmen they solicit customers to purchase secured promissory
notes with defendant Los Angeles Trust Deed and Mortgage Exchange . . ."

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Civil
Code, section 3081.01, as originally enacted, provided: "It is unlawful for any
real estate broker to act as a real property loan broker within this State
without first registering as a real property loan broker with the Division of
Real Estate . . ." (Stats. 1959, chap. 1942, p. 4536.)

   Civil Code, section 3081.02, supra, as originally enacted, provided: "A real
property loan broker within the meaning of this article is a real estate broker,
. . ." (Stats. 1959, chap. 1942, p. 4536.)

   Civil Code, section 3081.03, as originally enacted, provided: "The definition
of real property loan broker as set forth in Section 3081.02 does not include
the negotiation of loan or loans by a licensed real estate broker in connection
with the sale or exchange by him of real property, or the sale or exchange by
him of any note or notes made or taken in connection with such transaction."
(Stats. 1959, chap. 1942, p. 4536.)

   Civil Code, section 3081.04, as originally enacted provided: "Any licensed
real estate broker may file an application for registration as a real property
loan broker . . ." (Stats. 1959, chap. 1942, p. 4536.)

   Civil Code, section 3081.05, as originally enacted, provided: ". . .  The
provisions of this section shall not be applicable to the negotiation of a loan
or loans by a licensed real estate broker in which he does not actually or
constructively in any way keep, have charge of, or otherwise handle any of the
funds involved in the loan." (Stats. 1959, chap. 1942, p. 4537.)

   Civil Code, section 3081.06, as originally enacted, provided: "The
registration as a real property loan broker shall expire at the same time as
does the applicant's license as a real estate broker. Thereafter the license and
the registration shall run for concurrent periods." (Stats. 1959, chap. 1942, p.
4537.)

   Civil Code, section 3081.07, as originally enacted, provided: "When a
registration as a real property loan broker has been issued, the applicant's
real estate brokers license shall be affixed with a distinctive insignia, as
designated by the Real Estate Commissioner, to clearly indicate to the public
that the licensee is also registered as a real property loan broker." (Stats.
1959, chap. 1942, p. 4537.)

   Civil Code, section 3081.08, as originally enacted, provided: "Every person
registered as a real property loan broker under this article shall be subject to
the disciplinary provisions of Article 3 (commencing at Section 10175) of
Chapter 3, Part 1, Division 4, of the Business and Professions Code." (Stats.
1959, chap. 1942, p. 4537.)

   In 1960,  section 3081.01, Civil Code, was amended to read as follows: "It is
unlawful for any person to act as a real property loan broker within this State
without first having obtained a real estate broker's license and having
registered as a real property loan broker with the Division of Real Estate."
(Stats. 1960 [1st Ex. Sess.], chap. 77.) In connection therewith, the
Legislature made the following declaration: "By the enactment of the real
property loan brokers law (Statutes 1959, Chapter 1942), the Legislature
intended to require all persons engaged in the activities defined therein, to be
licensed as real estate brokers. By inadvertence of language doubt has been cast
upon whether the legislative language accomplished this purpose.  It is the
purpose of this statute to make clear that by the said 1959 law and now, persons
so engaged as real property loan brokers are to be licensed as real estate
brokers and registered as real property loan brokers by the Real Estate
Commissioner." (Stats. 1960 [1st Ex. Sess.], chap. 77.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Thus, it seems clear that appellant Exchange, prior to and after the May 4,
1960, amendments, was a real estate property loan broker, and therefore a real
estate broker, and was required to be licensed as such -- reference will
subsequently be made to the status of the appellant salesmen; as a matter of
fact, the record discloses that the sole ground for the sustaining of the
demurrer to the original complaint was the failure to allege or show that the
demurring defendant was not licensed by the Commissioner of Corporations --
section 3081.81 exempts from the operation of the real property loan brokers law
certain persons licensed by that official.  Furthermore, assuming that appellant
Exchange was not required to be licensed until after the effective date of the
amendments, the validity of the injunction rendered on June 21, 1960, would not
be affected since it was issued pursuant to verified amendments to the complaint
filed June 3, 1960, and all of the allegations of the original complaint are
realleged in the amendments as of the date of such amendments.  The case of
California Farm & Fruit Co. v. Schiappa-Pietra, 151 Cal. 732 [91 P. 593], is
cited by appellants for the principle that a complaint speaks as of the time it
is filed; under the doctrine of relation back pertaining to amended pleadings,
an amendment to a complaint is deemed to be a statement of the facts existing at
the commencement of the action unless from the facts alleged or otherwise the
contrary appears (39 Cal.Jur.2d, Pleading, § 261).  Too, this being an equitable
proceeding "the court may consider the facts as they existed at the time of
trial so that the interests of justice may be subserved." ( Rosicrucian
Fellowship v. Rosicrucian etc. Church, 39 Cal.2d 121, 135 [245 P.2d 481].)

     As to the status of appellant salesmen, it was contended below (although
not argued here) that by legal definition a real estate salesman is one who
works for a licensed real estate broker (Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10132.1);
therefore, since Exchange was not licensed, its salesmen could not be real
estate salesmen. The point is a tenuous one and is answered by the equitable
maxim, "That which ought to have been done is to be regarded as done . . ." (
Civ. Code, § 3529).  Appellant salesmen were performing acts defined as duties
of real estate salesmen (Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10132.1,  supra); they were
properly so regarded, and enjoined, by the trial court.

     Next, appellants complain that the preliminary injunction is inconsistent
with the record in that it forbids them to act as real estate brokers, whereas
the complaint and amendments thereto allege that appellants were acting as real
property loan brokers.  As heretofore pointed out, all  real property loan
brokers are by legal definition real estate brokers and real estate salesmen --
the terms are used interchangeably; furthermore,  the record does not sustain
appellants' assertion as to the matters set forth in the complaint and
amendments thereto.

     Appellants' next point challenges the constitutionality of the governing
legislation; it is said to be "arbitrary and capricious, resting on no
reasonable or substantial difference between the classes." They further assert:
"Dealers in trust deeds are not engaged in the real estate business. Their
activity has nothing in common with the real estate business," concluding that
it is unconstitutional to require them to have the skills of a real estate
broker. Although the claim of unconstitutionality is made for the first time and
is therefore not open to review ( Buckmaster v. Silva, 103 Cal.App.2d 335, 338
[229 P.2d 799]), we shall consider the contention nonetheless.  In our opinion
the classification here is quite valid; we cannot overlook the commonplace that
real estate brokers act as intermediaries in the purchase and sale of real
estate; since very few of such transactions are for cash, they are usually
financed by mortgages and deeds of trust; also, the arranging of such mortgages
and deeds of trust is, and has been for many years, one of the peculiar services
of the real estate broker. One of the chief skills required of a real estate
broker is the ability to appraise real estate with an expert knowledge of the
market prices of the various types of real estate; anyone who sought to engage
as a principal vocation in the buying and selling of real estate without those
skills would be a menace to the real estate industry.  Appellants themselves
have pointed to the intimate relationship between dealers in trust deeds and the
real estate industry; thus, an affidavit filed by appellant David Farrell in
opposition to the original order to show cause states: "Affiant organized
LATD&ME and has caused it to be engaged in business for the purpose of meeting
an economic need and necessity in connection with the financing of residential
properties.  This economic need and necessity was demonstrated under the
following circumstances.  Prior to 1955 affiant personally acquired some trust
deeds in connection with a personal investment transaction in real estate, and
later, in seeking to liquidate those trust deeds, he learned that there was no
established market place where trust deeds could be either purchased or sold.
He further discovered, in connection with his efforts to liquidate the trust
deeds which he had so acquired, that there was only what might be described as a
'jungle market' in trust deeds, particularly second trust deeds. Inquiring
further,  affiant learned that Savings and Loan Associations, and Banks, were by
law generally prohibited from dealing or acquiring second trust deeds. He also
found that about the only place available to a person interested in either
buying, selling, or dealing in second trust deeds was the classified sections of
the newspapers.  Affiant further learned that the going rate or price which the
holder of a second trust deed could expect to receive on the sale or liquidation
of it, was no more than 50% of the sum secured by the trust deed. Fifty percent
was all that a person could expect to receive from such a trust deed, even
though the trust deed might be safely and adequately secured.  Affiant also
learned that in most transactions, where homes were acquired by young married
couples, the down payment received by the builders or owners was insufficient to
finance the purchase of the use of a first trust deed alone, and that second
trust deeds were essential to complete such financing.  The builders of tract
houses and other residential properties were compelled to take second trust
deeds in order to consummate sale transactions, and to look to the liquidation
of said second trust deeds for the purpose of cashing out such profit they might
have in the transactions.  These builders would accordingly increase the sale
price of such residential properties so that they would receive what they
considered to be a  normal and proper profit when the second trust deed so
acquired by them had been sold for 50% of its face value.  In every case it was
the purchaser or purchasers of the residential properties who were necessarily
burdened by the increased cost of their homes by reason of these conditions."

   In 1955, pointing out the evils it sought to remedy, the Legislature declared
that dealers in trust deeds upon real estate were real estate brokers: "A recent
opinion of the Attorney General (No. 54/82) holds that promissory notes referred
to in Section 25102 of the Corporations Code are securities within the meaning
of the Corporate Securities Law and if offered to the public are not exempt from
the law.  The person making such an offer to the public is held in the opinion
to be a security broker. This has been neither the practice nor the
understanding of persons engaged either in the securities or the real estate
business. Transactions in such promissory notes relating to real estate always
have been conducted by real estate brokers, and not by security brokers. It is
the practice of the public having such promissory notes to buy or  sell to go to
real estate brokers. As a result of the opinion of the Attorney General a
divided authority exists as between the Division of Real Estate and the
Department of Corporations and a cloud is placed upon the enforcement of the
law.  If established practices are in violation of law as interpreted by the
Attorney General, then it will be necessary for the State to require dual
licensing of many thousands of real estate licensees.  Not to immediately alter
the law as above proposed would impose a great hardship on the public, the real
estate brokers and the departments involved." (Stats. 1955, chap. 1792, p.
3308.)

     "Every presumption is in favor of the validity of the legislative act and
the legislative classification will not therefore be disturbed unless it is
palpably arbitrary in its nature and neither founded upon nor supported by
reason." ( In re Herrera, 23 Cal.2d 206, 212 [143 P.2d 345].) Appellants here
have made only a brief and token attack on the classification in question; it is
unconvincing and unsound.

     Finally, appellants make reference to a pending administrative case
involving appellant Exchange, David Farrell, its president, David Farrell,
individually, and Oliver Joseph Farrell; it is contended that the commissioner
cannot proceed against them herein until the administrative case is concluded.
The contention is without merit.  It is suggested that the commissioner has
adopted contradictory positions; thus, in the administrative case he seeks to
revoke the licenses of the appellants named in the accusation, while in the
present proceeding he asserts that the party defendants are unlicensed.  Only
three of the present appellants, it appears, were named in the accusation --
hence, as to the remaining appellants the commissioner's position could not be
contradictory; but his position is not contrary even as to the appellants in the
administrative case.  That action (revocation of licenses) was commenced in June
1959; on September 17, 1959, before any hearing was had, Exchange and David
Farrell voluntarily surrendered their licenses. By section 10103, Business and
Professions Code, it is expressly provided that the commissioner may proceed to
a decision even though the license is surrendered; the former licensee is
regarded as a constructive licensee for the purpose of retaining jurisdiction
with the commissioner.  Appellants cite Lynn v. Duckel, 46 Cal.2d 845 [299 P.2d
236], and Abelleira v. District Court of Appeal, 17 Cal.2d 280 [109 P.2d 942,
132 A.L.R. 715], for the proposition that the commissioner cannot proceed in the
present matter until   all administrative remedies have been exhausted.  The
cited cases, however, pertained to private persons seeking to invoke judicial
action against a public official; here a public official is seeking judicial
action against private persons to end a violation of law.  The Real Estate
Commissioner of California is expressly given several means of ending law
violations within his particular  jurisdiction.  Thus, he may seek a criminal
complaint (Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10081); he may seek an injunction (Bus. & Prof.
Code, § 10081) or he may issue a cease and desist order (Bus. & Prof. Code, §
10084).  Which remedy (or remedies) to pursue in a given case is left to the
sound discretion of the commissioner.  Where the Legislature has desired that
the commissioner proceed administratively in the first place, it has so
declared: "Before denying, suspending or revoking any license issuable or issued
under the provisions of this part, the commissioner shall proceed as prescribed
by Chapter 5 of Part I of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code, and the
commissioner shall have all the powers granted therein." (Bus. & Prof. Code, §
10100).

   The order is affirmed.


                               3 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              CHARLES E. GUY, Respondent, v. H. W. BRENNEN et al.,
                                   Appellants

                                 Civ. No. 3876

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SECOND APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION TWO

             60 Cal. App. 452; 213 P. 265; 1923 Cal. App. LEXIS 632


                           January 17, 1923, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:      APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County. Louis W. Myers, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Broker's Commissions--Sale of Lease and Furniture--Pleading -- Evidence --
Variance -- Appeal.  --In an action to recover a broker's commission, error in
the complaint and findings in describing the services rendered by plaintiff as
that of finding a purchaser for the "furniture, furnishings and equipment" of
defendant's apartment house, whereas the evidence showed that plaintiff's
employment extended to the procurement of a purchaser of the lease held by
defendants as well as of the furniture and equipment, will be disregarded on
appeal, where the defendants could not have been misled as to the nature of the
services which plaintiff was employed to perform and for which he was seeking
compensation.

(2) Id. -- Real Estate -- Sale of Lease -- Statute of Frauds.  --The term "real
estate," as used in subdivision 6 of section 1624 of the Civil Code and section
1973 of the Code of Civil Procedure, does not embrace such an estate or interest
in real property as amounts only to an estate for years; therefore an agreement
employing an agent or broker to sell a lease of an apartment house is not
invalid because the same or some note or memorandum thereof is not in writing
and subscribed by the party to be charged, or by his agent.

COUNSEL: Walter E. Burke for Appellants.

John H. Miller for Respondent.

JUDGES: FINLAYSON, P. J. Works, J., concurred. CRAIG, J., Dissenting.

OPINION BY: FINLAYSON

OPINION

     FINLAYSON, P. J. Plaintiff, a realty broker, brought this action to recover
the commission earned by him in the sale of defendants' apartment house.
Judgment passed for plaintiff and defendants appeal.

   The first point advanced by appellants against the judgment is more technical
than meritorious.   The complaint alleged and the trial court found that
defendants employed plaintiff to find a purchaser for the "furniture,
furnishings and equipment" of the apartment house. Defendants, who had leased
the house from the owner, held a five-year lease thereon. Plaintiff, as the
proof showed, was employed to find a purchaser of the lease as well as of the
furniture and equipment. It now is claimed that the finding that plaintiff was
employed to sell the "furniture, furnishings and equipment" is not supported by
the evidence, for the reason that plaintiff's employment extended to the
procurement of a purchaser of the lease as well as of the furniture and
equipment. We can see in this objection no good reason for disturbing the
judgment. The gist of plaintiff's cause of action is the performance of certain
services in bringing about a sale of defendants' property. The fact that the
allegation in the complaint and the finding of the court did not describe all
that was to pass to the purchaser in the event that a sale should be effected
through plaintiff's efforts could not have misled defendants as to the nature of
the services which plaintiff was employed to perform and for which he now is
seeking compensation; and we are unable to see how defendants could have been
injured by the failure of the complaint and findings to make mention of the
lease. Under the familiar and oft-cited sections of the code and  constitution (
Code Civ. Proc., sec. 475; Const., art. VI, sec. 4 1/2) the error will here be
disregarded.

     Appellant's second point is that the contract of employment, which was
oral, was invalid under that provision of our statute of frauds which provides
that an agreement employing an agent or broker to sell "real estate" for a
compensation or commission is invalid unless the same or some note or memorandum
thereof be in writing and subscribed by the party to be charged, or by his
agent. ( Civ. Code, sec. 1624, subd. 6; Code Civ. Proc., sec. 1973, subd. 6.) In
this particular subdivision of the statute the words "real estate" are used,
whereas in the preceding subdivision the words "real property" occur.
Appellant's contention, stated in the language of their brief, is: "We contend
that by the use of the term 'real estate' rather than 'real property' in this
subdivision (subd. 6) the legislature referred to 'estates in real property.'"
And because a lease for years is an estate ( Civ. Code, sec. 701 and sec. 761,
subd. 3), and a broker employed to sell a lease for years is therefore employed
to sell an "estate," it is argued that respondent was employed to sell "real
estate," within the meaning of subdivision 6 of the statute of frauds. This
argument loses sight of the significance of the word "real" in the expression "
real estate." It may be conceded, as appellants contend, that by the words "real
estate," as here used, the legislature did refer to "estates" in, i. e.,
interests in, "real property," and not to the land itself -- the corpus. But
even so, the words "real estate" do not connote any and every estate or interest
in real property. They embrace only such an estate or interest in real property
as reaches to the dignity of real estate. And a lease is not "real" estate. The
legislature was dealing with the terms of art, and is presumed to have used them
in their technical sense. "The term 'real estate,'" says Kent, "means an estate
in fee or for life in land, and does not comprehend terms of years, or any
interest short of a freehold." (3 Kent's Commentaries, p. 401.)  "They [the
words "real estate"] import a freehold interest, either an estate for life or in
fee simple." ( Bourn v. Robinson, 49 Tex. Civ. App. 157 [107 S.W. 873].) "A
leasehold interest is not real estate, but merely a chattel real, which is
personal property." ( Townsend v. Boyd, 217 Pa. 386, 12 L. R. A. (N. S.) 1148,
[66 A.  1099].) See, also, Mayor v. Mabie, 13 N.Y. 151  [64 Am. Dec. 538],
Scogin v. Perry, 32 Tex. 21, 29, and Harrington v. Sharp, 1 Greene 131 [48 Am
Dec 365].

   If we return to the definitions which are to be found in our code we shall be
led to the same result. An estate is an interest in real property. ( Civ. Code,
sec. 701.) A lease -- an estate for years -- is an estate in real property. (
Civ. Code, sec. 761, subd. 3.) But though a lease is an "estate," i. e., an
interest in real property, it is not "real" estate. It is a chattel. ( Civ.
Code, sec. 765.) True, it is a chattel real (sec. 765); but all chattels are
included within the code definition of personal property. ( Civ. Code, sec. 14,
subd. 3; Code Civ. Proc., sec. 17, subd. 3.) It follows, therefore, that under
the definitions to be found in our codes a lease for years, though a chattel
real, is personal property, and, therefore, though it may be an estate or
interest in real property, it is not such an estate or interest as is connoted
by the words "real estate." "A term for years is only personal property -- a
chattel real. . . . An assignment of a term for years is, therefore, governed
generally by the rules applicable to the sale of personal property." ( Jeffers
v. Easton, Eldridge Co., 113 Cal. 345, 352, 353 [45 P. 680, 681]. See, also,
Summerville v. Stockton Milling Co., 142 Cal. 529, 539 [76 P. 243].)

   If the term "real estate," as used in this subdivision of our statute of
frauds, were held to include a lease for years, a singular anomaly might arise.
Neither an agreement for, nor the actual transfer of, a lease for one year or
less need be in writing. This is because our statute of frauds, by appropriate
qualifying language, in effect exempts from its operation all leases for a term
not longer than one year. ( Code Civ. Proc., sec. 1973, subd. 5; Civ. Code, sec.
1624, subd. 5, and sec. 1091.) But the words "real estate," as used in
subdivision 6 of sections 1624 of the Civil Code and 1973 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, are not thus limited by any qualifying word or phrase. The result is
that those words, as used in subdivision 6, include any and every interest in
real property which properly may be denominated "real estate." So that if it
were proper to classify an estate for years as "real estate," then no agreement
authorizing or employing an  agent or broker, for a compensation or a
commission, to find a purchaser of any lease, even of a lease for one month,
would be valid unless the employment were in writing. "Estates for years embrace
all terms limited to endure for a definite and ascertained period, however short
or long this period may be; that is to say, they embrace terms for a fixed
number of weeks or months, or for a single year, as well as for any definite
number of years, however great." (24 Cyc. 958.) Thus in Stoppelkamp v. Mangeot,
42 Cal. 316, it was held that a lease for one month is technically a tenancy for
years. Since a parol lease for a year or for a shorter definite period is valid,
what an anomaly it would be if an agreement employing a broker to find a
purchaser for such a lease were invalid unless it or a memorandum thereof were
in writing! And yet such an anomalous situation is inescapable if the words "
real estate," as used in subdivision 6 of the statute, shall be held to include
leasehold interests.

   We are, of course, aware that there is a reverse side of the picture which we
have painted of an anomalous situation, and that under our construction of the
words "real estate" an oral employment of a broker to secure a purchaser of a
lease for a term longer than one year will be valid, although the lease which is
the subject matter of the employment must be in writing in order to be valid.
But because either construction of the words "real estate" will involve what
appears to be somewhat of an anomaly, we think there is all the more reason why
those words should be construed in the light of our code definitions --
definitions which, as at common law, make all chattels, real as well as
personal, to fall within the definition of personal property.

   There is nothing in Commercial Bank v. Pritchard, 126 Cal. 600 [59 P. 130]
which conflicts with the foregoing views. That case, following the reasoning in
Garber v. Gianella, 98 Cal. 527 [33 P. 458], holds that an instrument whereby a
lease is created must be deemed to be a "conveyance" for all the purposes
mentioned in sections 1213 and 1214 of the Civil Code. The court was obliged so
to hold because, by section 1215 of the Civil Code, there is an express
legislative declaration that the term "conveyance,"  as used in sections 1213
and 1214, shall embrace every instrument, except wills, whereby any estate or
interest in real property is created, aliened, mortgaged or encumbered. But
because the legislature has said, in effect, that, for the purposes of the law
respecting the recordation of conveyances, a written instrument whereby a
leasehold interest is created shall be deemed to be a "conveyance," it does not
necessarily follow that the leasehold interest conveyed by such instrument is "
real estate."

   The words "real property," as defined by section 14 of the Civil Code,
subdivision 3, are "coextensive with lands, tenements and hereditaments." The
learned author of the majority opinion in Commercial Bank v. Pritchard, supra,
seems to have used the terms "real estate" and "real property" interchangeably.
It doubtless was in view of this laxity in the commissioner's use of two
expressions which, technically, are not convertible terms, that Mr. Justice
McFarland was prompted to write a separate but concurring opinion so as to avoid
any possible future misconception as to the real purport and extent of the
court's decision. That this was the purpose of the concurring opinion seems
evident from its language, Mr.  Justice McFarland saying: "I concur in the
judgment; but the opinion of the commissioner might, perhaps, [italics ours] be
construed as holding, generally, that an estate for years in land is real
property, which, of course, is not so. An estate for years is, in its nature,
personal property -- a chattel real; and it is subject for most purposes to the
law which applies to personal property. (See Jeffers v. Easton, 113 Cal. 345,
where the subject is discussed and our code division of property into real and
personal is shown to be, substantially, that of the common law.)"

   We think it clear that whether we look to the common law or to our code
definitions, the term "real estate," as used in subdivision 6 of sections 1624
of the Civil Code and 1973 of the Code of Civil Procedure, must be held not to
embrace such an estate or interest in real property as amounts only to an estate
for years.

   The judgment is affirmed.

   Works, J., concurred.

DISSENT BY: CRAIG

DISSENT

    CRAIG, J., Dissenting. I dissent. In doing so it will serve no useful
purpose to write an extended opinion, or one which will more than outline my
reasons.

   Unquestionably the term "real estate" has been construed as of narrower or
broader meaning according to the context in which it is used. This is true of
words of similar application, as "conveyance" and "grant." ( San Pedro etc. R.
R. Co. v. Hamilton, 161 Cal. 610 [37 L. R. A. (N. S.) 686, 119 P. 1073].)
According to Tiffany on Real Property, second edition, section 3, the expression
"real estate" is frequently used by legislatures and courts as applying to any
estate in lands. It is elementary that an estate is the interest one owns in
either real or personal property; that a real estate is one whose duration is
indefinite, as for life or in fee; and that interests in property of a fixed
duration are personal estates. (Robinson's Elementary Law, secs. 60 and 62.) As
used in this common-law sense, "estate" is a noun, and "real" a descriptive
adjective. But the words "real estate" may be so employed as to jointly
constitute a term in effect a single word in the nature of a noun; and in my
opinion it was the intention of the legislature to apply this meaning to the
term when it said that "an agreement authorizing or employing an agent or broker
to purchase or sell real estate for compensation or a commission" is invalid
unless the same or some note or memorandum thereof be in writing, etc. (Subd. 6,
sec. 1973, Code Civ. Proc. Italics mine.) Commercial Bank v. Pritchard, 126 Cal.
600, at page 603 [59 P. 130], holds that a lease for a term of five years with
provision for its cancellation and renewal is a "conveyance of real estate."

   It is true that in the opinion of Mr. Justice McFarland, concurring, the
meaning assigned the term by the opinion of the court was justified only because
of sections 1214 and 1215 of the Civil Code. However, it is equally clear that
the majority of the court did not entertain the same view of the matter as that
able jurist.  Sections 1214 and 1215 of the Civil Code have to do with the
recording of instruments, whereas in that part of the opinion of the court where
it is said that "the lease by the Railway Company to Pritchard was a conveyance
of real estate" no reference to rights based upon the recording of the
instrument was made. That phase of the case was not then being discussed.  The
opinion states that "the lease . . . is real estate," and upon that fact
predicates the proposition that the warehouse placed upon the land by the owner
of the lease went with a conveyance of the lease. To my mind the purpose of
subdivision 6 was clearly intended to have general application in the prevention
of fraud as between real estate agents and their customers, not only in
disposing of estates in real property for life or of greater duration,  but to
accomplish the same purpose in connection with all of the transactions involving
interests of any kind in land which are daily a part of the real estate agent's
business. If an anomaly is thereby created, as pointed out in the majority
opinion, it is the not unusual result of piecemeal legislation.


                               4 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           WALTER E. DABNEY, Respondent, v. L. T. EDWARDS, Appellant

                                L. A. No. 15343

                          Supreme Court of California

           5 Cal. 2d 1; 53 P.2d 962; 1935 Cal. LEXIS 617; 103 A.L.R.
                                      822


                               December 30, 1935

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County and from an order denying a new trial.  J. T. B. Warne, Judge Presiding.

COUNSEL: E. V. Knauf for Appellant.

Harold C. Morton and Hanna & Morton for Respondent.

JUDGES: In Bank.

OPINION BY: THE COURT

OPINION

     The petition for a hearing in this case was granted for the reason that
there  were pending in this court several cases involving important questions
with reference to the nature of the legal interests created and conveyed by
certain oil and gas leases, and it was deemed advisable to postpone a final
determination of the question involved in this case until the nature of such
interests should be definitely determined and defined by this court.  The facts
of the case are succinctly and correctly set forth in the opinion of the
District Court of Appeal and are as follows:

   "On January 25, 1929, Edward C. Doak was a licensed real estate salesman
acting under Walter E. Dabney, the respondent, a licensed real estate broker. On
that date he was authorized orally by appellant to sell for appellant certain
oil leases,  all of which were for a term of years, and two of which provided,
in addition to the term specified, that the leases were to continue 'so long
thereafter as gas or oil or either of said substances is produced therefrom in
quantities sufficient to pay to pump, or otherwise to secure and save . . .' The
sale of the leases was consummated, appellant contending in the court below that
Doak had agreed to accept 2 1/2 per cent commission which was paid.  Doak
testified and the court found upon sufficient evidence that the agreement called
for a commission of 5 per cent, one-half of which was to be paid as installments
were paid on the purchase price of the leases, and the other one-half on the
happening of a contingency which did occur prior to the bringing of the lawsuit.
Respondent admitted the receipt of one-half of the commission, and proved that
the contingency upon which the payment of the other one-half depended had
occurred, and demanded payment of the additional 2 1/2 per cent for which he
obtained the judgment, from which this appeal is taken.  There is also an appeal
from an order denying motion for new trial."

   The primary contention presented by appellant as grounds for reversal is that
the agreement to employ respondent was of the kind required to be in writing,
and that since it was oral, respondent cannot recover.  Subdivision 5 of section
1624 of the Civil Code provides that, "an agreement authorizing or employing an
agent or broker to purchase or sell real estate for compensation or a
commission" is invalid, unless the same, or some note or memorandum thereof, is
in writing and subscribed by the party to be charged or by his agent.  The
question presented, therefore, is whether an agreement, employing and
authorizing a real estate broker to sell oil and gas leases such as are here
involved, is within the statute of frauds; or more specifically, does such an
agreement contemplate the purchase of "real estate" as the term is used in
subdivision 5 of section 1624 of the Civil Code?

    It should be kept in mind that the agreement here involved between the
seller and a broker or agent deals solely with the compensation or commission
receivable by the broker or agent for his services rendered in selling "real
estate" and that subdivision 5 of section 1624 does not contain any provision
specifically relating to "an interest in real estate".  It is subdivision 4 of
section 1624 of the Civil Code which provides that an agreement for the sale of
real property or an interest therein shall be invalid unless the same or some
memorandum thereof is in writing and subscribed by the party to be charged or by
his agent.  This latter type of agreement in which the parties are the seller
and the buyer and the subject-matter is the property to be sold and purchased
is, of course, separate and entirely distinct from the agreement here under
consideration in which the parties are the seller of the property on the one
hand and the broker or agent on the other, and the subject-matter of the
agreement is the compensation or commission to be paid the broker or agent.  In
the agreement here involved "an interest in real property" may only be read into
the subdivision by a broad and liberal interpretation of the term, "real estate
".

   Appellant contends that the term "real estate", as the term is used in
subdivision 5 of section 1624 of the Civil Code, should be given a broad and
liberal interpretation; that it should not be limited to the technical common
law definition of an estate of freehold, but should be enlarged to include "any
interest or estate in land".  Respondent contends that the term "real estate"
has a fixed, definite meaning, derived from the common law, which is synonymous
with real property, which includes therein only freehold estates and excludes
therefrom estates for years and estates of lesser duration, such as estates at
will, from year to year, and at sufferance.  It is his contention that although
estates for years under the common law may be interests or estates in real
property, they are not "real estate" or real property, but under the common law
definition are classified as "chattels  real", or personal property. It appears
from the record that the case was tried upon the theory that the leases involved
were similar in terms and were properly classifiable in the same category of
property interests.  At the oral argument before the District Court of Appeal it
was suggested, apparently for the first time, that the two leases which provide
for  a term of twenty years, "and so long thereafter as gas or oil or either of
said substances is produced therefrom in quantities sufficient to pay to pump,
or otherwise to secure and save . . . " created freehold estates in the nature
of determinable fees, and that, notwithstanding the fact that the two leases
which provided for a definite term of years might be properly classified as
estates for years, and therefore, under the common-law definition of chattels
real, as personal property, the two leases which contained the further provision
that the term should continue "so long thereafter as gas or oil or either of
said substances is produced therefrom in quantities sufficient to pay to pump,
or otherwise to secure and save . . . " must be classified as freehold estates,
and, therefore, necessarily defined as "real estate".

     The District Court of Appeal concluded, and in our opinion correctly so,
that the definition of real estate as contained in said subdivision 5 of section
1624 of the Civil Code conformed to the common law definition of real estate and
that the oil and gas leases herein which provided for a definite term of years,
being properly classified as estates for years, were chattels real, or personal
property, and, therefore, an agreement authorizing or employing an agent or
broker to purchase or sell oil and gas leases which provide for a definite term
of years is not invalid by reason of the fact that it is not in writing.  In so
far as the opinion of the District Court of Appeal may be limited in its
discussion to oil and gas leases which provide for definite terms, we are in
accord with the reasoning and conclusion therein expressed, and as so limited,
we adopt that portion of the opinion of the District Court of Appeal which deals
with the question of whether or not the interests created by oil and gas leases
providing for definite terms are, or are not, "real estate" within the scope of
subdivision 5 of section 1624 of the Civil Code.  Said opinion, written by Mr.
Justice Roth pro tempore with certain modifications, is as follows:

     "Real estate at common law and in its generally accepted meaning is
synonymous with real property. Estates for years at common law were classified
as chattels real and regarded as personal property. Except in those cases where
our courts have construed some particular statute, which by its own terms so
defined real estate as to include an estate for years, a claim to an estate in
or a right to possession of  real property, the common law definition has been
definitely maintained and endorsed by the courts of this state.  (10 Cal. Jur.
601; Jeffers  v. Easton, Eldridge & Co., 113 Cal. 345 [45 Pac. 680];
German-American Savings Bank v. Gollmer, 155 Cal. 683, 686, 687 [102 Pac. 932,
24 L. R. A. (N. S.) 1066]; County of Ventura v. Barry, 207 Cal. 189 [277 Pac.
333]; Summerville v. Stockton Milling Co., 142 Cal. 529 [76 Pac. 243]; Potts
Drug Co. v. Benedict, 156 Cal. 322 [104 Pac. 432, 25 L. R. A. (N. S.) 609]; Barr
Lumber Co. v. Perkins, 214 Cal. 531 [6 Pac. (2d) 948].)

   "A perusal of the foregoing cases discloses the persistence with which our
courts have maintained that 'the common law on the subject has not been changed
by our statutes . . . (and that) there is a marked difference between things
real and an interest or estate in things real'.  ( Jeffers v. Easton, Eldridge &
Co., supra, at 353.) This position is further demonstrated by a comparison of
the cases of Pike v. Psihogios, 68 Cal. App. 145 [228 Pac. 722], and Nittler v.
Continental Casualty Co., 94 Cal. App. 498 [271 Pac. 555, 272 Pac. 309]. In both
cases hearings were denied by the Supreme Court.  Both cases involved the
construction of section 2 of 'An act to define real estate brokers and salesmen
. . . ' approved June 1, 1917 (Deering's Gen. Laws, 1931 ed., Act 112).  In the
Pike case the court said: 'It will be observed that section 2 of said act, in
its enumeration of the acts which only a duly licensed real estate broker may
perform, does not specify either the sale of personal property or the sale of a
lease to real property. It was, therefore, not necessary for Katugios to obtain
a license under said section 2 to perform the services rendered by him to the
plaintiff, and which forms the basis of this counterclaim.' In 1925, section 2
of the act in question was amended.  (Stats. 1925, p. 600.) Thereafter the court
in the Nittler case ruled exactly opposite to the rule in the Pike case, the
court saying: 'As  a result of the Pike decision the legislature, at its next
session, amended this section of the act so as to expressly include within the
definition of a real estate broker one who negotiated for or sold or exchanged a
lease in real property.'

   "While the exact question presented here has never been decided in this state
with reference to oil leases, it has been squarely decided with reference to
ordinary leases. ( Guy v.    Brennen, 60 Cal. App. 452 [213 Pac. 265].) The
legal doctrine announced by Guy v. Brennen, supra, is that the words 'real
estate' as used in subdivision 5, section 1624, Civil Code (subd. 6 at the time
of that case), means real property and not personal property and the corollary
which follows, to-wit: That a contract of employment made with a real estate
broker 'to sell a lease for years' is not within the statute of frauds and need
not be in writing.  This doctrine is apparently followed with approval in Layne
v. Malmgren, 99 Cal. App. 742 [279 Pac. 670]; County of Ventura v. Barry, 207
Cal. 189 [277 Pac. 333]; Spalding v. Bennett, 93 Cal. App. 577 [269 Pac. 948];
Lind v. Huene, 205 Cal. 569 [271 Pac. 1087]; Edgecomb v. Callahan, 132 Cal. App.
248 [22 Pac. (2d) 521]. Other authorities are to the same effect: 17 Cal. Law
Review 187; Nelson Law of Real Estate Brokerage, page 25; Myers v. Arthur, 135
Wash. 583 [238 Pac. 899]; Lowenmeyer v. National Lumber Co., 71 Ind. App. 458
[125 N. E. 67]; Barr v. Campbell Mill Co., 154 Wash. 83 [280 Pac. 929, 284 Pac.
1119].

     "Appellant vigorously assails this doctrine, contending that there is a
substantial distinction between an oil lease and an ordinary lease ( Graciosa
Oil Co. v. County of Santa Barbara, 155 Cal. 140 [99 Pac. 483, 20 L. R. A. (N.
S.) 211]); and that Guy v. Brennen, supra, has in effect been overruled in the
case of Wilson v. Earp, 91 Cal. App. 538 [267 Pac. 112].

   "In the Graciosa case the court says, at pages 144, 145, speaking with
reference to the difference between an oil lease and an ordinary lease: 'There
are material differences between such estates for years and the right and
privilege to bore for and extract oil, held by plaintiff under its oil lease. .
. .  The right vested in plaintiff is an estate for years, so far as necessary
for the purpose of taking oil therefrom, and it carries with it the right to
extract the oil and remove it from the premises.  This right constitutes, for
the term prescribed, a servitude on the land and a chattel real at common law. (
Civ. Code, sec. 801, subd. 5; sec. 802, subd. 6; Harvey C. & C. Co. v. Dillon,
59 W. Va. 605 [53 S. E. 928-937, 6 L. R. A. (N. S.) 628], and cases there cited;
Thornton on Oil Leases, sec. 51.) . . .  The right of the lessee under this
contract is more than that of the ordinary lessee. It is of a different
character and for a different purpose.  He has no  right at all to the usufruct
of the soil.  His right extends to the extraction of a certain part of the
substance of the land itself, to its permanent separation and removal and its
conversion to his own use.  The whole subject of the contract is to the effect,
if not technically a sale and conveyance of a substantial and specific part of
the land, at least a disposition and transfer thereof to another.'

   "In the Graciosa case, as is suggested by the foregoing excerpt, the court
was considering whether an oil lease could be assessed and taxed severally and
separately from the real estate, the court holding that it could be so
separately taxed, saying at page 145: 'It can be easily seen that the reasons
for the rule applicable to ordinary leases for the use only, that the entire
estate should be assessed to the lessor, are entirely lacking here, and that it
would be a more just and reasonable adjustment of the burden of taxation of such
oil leases to assess each party separately with the value of his right or estate
in the land.  There is no statute forbidding it.  On the contrary, we think the
statute at least permits it, if it does not require it.'

   "In the Graciosa case, the court nowhere says that such a lease is real
property, but on the contrary says: 'This right constitutes, for the term
prescribed, a servitude on the land and a chattel real at common law.' (Italics
ours.)

   "It must be apparent, therefore, that even though our courts have recognized
that there are substantial differences between an oil lease and an ordinary
lease, that such recognition has not, by any decisions of the courts of this
state, made an oil lease real property in the generic common law sense of that
phrase.  Our courts have held uniformly and unequivocally that the interest
created by an oil and gas lease is a term for years, and as such it is
personalty.  ( Chandler v. Hart, 161 Cal. 405 [119 Pac. 516, Ann. Cas. 1913B,
1094]; Barr Lumber Co. v. Perkins, 214 Cal. 531 [6 Pac. (2d) 948].)

    "Appellant criticizes the soundness of the rule announced by Guy v. Brennen,
supra, because the court in its opinion in that case failed to take into
consideration, or at least in its opinion failed to refer to subdivision 3,
section 658, or subdivision 5, section 801, Civil Code, adding further that
section 773 of the Civil Code suggests a general distinction between 'chattel'
and a 'chattel real'.

    "No specific mention is made in the Brennen case of these sections, but in
Jeffers v. Easton, Eldridge & Co., 113 Cal. 345 [45 Pac. 680], the court makes
clear that by section 765 of the Civil Code, California follows the common law
distinction between freehold estates and estates for years, and says: 'The same
distinction is to be found in section 14 and in sections 657 to 663 of the same
code.' And further, that the right of taking minerals mentioned in section 801,
subdivision 5, Civil Code, is not an incorporeal hereditament which constitutes
the subject of the oil lease, but is an easement attached to other land as an
easement appurtenant thereto.  In other words, section 801 has to do with
easements over a servient tenement appurtenant to a dominant tenement.  There is
no such question in this case.

   "The fact that section 773 of the Civil Code provides that 'an estate for
life may be created in a term of years' can have no significance, for the reason
as stated in the Jeffers case (pp. 352-353), 'A term for years is only personal
property -- a chattel real.  "An estate for life, even if it be pur autre vie,
is a freehold; but an estate for a thousand years is only a chattel, and
reckoned part of the personal estate." (2 Blackstone's Commentaries, 143,
385-387.) "All leases for years are held by law to be of less value -- perhaps
it would be more proper to say of less dignity -- than estates for life; estates
for life being freeholds, and for years but chattels, and regarded as part of
the personal estate, and cast upon the executor." . . .  The common law upon the
subject has not been changed by our statutes.  The provision of section 1113 of
the Civil Code, that only certain enumerated covenants shall be implied in
transfers of property, is expressly limited to a conveyance by which "an estate
of inheritance or fee simple is to be passed"; and by section 765 the common-law
distinction between freehold estates and estates for years is followed, and it
is declared that "estates for years are chattels real".  The same distinction is
to be found in section 14, and in sections 657 to 663 of the same code.  There
is a marked difference between things real and an interest or estate in things
real.  "The nature of the thing itself, therefore, does not determine the
character of any particular estate that may exist in it, whether personal or
real, but the extent and duration of the estate." (2 Cooley's Blackstone, 15,
note 1.)'  In short, at common law an estate for  life, even though imposed upon
an estate for years, was regarded as a freehold and as real property. But an
estate for years, even for 'a thousand years is only a chattel, and reckoned
part of the personal estate' ( Jeffers v. Easton, Eldridge & Co., supra), and
this common-law distinction has been maintained in this state.

   "The case of Wilson v. Earp, supra, in so far as it differs with the
principles herein announced, cannot be followed."

     Although we are in accord with the conclusion of the District Court of
Appeal holding that the two leases which provide for a definite term of years
were not included within the term, "real estate", we are of the opinion that the
two leases which provide in addition to the definite fixed term specified that
the leases are to continue "so long thereafter as oil or gas or either of said
substances is produced therefrom in quantities sufficient to pay to pump, or
otherwise to secure and save . . . " are included in the term, "real estate".
It follows logically that if the legal interest created by oil and gas leases
which provide for a definite term of years, being classified as estates for
years at common law, are deemed to be personal property and are therefore
excluded from the definition of "real estate as used in Subdivision 5 of Section
1624 of the Civil Code, that the legal interest created by oil and gas leases
which provide for a term of indefinite and uncertain duration, which under the
common law are classified as freehold estates in the nature of a qualified or
determinable fee, must be deemed to be real property and therefore included in
the definition of real estate as used in said section."

   In the case of Callahan v. Martin, 3 Cal. (2d) 110 [43 Pac. (2d) 788], this
court recently discussed in detail the nature of the property right created by a
lease for production, and it was held that an operating lessee under a lease for
a term of years, or for a term of years and so long as oil or gas should be
produced in paying quantities,  was an interest or estate in real property in
the nature of a profit a prendre which is an incorporeal hereditament.  It was
further held: "Under the usual oil and gas lease the owner-lessor transfers to
his lessee his right to drill for and produce oil and other substances.  The
right of the lessee presents a clear case of a profit a prendre in gross, a
right to remove a part of the substance of the land.  . . .  This profit a
prendre vests in the lessee an incorporeal hereditament, a present  estate, an
interest in the land, which is a chattel real if it is to endure for years."
(Italics ours.) (Citing authorities.) And in Dabney-Johnston Oil Corp. v. Walden
, 4 Cal. (2d) 637 [52 Pac. (2d) 237], the court continued the discussion,
saying: "The profit a prendre, whether it is unlimited as to duration or limited
to a term of years, is an estate in real property. If it is for a term of years,
it is a chattel real.  . . .  Where it is unlimited in duration, it is a
freehold interest, an estate in fee, and real property or real estate." (Italics
ours.)

   The leases which were the subject of sale by the licensed real estate
salesman acting under respondent real estate broker are not in the record by
reason of the fact that it was stipulated at the trial of the case that it was
not necessary for them to be introduced in evidence, both parties agreeing that
they were the "usual" oil and gas leases. In our examination into the question
of the provisions ordinarily included in "usual" oil and gas leases, it has
developed that there are an unusual variety of "usual" oil and gas leases. The
record does not even disclose with certainty whether or not the "thereafter"
clause is identical in both the leases containing the "thereafter" clause herein
involved.  It appears that there is a decided lack of uniformity of expression
in the "thereafter" clause as found in the usual oil and gas leases. A lease may
provide for the continuance of the lease after a definite period as long as oil
or gas are found, discovered, obtained, or produced, using these words
singularly or in combination, and such oil and gas leases generally have the
added requirement that the finding, discovering, or obtaining, or producing be
in paying quantities. (Summers, Oil and Gas, sec. 85, p. 293.) This lack of
uniformity of expression in the "thereafter" clauses,  however, is not material
to the correct solution of the problem of the nature of the estate created and
conveyed by leases containing such clauses, since in any event, whether the
lease be terminated by a failure to find, discover, obtain, or produce oil or
gas in paying quantities, the date of such termination, at the time of the
execution of the lease, could not be definitely determined, and the duration of
the term of such leases is therefore necessarily uncertain.  The estates created
by such leases are freehold estates in the nature of determinable fees.  In this
conclusion we are supported by ample authority from other jurisdictions.   (
Bruner v. Hicks, 230 Ill. 536 [82 N. E. 888, 120 Am. St. Rep. 332]; Poe v. Ulrey
, 233 Ill. 56 [84 N. E. 46]; Terry v. Humphreys et al., 27 N. M. 564 [203 Pac.
539]; Leonard v. Prater, (Tex. Com. App.) 36 S. W. (2d) 216, 86 A. L. R. 499.)

     Respondent concedes that had the phrase "for twenty years" been omitted,
the lessee's estate would clearly have been of indeterminate duration. He argues
that by the use of these words, "for twenty years" the parties intended to limit
the term during which the lease should be binding on the lessee and to make the
extended term optional rather than mandatory.  It is his theory that after the
expiration of the fixed term the lessee is to be regarded as having an estate
which he can terminate at will, simply by failing to produce oil. This reasoning
had its inception in the case of State v. South Penn Oil Co., 42 W. Va. 80, 102
[24 S. E. 688], which held that the addition to the term of years of the clause
"and so long thereafter as oil or gas may be found in paying quantities" did not
give the lease such indefinite duration as to make the interest freehold in
quantity. Respondent asserts that this state has accepted this view by reason of
the fact that the holding in the above case was cited with approval in the case
of Harvey Coal & Coke Co. v. Dillon, 59 W. Va. 605 [53 S. E. 928, 6 L. R. A. (N.
S.) 628], which in turn was cited as authority in the case of Graciosa Oil Co.
v. Santa Barbara, 155 Cal. 140 [99 Pac. 483, 20 L. R. A. (N. S.) 211]. The
citation from the case of State v. South Penn Oil Co., supra, is as follows:
"Nor does the addition to the term of years of the clause, 'and so long as oil
or gas may be found in paying quantities' give it such indefinite duration as
makes the interest freehold in quantity, for, after the expiration of the term
prescribed, . . . the lessee, having the option to continue to pump if he can
find oil in paying quantities, becomes a  tenant at will, which may become a
tenancy from year to year on the terms of the lease, but is not a freehold,
because its extension after the end of the term prescribed depends upon his own
act, the exercise of his own will; so, according to the terms of the instrument,
that is as large an interest as the words will bear.  Such super-added
possibility of extended duration constitutes no part of the term of years
prescribed, but is a new interest in the nature of an option to become tenant at
will or from year to year by the exercise of  his own volition when the fixed
term of years shall have expired."

     We do not agree with this analysis of the effect of the inclusion of a
"thereafter" clause in an oil and gas lease. The solution of the problem as to
what is the nature of the interest or estate created by such instruments may be
arrived at by a consideration of just exactly what is implied by the provision
for a fixed term, with the further provision that the lessee's interest shall
continue so long thereafter as oil or gas is produced.  Obviously the lease is
divided as to duration into two parts, the definite term, commonly called the
exploratory period, and the indefinite term, beyond the exploratory period, for
which the lease may be extended by production.  The "thereafter" clause
prescribes the condition of fact which must exist within or at the end of the
exploratory period of the lease upon which the lease may be continued beyond the
definite term, as well as the conditions which must exist after the end of the
exploratory period, upon which the lease may continue indefinitely.  In other
words, during the definite fixed term, the lessee must complete its exploratory
work [except in very exceptional cases when for some equitable reason the
definite term may be extended] and having discovered and produced oil upon the
leased premises within the definite fixed term must continue such production
during the remainder of the fixed term in order to be entitled to continue the
lease thereafter, and may continue as lessee thereafter only so long as
production is continued.  It is thus apparent that there are in fact two periods
of time provided for by the habendum clause in such leases; the definite fixed
term for exploration and discovery which vests immediately upon the execution of
the lease and terminates in the absence of earlier forfeiture at the expiration
of the definite fixed term, and secondly, the indefinite period for production
which likewise vests immediately upon the execution of the lease and continues
until oil or gas is no longer produced.

   The doctrine that the lessee's interest is inchoate and does not vest until
the discovery or production of oil or gas was expressly repudiated in the recent
case of Callahan v. Martin, 3 Cal. (2d) 110 [43 Pac. (2d) 788]. It is true that
the physical power to produce oil or gas does not come into being until the time
that a well is drilled and oil or gas is obtained  therefrom, but the right or
privilege to produce undoubtedly vests upon the execution of the lease. This
indefinite term to produce oil or gas conveyed by the lease, vesting at the
execution of the lease and continuing thereafter so long as oil or gas is
produced, is subject to the possibility of termination at any time either by
failure to discover oil at all upon the premises, the exhaustion of oil and gas
prior to the end of the definite term, or the exhaustion of oil and gas
subsequent to the end of the definite period set out in the lease. It is this
possibility of termination which renders the term uncertain.  We thus have
conveyed in the same instrument a definite term for exploration and an
indefinite term for production.  It is self-evident that the main purpose of oil
and gas leases is to produce oil or gas in paying quantities and that the
provision to explore is subsidiary to this primary purpose.  This being so, we
think that the duration of this primary right to produce oil or gas for an
indefinite period gives character to the instrument as providing for a term of
indefinite duration.

   It may be that the leases contain some provision, and they probably do, such
as a surrender clause, whereby the lessee may rid himself of the liabilities and
duties accruing under the lease by virtue of his covenants to explore, drill,
continue production, etc.  By means of such added provisions it is probable that
the lessee may divest himself at any time during the fixed term or thereafter of
any interest in the lease, but such, possibility arises solely from these added
provisions.  We are not willing to concede that the lessee may, in the absence
of such special provisions, simply by deciding not to continue production,
exercise an option to not accept a renewal of the lease after the expiration of
the definite term. (See South Penn Oil Co. v. Snodgrass, 71 W. Va. 438 [76 S. E.
961, 43 L. R. A. (N. S.) 848].) We are likewise unwilling  to grant that the
mere fact that the lessee by reason of such added provisions may terminate the
lease at any time converts the estate granted into a tenancy at will.  The
lessor could not at his will terminate the estate granted by the habendum clause
providing for a fixed definite term and so long thereafter as oil and gas is
produced.  ( Rich v. Doneghey, 71 Okl. 204 [177 Pac. 86]; see note, 3 A. L. R.
378.)

   It is true that in the case of Graciosa Oil Co. v. Santa Barbara, supra, the
case of Harvey C. & C. Co. v. Dillon,  supra, and "cases there cited" were cited
as authority which included the case of State v. South Penn Oil Co., supra. It
is to be noted, however,  that this citation of authority is thrice removed, and
moreover that the question involved in this case with reference to the quantity
of estate created by an oil and gas lease containing a "thereafter clause" was
not involved, the main question in that opinion being whether or not an oil
lease could be assessed and taxed severally and separately from the real estate
of the landlord.  In any event, we are not now satisfied that the reasoning
therein employed is correct.

   It should also be noted that the cases cited by respondent in support of his
argument that California has heretofore adopted the position that leases
containing "thereafter" clauses are only estates for years are cases in which
the leases under consideration were leases for a definite fixed term and did not
contain "thereafter" clauses.  (See Chandler v. Hart, 161 Cal. 405 [119 Pac. 516
, Ann. Cas. 1913B, 1094], and Barr Lumber Co. v. Perkins, 214 Cal. 531 [6 Pac.
(2d) 948].) The case of Moore v. Heron, 108 Cal. App. 705 [292 Pac. 136], did
not involve the construction of an oil and gas lease but involved the question
of whether or not one who had an option to secure an oil and gas lease provided
certain exploratory work was done, could compel the lessor to specifically
perform such an agreement to execute an oil and gas lease. The question here
under consideration was not even remotely in question therein, and although some
phrases extracted therefrom may seem to uphold one view, other phrases would
equally well uphold the opposite view.  It has no value as authority upon the
problem here presented.

     Although, as before stated, the leases which were the subject-matter of the
sale by the real estate salesman are not in the record we have proceeded upon
the assumption that the "thereafter" clause controls the duration of the leases.
Since, according to the great weight of authority, the term clause which is the
habendum clause dominates the period for which the lease shall run, it is hardly
probable that there is included in the two oil and gas leases containing the
"thereafter" clause under consideration here any provision that would compel a
conclusion different from the one we have arrived at in our discussion of the
"thereafter" clauses, i. e., that the estate was a freehold estate in the nature
of a determinable  fee.  But in view of the fact that the nature of the
interests created by any lease must be determined by an analysis of the
instrument as a whole, which requires a consideration of all the provisions
contained therein, we do not wish to go so far as to irrevocably hold that the
leases herein involved create freehold estates, but simply hold that, in the
absence of other provisions which might perhaps compel a different conclusion,
the habendum clause used in such leases creates a freehold estate and therefore
requires a reversal of the judgment.

     It should also perhaps be pointed out that, inasmuch as the case was tried
in the lower court upon the theory that the leases were all classifiable in the
same category of property interests and no distinction was made between the
leases providing for a definite term which we have held to be chattels real, and
not real estate, and those containing the "thereafter" clause providing for
indefinite terms, which we have held to be determinable fees, and real estate,
the evidence introduced relative to the agreement was not directed to the
question of whether or not the agreement of employment was indivisible or
severable. If it is severable the plaintiff may recover for the proper
proportion of fees for the sale of the leases providing for a definite term and
for the sale of the personal property; if it is not severable, plaintiff will
not be entitled to any recovery.  This is a question which will probably arise
upon the new trial.

   The District Court of Appeal correctly disposed of the two contentions made
by appellant with reference to the recovery by plaintiff as real estate broker
for work performed as salesman by Mr. Doak.  Said portion of the opinion is as
follows:

   "  Appellant urges further that at the time the oral contract in question was
made, he did not know that Doak, the salesman, was working for respondent
Dabney.  At the time of the trial, counsel for the parties stipulated: 'Mr. Doak
in January, 1929, was a licensed real estate salesman under Walter Dabney, the
plaintiff, who was a duly licensed broker under the Real Estate Act of that
time.' The foregoing stipulation amply supports the finding of the court that
Doak was in fact the agent of respondent Dabney.

     "Appellant further urges that since he did not know that Dabney was the
principal of Doak, Dabney should not be permitted to recover the commission
involved as an undisclosed  principal. The right of an undisclosed principal to
recover, however, is too well established to be open to question.  (
Satisfaction Title etc. Co. v. York, 54 Colo. 566 [131 Pac. 444].)"

   Judgment is reversed.


                               5 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             ESTATE OF FRANK PRIETO III, a Minor.  ERNEST DUNLEVIE
            ASSOCIATES et al., Petitioners and Respondents, v. FRANK
          PRIETO, as Guardian, etc., et al., Objectors and Appellants

                                 Civ. No. 7803

           Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District,
                                  Division One

          243 Cal. App. 2d 79; 52 Cal. Rptr. 80; 1966 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      1648


                                 June 22, 1966

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from an order of the Superior Court of Riverside
County, in response to a petition for instructions in a guardianship proceeding,
directing payment of a real estate broker's fee.  Merrill Brown, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Brokers--Actions for Compensation--Evidence--Employment.  --Evidence that
guardians of a minor were "authorized" by court order to pay a commission to
brokers for arranging a lease to lessees, as a corporation, provided the lease
was approved by the Secretary of the Interior, was insufficient to support a
claim by the brokers, after the original lease was not, in fact, approved, that
they were employed by the guardians or performed services for them with respect
to a lease to lessees, as a partnership, such lease being approved by the
Secretary and by the court in an order containing no provision as to a real
estate commission.

(2) Id.--Compensation--As Dependent on License--Guardianship Proceeding.  --The
rule that no person may bring an action for compensation for services as a real
estate broker unless he pleads and proves that he was duly licensed as such at
the time of the transaction (Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10136) applies as much to a
petition for an order in a guardianship proceeding as in an action against a
guardian.

(3) Id.--Compensation--As Dependent on License--Duty of Court: Contracts--Effect
of Illegality.  --Regardless of whether the parties, by inadvertence or consent,
fail to raise the issues themselves, the rule that an agreement employing a
person to act as a real estate broker who is not licensed as such is illegal,
void, and unenforceable must be applied by the court on its own motion if such
illegality appears.

(4) Id.--Compensation--As Dependent on License--Issue on Appeal: Contracts--
Effect of Illegality.  --The rule that an agreement employing a person to act as
a real estate broker who is not licensed as such is illegal, void, and
unenforceable may be raised for the first time on appeal.

(5) Id.--Compensation--As Dependent on License--Where One Claimant Unlicensed.
--On appeal from an order directing payment of a real estate brokerage
commission, where the issue of the brokers being duly licensed had not been
raised at the trial, the admission in an appeal brief that one of the claimants
was an attorney and not a licensed broker barred recovery of such commission.

(6) Id.--Action for Compensation--Evidence--Employment.  --Where a court order,
on which joint claimants relied as originally authorizing a fee on a lease
transaction, referred only to a "real estate commission", and their subsequent
petition for instructions and the order appealed from referred only to a
"broker's fee," they could not be heard to contend on appeal that the part of
the fee claimed for one of them, who was not licensed as a broker (Bus. & Prof.
Code, § 10131 et seq.), was for services rendered as a licensed attorney.

(7) Id.--Compensation--As Dependent on License--Joint Contracts.  --Where the
assumed services in effecting a lease were the product of the joint efforts of
two claimants to the broker's fee, the illegality of the participation of one of
them, who was unlicensed as a broker, invalidated the whole claim and foreclosed
recovery by either.

(8) Indians--Lease of Land.  --When the Secretary of the Interior authorized the
lease of property owned by a minor Indian as an allottee subject to United
States trusteeship (25 U.S.C., §§ 331 et seq., 951 et seq.), but made no mention
of any real estate commission, the order of a state court authorizing the lessee
to pay a broker's fee in yearly amounts from rental due under the lease violated
25 U.S.C. §§ 348, 410, prohibiting charges upon land held in trust by the United
States without the Secretary's consent.

(9) Guardian and Ward--Proceedings--Appealable Orders.  --An order in a
guardianship proceeding directing a guardian to pay a broker's fee is an
appealable order within the meaning of Prob. Code, § 1630.

COUNSEL: Raymond C. Simpson for Objectors and Appellants.

James Hollowell and Allan C. Smith for Petitioners and Respondents.

JUDGES: Coughlin, J.  Brown, P. J., concurred.

OPINION BY: COUGHLIN

OPINION

     This is an appeal from an order, in response to a petition for instructions
in a guardianship proceeding, directing payment of a "Real Estate Broker's fee."
Appellants, Frank Prieto and Dora Joyce Prieto, are the guardians of the estate
of a minor.  Respondents, Ernest Dunlevie Associates and Eugene E. Therieau, are
the petitioners who sought the order from which the appeal is taken.

   Each side to the controversy, in its briefs, assert facts wholly unsupported
by the record.  Nevertheless, those concededly true are included in the
following statement.

   The minor, Frank Prieto III was the allottee of 120 acres of land held in
trust for his use and benefit by the United States pursuant to the provisions of
sections 331 et seq. and 951 et seq., title 25, United States Code.  Respondents
were active in effecting a lease of this and other adjacent land.  Appellants
agreed to participate; petitioned for and obtained authority to execute such a
lease "to Senci Corporation, a California Corporation" on terms and conditions
set forth in  a copy of the lease attached to their petition; and subsequently,
on January 3, 1962, in response to a subsequent petition, obtained an "Amended
Order" which again authorized them to execute a lease to the same corporation
and contained the further provision that "petitioner is authorized to pay its
proportionate share of the real estate commission in the amount of Fifty
Thousand ($ 50,000.00) Dollars, payable one-half to Ernest Dunlevie Associates
and one-half to Eugene E. Therieau . . . provided that said lease is . . .
approved by the Secretary of the Interior.  . . ." (Italics ours.) The lease to
Senci Corporation was not approved by the Secretary of the Interior.  However,
he indicated approval of a lease upon the same terms and conditions to "Senci, a
Partnership, composed of Hast Builders, a California Corporation, Date Palm
Development Company, a California Corporation, and Harab Development Company, a
California Corporation." Thereupon appellants petitioned for and, on April 10,
1963, obtained an order authorizing them to execute such a lease to the
partnership, but containing no provision for a real estate commission. Execution
of this lease was approved by the secretary on April 23, 1963.

   In their brief, respondents refer to the substitution of lessees as a minor
change in the lease. Nevertheless, the fact remains that the lease appellants
originally were authorized to execute, which was to a corporation as lessee,
never was executed, and the lease that was executed, pursuant to an independent
order authorizing such, was to a partnership, as lessee.

   On January 22, 1964, Ernest Dunlevie Associates and Eugene E. Therieau
instituted proceedings in the guardianship, by a document entitled "Petition for
Instructions (Payment of Brokers' Fee Senci Lease)," to obtain an order
directing Senci, a partnership, to pay to each of them  on the anniversary date
of the subject lease the sum of $ 593.20 for a total of five years.  This
petition referred to a prior order of the court, without identifying it by date,
authorizing the guardians to execute a lease on the subject property; described
the lease as that in which Senci, a partnership, was the lessee; and alleged
that the order authorizing the guardians to enter into "said lease" contained
language -- setting it forth in haec verba -- authorizing the guardians to pay
the estate's proportionate share of the real estate commission to petitioners in
five equal annual installments.  The record before us establishes the allegation
in this petition that the order authorizing the  guardians to execute the lease
to the partnership contained a further order authorizing payment of a "real
estate commission" is untrue.  The order authorizing the payment of a commission
was part of the order authorizing execution of a lease to the corporation.

   The petition for instructions did not contain any allegation that Ernest
Dunlevie Associates and Eugene E. Therieau had been employed as brokers to
obtain the subject lease; had rendered services in obtaining such a lease; or
were licensed to act as brokers. At the hearing on this petition the guardians
testified, in substance, they did not employ Ernest Dunlevie Associates or
Eugene E.  Therieau to act as brokers for them, nor did they agree orally or in
writing to pay them a real estate commission in connection with the subject
lease. It appears from other testimony that although the original proposal was
to lease the property to Senci, a corporation, the substitution of a
copartnership consisting of three corporations subsequently was proposed for tax
reasons.  Regardless of the reason for the substitution the evidence establishes
the Secretary of the Interior would not approve a lease to a corporation but
would approve a lease to a partnership. There was no testimony from which it
might be concluded the guardians employed Ernest Dunlevie Associates or Eugene
E. Therieau to act as brokers; employed either of them in any capacity to effect
execution of the lease; or promised to pay either of them a commission or a fee.

   Following the hearing the court made the order appealed from which is
entitled "ORDER (Directing Payment of Broker's Fee, Senci Lease)," which
referred to the petition as one requesting an order "directing the payment of a
Real Estate Broker's fee"; ordered the guardians to pay Ernest Dunlevie
Associates and Eugene E. Therieau, each, the sum of $ 593.20 each year for five
years commencing on the first anniversary date of the lease, and authorized
Senci, a partnership, to deduct these sums from the yearly rentals due under the
lease and pay the same directly to Ernest Dunlevie Associates and Eugene E.
Therieau at the times designated.

   The order must be reversed for the following reasons:

   (1) There is no evidence that respondents were employed by the guardians or
performed any services for the estate as a broker in obtaining the subject
lease;

   (2) There is no evidence that either of them was a licensed real estate
broker during the time in question;

    (3) It appears from respondents' brief on appeal that Therieau was an
attorney-at-law and not a licensed real estate broker;

   (4) The purported services for which Therieau seeks compensation were
rendered as a broker and not as an attorney-at-law;

   (5) Any employment of Therieau to render such services was illegal;

   (6) Any employment of Ernest Dunlevie Associates as a broker involved the
joint employment of Therieau and for this reason was illegal;

   (7) The services rendered by Dunlevie Associates and Eugene E. Therieau in
obtaining the subject lease were part of a single consideration which, because
Therieau admittedly was not a licensed broker, was illegal; and

   (8) That part of the order authorizing payment of the real estate commission
from the yearly rentals due under the lease contravenes  controlling provisions
in the United States Code, as approval of such payment was not obtained from the
Secretary of the Interior.

     It would appear respondents rely entirely upon the order of January 3,
1962, authorizing execution of the lease to the corporation and payment by the
estate of its proportionate share of the real estate commission payable to
respondents, as proof of the fact they were entitled to such a commission.  This
order was ineffective for this purpose in that the authority thus conferred to
pay a real estate commission was conditioned upon approval by the Secretary of
the Interior of the lease therein referred to, which was the lease to the
corporation.  This lease never was approved.  Furthermore, this order did no
more than "authorize" the guardians to pay "the real estate commission." It did
not direct payment, and for this reason may not be the basis of a claim by
respondents they were employed by the guardians as brokers to obtain the
partnership lease, or rendered services to the estate as such in obtaining that
lease.

     There was neither pleading nor proof that Ernest Dunlevie Associates or
Eugene E. Therieau were licensed real estate brokers at the time they rendered
services for which they claim a real estate commission.  Section 10136 of the
Business and Professions Code provides: "No person . . . acting in the capacity
of a real estate broker or a real estate salesman within this State shall bring
or maintain any action in the  courts of this State for the collection of
compensation for" services as such a broker or salesman "without alleging and
proving that he was a duly licensed real estate broker or real estate salesman
at the time the alleged cause of action arose." Respondents contend the
foregoing rule does not apply to a petition for an order in a guardianship
proceeding directing payment of a real estate commission; such a proceeding is
not an "action" within the meaning of the statute; and for this reason they were
not required to plead or prove they were licensed to act as a real estate broker
or salesman. This contention is without merit.  The object of the statute would
be defeated if recovery of a real estate commission not obtainable in an action
against a guardian could be effected by a petition in the guardianship
proceeding. No reason appears for differentiation between a claim for a real
estate commission against a guardian and one against an individual.  The purpose
of the law is to prevent recovery of a real estate commission by a person not
licensed as a real estate broker or salesman. It is for this reason the law not
only requires the person seeking recovery of a real estate commission to plead
and prove he is a licensed real estate broker, but also provides that any person
acting as a real estate broker without a license is guilty of a criminal
offense. ( Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10139), and further provides that any person who
pays a real estate commission to a person not licensed as a real estate broker
is guilty of a criminal offense. ( Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10138.)

      Not only is there no proof that at the time in question respondents were
licensed real estate brokers, but it affirmatively appears from their brief that
Eugene E. Therieau, at that time, was an attorney-at-law and not a licensed real
estate broker. An agreement employing a person to act as a real estate broker
who is not licensed as such is illegal, void and unenforceable. ( Davis v.
Chipman, 210 Cal. 609, 619 [293 P. 40]; Haas v. Greenwald, 196 Cal. 236, 242
[237 P. 38, 59 A.L.R. 1493]; Weber v. Tonini, 151 Cal.App.2d 168, 171 [311 P.2d
132]; cf.  Firpo v. Murphy, 72 Cal.App. 249, 253 [236 P. 968].)

   In Lewis & Queen v. N. M. Ball Sons, 48 Cal.2d 141, 147 [308 P.2d 713], the
court said: "Whatever the state of the pleadings, when the evidence shows that
the plaintiff in substance seeks to enforce an illegal contract or recover
compensation for an illegal act, the court has both the power and duty to
ascertain the true facts in  order that it may not unwittingly lend its
assistance to the consummation or encouragement of  what public policy forbids.
(Citations.) It is immaterial that the parties, whether by inadvertence or
consent, even at the trial do not raise the issue.  The court may do so of its
own motion when the testimony produces evidence of illegality. (Citation.) It is
not too late to raise the issue . . . even on appeal."  In the light of
respondents' statement in their brief that Therieau was not a licensed broker,
we deem it appropriate to indicate that application of the foregoing rule to the
instant situation bars recovery of a broker's real estate commission.

     To avoid the claim of illegality respondents, although admitting Therieau
was not a licensed broker, contend his services in effecting the lease were
rendered as an attorney rather than a broker as defined by the licensing
statute.  (See Bus. & Prof. Code, §§ 10131 and 10131.2.) This contention is not
supported by the evidence.  The order of January 3, 1962, upon which respondents
rely to establish their claim, authorized execution of a lease to the
corporation and, upon its approval, payment to them of a "real estate
commission." Their petition for instructions was directed to the payment of
"Broker's Fee Senci Lease." The order appealed from refers to this petition as
requesting an "order directing the payment of a Real Estate Broker's fee." These
circumstances dictate the conclusion respondents were seeking recovery of a
broker's fee.

     It would appear respondents were associated in a joint effort to effect the
subject lease. The order of January 3, 1962, concerned a single real estate
commission payable one-half to Ernest Dunlevie Associates and one-half to Eugene
E. Therieau.  Nowhere in the record does it appear that either respondent, at
any time, claimed a separate commission or fee.  The assumed services in
effecting the subject lease being the product of the joint effort of both
respondents, the illegality attendant upon Therieau's participation, because he
was not a licensed broker, invalidates the whole transaction, and forecloses
recovery by either of them.  ( Haas v. Greenwald, supra, 196 Cal. 236, 242, 246;
Weber v. Tonini, supra, 151 Cal.App.2d 168, 171.)

     That part of the order appealed from authorizing deduction of the
commission from rental, under the circumstances of this case, is contrary to
controlling federal law in the premises.  The leased property was owned by the
minor as an allottee, subject to trusteeship in the United States.  Section 348,
title 25, of the United States Code provides that "any contract made touching"
allotted land "shall be absolutely  null and void." The proceeds of such land
are subject to the same trusteeship provisions as the land.  ( Squire v.
Capoeman, 351 U.S. 1, 9 [76 S.Ct. 611,  616, 100 L.Ed. 883, 890].) In this
regard, section 410, title 25, of the United States Code specifically provides:
"No money accruing from any lease . . . of lands held in trust by the United
States for any Indian shall become liable for the payment of any debt of, or
claim against, such Indian . . . except with the approval and consent of the
Secretary of the Interior." As a consequence, any charge upon rentals due under
the lease may not be effected without approval of the Secretary of the Interior.
Respondents contend the Secretary of the Interior approved payment of a real
estate commission by approval of the lease. However, the lease made no mention
of any real estate commission. Their contention in the premises is a conclusion
without support in fact or law.  The provision in the order authorizing the
lessee to pay respondents a designated sum each year upon their commission from
rental due under the lease is equivalent to a charge upon land the title to
which is in the United States as trustee; is contrary to the proscription of
sections 348 and 410, which control state court action  in the premises; and,
for this reason, is erroneous.  ( Spriggs v. United   States, 297 F.2d 460, 463;
Beall v. Graham, 75 Kan. 98 [88 P. 543, 544]; Burney v. Burney, 61 Okla. 35 [160
P. 85, 86].)

     Respondents moved to dismiss this appeal on the ground the order from which
the appeal is taken is not appealable.  An appeal may be taken from an order
"instructing or directing a guardian." ( Prob. Code, § 1630.) The instant order
is within this category.  Respondents' contention to the contrary is without
merit.

   Motion to dismiss appeal denied.  The order is reversed.


                               6 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          CARL H. SHAFFER et al., Appellants, v. CHARLES A. BEINHORN,
                                   Respondent

                                 Sac. No. 3303

                          Supreme Court of California

                 190 Cal. 569; 213 P. 960; 1923 Cal. LEXIS 578


                                 March 7, 1923

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Tulare
County.  J. A. Allen, Judge.

COUNSEL: Earl A. Bagby for Appellants.

Karl A. Machetanz for Respondent.

U. S. Webb, Attorney-General, and J. Charles Jones, Deputy Attorney-General,
Amici Curiae.

JUDGES: In Bank. Lennon, J.  Kerrigan, J., Seawell, J., Lawlor, J., Myers, J.,
Wilbur, C. J., and Waste, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: LENNON

OPINION

     The case is here on rehearing after decision by the district court of
appeal.  The facts of the case and the point presented in support of the appeal
are as follows:

   "The appeal is from a judgment based upon an order sustaining defendant's
demurrer to the amended complaint of plaintiffs.

   "As far as necessary to quote said complaint is as follows:

   "'That on or about the 5th day of March, 1920, the defendant was a real
estate broker, duly licensed as such, residing and having his principal place of
business in the City of Exeter, County of Tulare.

   "'That on or about the said last mentioned date the said defendant as such
broker was the real estate agent and broker, by writing duly appointed for the
sale of certain real property situate in the County of Tulare, State of
California, commonly known as the Rockford ranch and that by the terms of the
agency agreement, as aforesaid, as plaintiffs are informed and believe, the said
defendant was to receive from the owner of said ranch as compensation for the
selling of the same as such real estate broker, and the owner of said ranch in
said agency  agreement, did agree to pay as such compensation to defendant, as
such real estate broker, a commission of five per cent, to be computed upon the
total selling price.

   "'That on or about the 5th day of March, 1920, the said defendant as broker
and agent for the sale of said real estate, as aforesaid, entered into an
agreement with these  plaintiffs whereby the defendant agreed that if the
plaintiffs, or either of them, would find anyone interested in the purchase of
such a ranch, to whom the said defendant would be able to negotiate a sale
thereof, or would introduce to said defendant anyone to whom the said defendant
would be able to negotiate a sale thereof, he, the said defendant would pay unto
the plaintiffs a sum of money equal to two-thirds of the gross commission which
the said defendant might receive on account thereof.

   "'That thereafter these plaintiffs relying on their said agreement with
defendant did procure and produce to defendant a prospective purchaser for the
said real property to whom the said defendant did thereafter and as such agent
and broker negotiate a sale of said real property, and on account of which sale
the said defendant did on or about the 26th day of October, 1920, receive, as a
part of the compensation and commission aforesaid, the sum of five thousand
seven hundred and fifty ($ 5,750) dollars.'

   "Then follows an allegation of a demand upon defendant for the payment of
their proportion of said commission and his refusal to pay any portion of it,
and the complaint proceeds:

   "'That neither of said plaintiffs are or ever have been a real estate broker
or real estate salesman within the meaning of the Act of the Legislature of the
State of California defining a real estate broker and salesman, approved May
27th, 1919, and that neither of said plaintiffs have at any time sold or offered
to sell, bought or offered to buy, or negotiated the purchase or sale or
exchange of real estate, or negotiated loans on real estate, leased or offered
to lease, rented or placed for rent, or collected rent from any real estate or
improvements thereof for others either as a whole or partial vocation, and that
neither of said plaintiffs have ever at any time or in any manner acted as a
broker or salesman or agent for the purchase, sale or exchange of real estate of
or for another, and that at no time other than the time herein mentioned have
the plaintiffs or either of them ever engaged for a compensation to find,
procure or introduce to any person, another person, firm, or corporation to whom
or with whom a contract of sale, purchase, or exchange might be made.'

    "It is conceded that the demurrer to the complaint raised the point and was
decided upon the ground that plaintiffs by their allegations disclosed an
attempt to induce the defendant to violate an express mandate of law and that
the enforcement of their demand would be against public policy.

   "Sec. 1 of said real estate Act (Stats. of 1919, p. 1252), provides: 'It
shall be unlawful for any person, copartnership or corporation to engage in the
business, or act in the capacity of a real estate broker, or a real estate
salesman within this state without obtaining a license therefor.'

   "Sec. 2 provides: 'A real estate broker within the meaning of this act is a
person, copartnership or corporation, who for a compensation, sells, or offers
for sale, buys or offers to buy or negotiates the purchase or sale or exchange
of real estate . . . for others as a whole or partial vocation. A real estate
salesman within the meaning of this act is one who for compensation is employed
by a licensed broker to sell, or offer for sale, or to buy, or offer to buy, or
to negotiate the purchase or sale or exchange of real estate, . . . as a whole
or partial vocation.'

   "Section 17 provides the penalty for acting as a broker or salesman without
license and Section 18 is as follows: 'It shall be unlawful for any licensed
broker to pay a commission for performing any of the acts herein specified to
any person who is not a licensed broker, or a licensed salesman.'

   "Section 20 provides: 'No person, copartnership, or corporation engaged in
the business or acting in the capacity of a real estate broker or a real estate
salesman within this state shall bring or maintain any action in the courts of
this state for the collection of compensation for the performance of any of the
acts mentioned in Section Two hereof without alleging and proving that such
person, copartnership or corporation was a duly licensed real estate broker or
real estate salesman at the time the alleged cause of action arose.'

   "As to the validity of said Act no question is raised by appellants.  Indeed,
the Supreme Court has recently upheld it as a legitimate example and exercise of
the police power of the State.  Riley v. Chambers, 181 Cal. 592 [8 A. L. R. 418,
185 Pac. 855]. It was declared that even lawful and useful occupations may be
subjected to regulation in the  public interest and that the proper test as to
whether the Legislature has exceeded its authority is whether the purpose and
effect of the regulation 'go no further than throwing reasonable safeguards in
the public interest around the exercise of the right'; and the conclusion was
reached that 'the single primary purpose of the Act is to require of real estate
brokers and salesmen that they be honest, truthful and of good reputation' and
that said legislation embodies a legal and reasonable scheme for that purpose.
It is conceded that the measure was enacted for regulation and not for the
purpose of revenue, and it is to be observed that the license fees are of
nominal consideration and are imposed only for the purpose of defraying the
expense attached to the administration of the law.  But it is the claim of
appellants that the act which they were employed to perform does not bring them
within the purview of a broker or salesman as these terms are defined in said
statute." (Real Estate Brokers Act [Stats. 1919, p. 1252].)

     With this contention as a basis, it is argued that the complaint does state
a cause of action and was, therefore, proof against demurrer. We are in accord
with this contention.

   The complaint does not on its face show that plaintiffs were engaged in the
business, or acting in the capacity, of a real estate broker or real estate
salesman when  they performed the act for which they seek compensation.   In
order to come within the definition of real estate broker or real estate
salesman a party must "sell or offer to sell, buy or offer to buy, or negotiate
the purchase or sale or exchange of real estate . . ." By the terms of their
contract as pleaded the plaintiffs were only required "to find" or "to
introduce" to defendant a person "interested" in purchasing and who subsequently
did purchase, in order to recover the sum agreed by defendant to be paid to
them.  By the terms of the contract, as set forth in the complaint, the
"negotiation" of the sale was to be left entirely to defendant.  Plaintiffs'
only duty was to produce a prospective purchaser. This, the complaint alleges,
they did.  The complaint expressly negatives any further act or acts on the part
of plaintiffs which might tend to bring them within the scope of the definition,
denying specifically and in practically the identical words of the statute
itself that they  "sold or offered to sell, bought or offered to buy, or
negotiated the sale . . . of real estate . . ." The truth of this allegation is
admitted by demurrer. The acts of plaintiffs, therefore, as alleged in the
complaint fall short of those defined by the Real Estate Brokers Act as
constituting either a real estate broker or real estate salesman.

   In Schomig v. Keiser, 189 Cal. 596 [209 Pac. 550], it was held that any
employment by any person of another to collect payments on an agreement which
had already been negotiated did not make the party a real estate broker,  or
real estate salesman. By a parity of reasoning the employment of any person to
perform an act preceding the negotiation of a sale does not, in the absence of
subsequent assistance rendered in the ultimate negotiation of the sale
constitute the party thus employed a real estate broker, or real estate
salesman.

   It may be that upon a trial of the case the defendant may be able to prove
that plaintiffs did in fact actually assist in negotiating the sale.  If he can
do this, it is a good defense.  But for the purpose of passing upon a demurrer
it is not permissible to predicate a ruling upon the presumption that plaintiffs
did actually assist in the subsequent negotiations which ultimately resulted in
the sale.

   The question of whether or not a single act can be held to constitute a
"partial vocation" need not, under the view which we have taken of the facts
pleaded in the plaintiffs' complaint, be decided.

   Moreover, a consideration of that question is immaterial in this particular
case by reason of the provisions of section 18 of the Real Estate Brokers Act
(Stats. 1919, p. 1259), which provides that "it shall be unlawful for any
licensed broker to pay a commission for performing any of the acts herein
specified to any person who is not a licensed broker or a licensed salesman." In
view of this section it follows as a matter of course that although it be
conceded that it was but a single act, nevertheless if the plaintiffs'
participation in the transaction in question was in fact that of a salesman or
broker, as defined by the act, then, of course, payment for the service rendered
in that behalf could not be enforced under the provisions of this section.  It,
therefore, makes no difference whether a single act does or does not amount to a
partial vocation.

    Judgment reversed, with instructions to the court below to overrule the
demurrer with leave to defendant to answer within a designated time.


                               7 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           J. T. NITTLER et al., Respondents, v. CONTINENTAL CASUALTY
                       COMPANY (a Corporation), Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 6375

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FIRST APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION TWO

             94 Cal. App. 498; 271 P. 555; 1928 Cal. App. LEXIS 623


                           October 26, 1928, Decided

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing of this Cause was Denied by
the District Court of Appeal on November 21, 1928.
   A petition by Appellant to have the Cause Heard in the Supreme Court, after
Judgment in the District Court of Appeal, was Denied by the Supreme Court on
December 24, 1928.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Alameda
County. J. D. Murphey, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Brokers--Action on Bond--Damages--Sales--Failure to Comply With Real Estate
Brokers' Act--Pleading.  --In this action for damages against a real estate
broker and the surety on his bond for failure of the broker to perform his
duties or to comply with the Real Estate Brokers' Act, in connection with the
sale of a gasoline service station, the complaint was not insufficient because
the sale alleged to have been made was not a real estate transaction requiring a
license under the Real Estate Brokers' Act, where there was nothing on the face
of the complaint to show that the service station was held under a title
separate from the title to the land and the trial court could well assume that
the usual course of business had been followed and that the transfer included
either a transfer of realty or of a lease thereon.

(2) Id.--Sufficiency of Complaint--Allegations as to Compensation.  --In such
action, the complaint was not insufficient because it failed to show that the
broker was acting for compensation, the allegation that he was a licensed real
estate broker under the statute and that while acting as such he made the sale
and received the purchase price being sufficient to bring him within the terms
of the act, which defines a real estate broker as one who acts for compensation.


(3) Id.--Sale of Personal Property Located on Real Property--Leases--Real Estate
Brokers' Act--Statutory Construction.  --In such action, where the transaction
consisted of the sale of personal property located on real estate, and
negotiations for and the exchange of a lease upon such realty, it was within the
terms of section 2 of the Real Estate Brokers' Act as amended in 1925 (Deering's
Gen. Laws, Act 112), and the contention that the interest in the realty was
incidental to the transfer of the personalty and should be disregarded, cannot
be sustained, where it appeared that the transaction was delayed for over a year
while it was being determined that plaintiffs could assign the lease and that if
this could not have been done the sale would have been canceled.

(4) Appeal--Findings--Evidence--Record.  --It must be assumed in support of the
judgment of the trial court that its findings were based upon competent evidence
and the appellate court will not search the typewritten record to discover if
error has occurred.

(5) Brokers--Refusal to Turn Over Proceeds of Sale--Breach of Duty--Remedies.
--In an action against the surety on a real estate broker's bond for failure of
the broker to perform his duties as such, the breach for which recovery may be
had may arise either from the failure of the broker to perform his duties or
from his failure to comply with the provisions of the Real Estate Brokers' Act,
and when a licensed real estate broker has obtained the proceeds of a sale of
property belonging to his principal and refuses to turn over such proceeds, he
has failed to perform the duty incumbent upon him as such broker or agent
irrespective of any provision of the act requiring him to do so.

(6) Appeal--Pleading--Objections Raised After Answer and Trial--Evidence--
Section 4 1/2, Article VI, Constitution.  --Though it appears that a demurrer
should have been sustained by the trial court, when the point is raised on
appeal after answer and trial, the appellant must show that the error complained
of has resulted in a miscarriage of justice under section 4 1/2 of article VI of
the constitution, which is not done when defendant has answered and gone to
trial after his demurrer has been overruled and the findings of fact disclose
that the alleged infirmities of the complaint have been cured, particularly
where appellant fails to show that the evidence was not received without
objection. (On denial of rehearing.)

(7) Id.--Issues not Raised in Trial Court--Rehearing--Review.  --Where an issue
is not raised in the trial court, the appellate court is not required to
consider the point when raised for the first time on a petition for rehearing.
(On denial of rehearing.)

COUNSEL: Redman & Alexander for Appellant.

Stanley R. Sterne for Respondents.

Joseph G. DeForest, Amicus Curiae.

JUDGES: NOURSE, J. Sturtevant, J., and Buck, P. J., pro tem., concurred.

OPINION BY: NOURSE

OPINION

     NOURSE, J. Plaintiffs sued to recover damages for the breach of R. C.
McKinney, a licensed real estate broker, and joined as a party defendant the
Continental Casualty Company, the surety upon the bond of McKinney under the
Real Estate Brokers' Act (Stats. 1919, p. 1252). The cause was consolidated for
trial with that of Carroll v. McKinney  et al., an action brought to recover for
a similar breach, and which upon the submission of this cause upon the appeal
was dismissed upon the stipulation of the parties. The cause was tried before
the court without a jury and judgment was rendered in favor of the Nittlers and
against the defendant McKinney and the Continental Casualty Company in the sum
of $ 1,058 and against the defendant McKinney in the additional sum of $ 262.
From this judgment the defendant Continental Casualty Company has appealed upon
a type-written record.

   The complaint alleged that on the nineteenth day of March, 1927, the
defendant McKinney, while acting as a licensed real estate broker, received for
plaintiffs the sum of $ 1,320 paid to him as the purchase price of a gasoline
service station sold by plaintiffs to the purchasers by and through the
defendant McKinney acting as a real estate broker; that on the twenty-eighth day
of March, 1927, plaintiffs made demand upon McKinney to pay over to them the
said sum of $ 1,320, but that McKinney refused to pay over the same or any
portion thereof and appropriated the whole sum to his own use; that on the
fourteenth day of March, 1927, McKinney and the Continental Casualty Company
executed a certain broker's bond under the terms of the Real Estate Brokers'
Act, the obligation of which was that the broker would faithfully perform every
undertaking entered into by him as a  licensed real estate broker; that said
bond expressly inured to the benefit of any person injured by the failure of the
broker to perform his duties and gave a right of action to such person against
the surety for the recovery of damages sustained by the failure or omission of
the broker to perform his duties or any of them, or to comply with the
provisions of the act; that the said bond was filed with the real estate
commissioner and in pursuance thereof McKinney received his license as a real
estate broker under said act.

     The Continental Casualty Company demurred generally upon the ground that
the complaint was insufficient because the sale alleged to have been made by
McKinney was not a real estate transaction requiring a real estate broker's
license, and because the complaint did not allege that McKinney was acting for
compensation in that transaction. On the first point the argument is that
because the complaint alleges that the transaction consisted of the sale of a
gasoline  service station we must assume that it did not include any of the
transactions referred to in section 2 of the Real Estate Brokers' Act as amended
in 1925 (Deering's Gen. Laws, Act 112), and which defines a real estate broker
as: "a person -- who, for a compensation, sells, or offers for sale, buys, or
offers to buy, or negotiates the purchase or sale or exchange of real estate, or
who, for compensation, negotiates loans on real estate, leases or offers to
lease, or negotiates the sale, purchase, or exchange of leases, rents, or places
for rent, or collects rent from real estate, or improvements thereon, for
others, as a whole or partial vocation." There is nothing on the face of the
complaint to show that this particular gasoline service station was held under a
title separate from the title to the land upon which it was situated and the
court could well assume that the usual course of business had been followed and
that the transaction included either a transfer of the real property upon which
the station was situated, or a lease upon such real property.

     The argument that the complaint is insufficient because it fails to show
that in this particular transaction the broker was acting for a compensation is
without force because the allegation that the defendant was a licensed real
estate broker under the state statute and that while acting as such real estate
broker he made the sale and received the purchase price is sufficient to bring
him within the terms of the act which itself defines a real estate broker as one
who acts for a compensation.

   Upon the trial it developed that the plaintiffs owned a gasoline service
station, a small chicken ranch, a store and sandwich shop, which they operated
upon leased premises, and which they placed in the hands of defendant McKinney
for sale. Acting under this authority McKinney on May 26, 1926, sold the
property to Martinez, from whom he collected the purchase price. The property
was turned over to the purchasers under escrow instructions through which
McKinney was authorized to retain the purchase price in the event of a
controversy arising until an adjudication of the controversy by a court. With
these escrow instructions McKinney received from the plaintiffs a bill of sale
of the personal property and a lease to the real property assigned by them to
the purchasers, and these two documents were authorized to be delivered to the
purchasers by the escrow-holder upon the expiration of the notice of sale if no
controversy arose. The trial court found that at the time these documents were
delivered to McKinney he was acting as a real estate broker for a compensation
and commission agreed to be paid to him by the plaintiffs; that he retained
possession of the money under the escrow instructions until the controversy
which arose over the right of the plaintiffs herein to assign their lease to the
property had been determined; that in an action brought for that purpose in the
superior court it was judicially determined that these plaintiffs were entitled
to assign all their right to the said lease to the purchasers; that they had
executed such an assignment and delivered it to McKinney, and that the
plaintiffs herein were entitled to receive from McKinney the sum of $ 1,320,
which was the balance left in his hands after deducting his commission and other
expenses, and as a part of the same transaction the purchasers were entitled to
have delivered to them the bill of sale of the personal property, together with
the assigned lease covering the real property.

     From the facts in the record and the findings of the trial court it appears
that the transaction in dispute consisted of the sale of personal property
located upon real estate and of the negotiation for and exchange of the lease of
the real property upon which such personalty was located. The transaction,
therefore, under the facts and findings, comes directly within the terms of
section 2 of the Real Estate Brokers' Act defining a real estate broker as one
who "leases or offers to lease, or negotiates the sale, purchase, or exchange of
leases." The question which is presented on this appeal is whether the sale of
personal property, to which the sale or exchange of a lease of the realty upon
which the personal property is located is an incident, is to be treated solely
as a sale of personal property and not within the Real Estate Brokers' Act. This
is the contention of the appellant and in support of the argument he cites
Weingast v. Rialto Pastry Shop, Inc., 243 N.Y. 113 [152 N.E. 693], and Salisbury
v. Alskog, 144 Wash. 88 [256 P. 1030]. The New York statute involved in the
Weingast case defines a real estate broker as "Any person who for compensation
-- buys or rents or offers or attempts to negotiate a sale, exchange, purchase
or rental of an estate or interest in real estate." The court held  that this
language did not include one who  made a specialty of procuring purchasers for
restaurants, stores and like going concerns where a lease simply goes with the
place as a part of the goodwill. In the Salisbury case the Washington statute
defined a real estate broker as one who negotiated for the purchase, sale,
exchange, lease, or rental of real estate or an interest therein. The Washingeon
court interpreted the statute to apply to a transaction where the broker leased
or rented real property and held that it did not apply to one who sold a lease
or leasehold interest in real property. The two cases are on a line with Pike v.
Psihogios, 68 Cal. App. 145 [228 P. 722], where it was held under the original
Real Estate Brokers' Act of 1919 (Stats. 1919, p. 1252) that the definition of a
real estate broker in that act did not include one who negotiated the sale of a
lease to real property. As a result of the Pike decision the legislature, at its
next session, amended this section of the act so as to expressly include within
the definition of a real estate broker one who negotiated for or sold or
exchanged a lease in real property. The cases cited by appellant are, therefore,
not applicable to the California statute as amended. In fact the real argument
of appellant is not that our statute does not include such a transaction but
that in the case at hand the interest in the lease was merely incidental to the
interest in the personalty sold, and that, therefore, that part of the
transaction should be disregarded. But it is significant that the interest in
the lease was of such importance that the transaction was delayed for more than
a year until it could be judicially determined that the respondents were
entitled to assign the lease to the purchasers, and that, if this could not be
done, the whole sale would have been canceled.

     The point is raised that the transaction upon which the liability is
predicated did not come within the term of the bond. The argument is that,
because the bond did not become effective until March 14, 1927, it was incumbent
upon the respondents to prove that the breach occurred during its term. The
trial court found that on March 27, 1927, McKinney misappropriated the money
entrusted to him and converted it to his own use. This finding, the appellant
states, is not supported by the evidence, but the appellant has taken its appeal
under section 953a of the   Code of Civil Procedure, and has failed to print any
of the evidence or the findings which it attacks. We must therefore assume, in
support of the judgment of the trial court, that its findings were based upon
competent evidence and we will not search the typewritten record to discover if
error has occurred. ( Estate of Berry, 195 Cal. 354, 358 [233 P. 330].)

   The evidence upon which the respondents rely is that the sale was made on May
27, 1926, and the purchase price delivered to McKinney in escrow to be held by
him in the event of a controversy "until adjudication by a court of
jurisdiction." A controversy actually arose over the right of the respondents to
assign to the purchaser the lease covering the premises upon which the service
station was located. On June 1, 1926, the purchasers notified McKinney not to
turn over the money because of this controversy, and on June 7th of the same
year the respondents filed an action in the superior court to have these rights
adjudicated. On January 20, 1927, judgment was entered in favor of these
respondents in that action decreeing that they had the right to assign the lease
involved. After the entry of this judgment a demand was made upon McKinney for
the balance of the purchase money, but he refused to turn it over to them upon
advice of counsel that the adjudication referred to in the escrow instructions
meant a final judgment and that he should, therefore, hold the money until the
expiration of 60 days after the entry of the judgment in the case referred to.
When the 60 days had expired the respondents again demanded of McKinney that he
turn the money over to them, but he refused, stating at the time that he had
used it for other purposes. This demand, it is claimed, was made on March 27 or
29, 1927, within the period covered by the term of appellant's bond.

     Finally it is argued that the breach for which recovery was had does not
come within the terms of the bond. Section 9a of the Real Estate Brokers' Act,
as amended in 1923 (Stats. 1923, p. 93), calls for a bond conditioned for the
faithful performance by the broker of any undertaking as a licensed real estate
broker under the act. The same section provides that any person injured by the
failure of the broker "to perform his duties, or comply with the provisions of
the act" has a right of action against  the broker and the surety for the
recovery of damages sustained by the failure of the broker to perform his duties
or to comply with the provisions of the act. The bond which was given pursuant
to the terms of the act is in the same language. It will be noted that the
breach for which recovery may be had may arise either from a failure of the
broker to perform his duties as such or from his failure to comply with any of
the provisions of the act. In this respect the act differs from the Corporate
Securities Act, prior to its amendment in 1925, which required a bond
conditioned for the "compliance with the provisions of law." This language was
held, in Blumenthal v. Larson, 79 Cal. App. 726, 730 [248 P. 681], to relate to
a compliance with the terms of the Corporate Securities Act alone. The same
ruling was made in Mitchell v. Smith, 204 Cal. 197 [267 P. 540], where the court
commented upon the amendment to the Securities Act in 1925, which extended the
liability of the surety under bonds given pursuant to the act. The language of
the Real Estate Brokers' Act, like this amendment of 1925, is so much broader
than the language of the original Securities Act that the cases cited are not
applicable to the case presented here. If the act intended to limit the
application  of the bond to a failure to perform duties specified in the act
itself there would have been no need of adding the alternative -- the failure on
the part of the broker to perform his duties as a licensed broker. It cannot be
doubted that when a licensed broker has obtained the proceeds of a sale of
property belonging to his principal and refuses to turn over such proceeds to
his principal he has failed to perform the duty incumbent upon him as such
broker or agent irrespective of any provision of the act requiring him to do so.

   Judgment affirmed.

   Sturtevant, J., and Buck, P. J., pro tem., concurred.

   A petition for a rehearing of this cause was denied by the district court of
appeal on November 21, 1928, and the following opinion then rendered thereon:

   THE COURT.   In appellant's petition for a rehearing, and in the brief of
amicus curiae in support thereof,  criticism is made of the opinion heretofore
filed herein on the matter of the demurrer to the complaint. It is argued that
the complaint was demurrable because it failed to allege that the broker was
acting for a compensation or that the money was received as a result of a real
estate transaction. We are inclined to the same view and if we had been sitting
in the trial court we would probably have sustained the demurrer and required an
amendment of the complaint. But when the point is raised on appeal after answer
and trial this court is in a different position from what the trial court was in
at the time of the ruling on the demurrer. Here it is necessary for the
appellant to show that "the error complained of has resulted in a miscarriage of
justice." (Sec. 4 1/2, art. VI, Const.) And before we can reverse a case because
of such claimed error we must be satisfied that it has resulted in a miscarriage
of justice after we have examined the entire cause, including the evidence.
When, therefore, the defendant has answered and gone to trial after his demurrer
has been overruled and the findings of fact disclose that the alleged
infirmities of the complaint have been cured, we may rest our decision on the
findings, particularly where, as here, the appellant has failed to show that the
evidence was not received without objection.

     It is also argued that, in any event, the recovery on the bond should be
limited to the amount received for the exchange of the leasehold interest. But
the appellant has not shown that the issue was raised in the trial court. It has
been raised here for the first time in this petition for a rehearing. The point
argued in the briefs was that the value of the leasehold interest was so small
that the entire transaction should be deemed to have been a sale of the
personalty and not a real estate sale under the act. The respondent testified
that he inventoried the personalty at $ 1,300. The total sale price was $ 1,700.
We took the view, on the point raised, that the value of the lease was
substantial and brought the transaction under the act. But there was no evidence
on the value of the lease because the matter was not put in issue. We are not
required to consider a point raised for the first time in a petition for
rehearing.

   The petition is denied.

    A petition by appellant to have the cause heard in the supreme court, after
judgment in the district court of appeal, was denied by the supreme court on
December 24, 1928.

   All the Justices concurred.


                               8 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            NORMAN NATHAN GRAND et al., Petitioners and Appellants;
             NELLIE GRAND, Respondent, v. F. W. GRIESINGER, as Real
          Estate Commissioner, etc., et al., Defendants and Appellants

                                 Civ. No. 22540

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

            160 Cal. App. 2d 397; 325 P.2d 475; 1958 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      2132


                                  May 13, 1958

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEALS from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  John J. Ford, Judge.

   Proceeding in mandamus to review an order of the Real Estate Commissioner
revoking the licenses of three real estate salesmen.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES


(1) Appeal--Briefs--Pointing Out Errors.  --On appeal from a judgment upholding
revocation of real estate salesmen's licenses, error assigned asserting
insufficiency of evidence was deemed to have been waived where appellants' brief
did not comply with Rules on Appeal, rule 15(a), relating to separate statement
of each point in a brief, and there was no adequate basis for a review of the
evidence.

(2) Id.--Briefs--Pointing Out Errors.  --Inasmuch as a reviewing court presumes
that the record contains evidence to sustain every finding of fact, appellants
must, if they contend that some particular issue of fact is not sustained, set
forth in their brief all the material evidence on the point and not merely their
own evidence; unless this is done the error assigned is deemed waived.

(3) Id.--Briefs--Pointing Out Errors.  --Appellants must state fully, with
transcript references, evidence that is claimed to be insufficient to support
the findings, and the reviewing court is not called on to make an independent
search of the record where this rule is ignored.

(4) Id.--Briefs--Pointing Out Errors.  --A claim of insufficiency of evidence to
justify findings, consisting of a mere assertion without a fair statement of the
evidence, is entitled to no consideration by the appellate court when it is
apparent that a substantial amount of evidence was received on behalf of
respondents.

(5a) (5b) Brokers--Licenses--Revocation.  --Licenses of two real estate salesmen
were properly revoked where such salesmen had operated rental agencies under
agreements with various brokers under whom they were licensed which provided
that the salesmen were to be in complete control of the rental office and the
brokers were to receive a percentage of the profits and where the registration
fees were paid by customers of the service to the salesmen, since a real estate
salesman must be employed by a real estate broker and cannot receive
compensation from any person other than the broker under whom he is licensed (
Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10137), and since the entire statutory scheme ( Bus. &
Prof. Code, § 10130 et seq.) requires the broker actively to conduct his
brokerage business and supervise the activities of his salesmen.

(6) Id.--Distinctions--Real Estate Broker and Salesman.  --A real estate broker
and a real estate salesman belong in different categories; the broker, because
of his superior knowledge, experience and proven stability, is authorized to
deal with the public, contract with its members and collect money from them;
whereas the salesman is strictly the agent of the broker, cannot contract in his
own name, and cannot accept money from any person other than the broker under
whom he is licensed.

(7) Appeal--Briefs--Effect of Respondent's Failure to File Brief.  --On appeal
from a judgment upholding revocation of the licenses of two real estate salesmen
and ordering that the revocation of the license of a third salesman be vacated,
the fact that no brief in response to cross-appellants' opening brief with
respect to the portion of the judgment concerning the third salesman was filed
was an admission of the facts as stated by cross-appellants and was, in effect,
a consent to a reversal of that portion of the judgment. (Rules on Appeal, rule
17(b).)

(8) Brokers--Licenses--Review.  --Where the Real Estate Commissioner's order
revoking the license of a real estate salesman was ordered vacated on the ground
that his findings that the salesman acted as a real estate licensee for
compensation when not licensed was not supported by the evidence, the
commissioner's reliance on stipulations, which stated that the salesman
negotiated with prospective tenants and with landlords in connection with a
rental service and received compensation therefor and that the salesman, while
unlicensed, interviewed, filled out registration cards, and accepted
registration fees from certain specified persons in connection with the rental
service, as proof of the receipt of compensation by the salesman, was justified.


(9) Stipulations--Effect--Stipulations as Binding.  --A finding made contrary to
a deliberate stipulation cannot stand in the trial court or on appeal.

(10a) (10b) Brokers--Licenses--Revocation.  --It was error for the court to
order vacated the Real Estate Commissioner's revocation of a real estate
salesman's license where the salesman, prior to getting the license, was engaged
with her husband in the operation of a rental agency, had opened a bank account
where portions of the proceeds of the business were deposited and the only
authorized signatures were those of the salesman and her husband, and had
interviewed, filled out registration cards for, and accepted registration fees
from persons who patronized the rental service, all of which was unknown to the
licensing authority at the time the license was issued, since, for such
violations of the Real Estate Law, the commissioner could have denied the
application for the license. ( Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10177, subd. (f).)

(11) Id.--Licenses--Revocation.  -- Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10177, relating to the
suspension or revocation of real estate licenses, is not confined to acts
committed by a person while holding a license, but is equally applicable to
conduct violative of the act though occurring before issuance of the license.

COUNSEL: Francis C. Jones for Petitioners and Appellants.

Edmund G. Brown, Attorney General, and Lee B. Stanton, Deputy Attorney General,
for Defendants and Appellants.

No appearance for Respondent.

JUDGES: Ashburn, J.  Fox, P. J., and Herndon, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: ASHBURN

OPINION

     The Real Estate Commissioner, after charges made and hearing duly had,
ordered revocation of the respective licenses of Norman Nathan Grand, William
Samuel Grand and Nelly Grand 1 as real estate salesman. Upon review through
administrative mandamus the superior court upheld the ruling as to Norman and
William and denied mandate; they appeal from the ruling.  As to Nelly Grand the
court held that the findings were not supported by the weight of the evidence
and accordingly adjudged that the order revoking her license as real estate
salesman be vacated, and that a peremptory writ be issued to that end.  From
this ruling the commissioner takes a cross-appeal.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   The first
name of this defendant is spelled Nelly and Nellie throughout the proceedings
herein.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Appeal of Norman and William Grand

   There is little dispute about the facts for most of them are covered by a
written stipulation filed at the hearing before the commissioner.  Each of the
Grands had a real estate salesman's license. Norman's dated from July 1, 1952,
William's from June 2, 1953, and Nelly's from March 18, 1954.  None of them ever
had a broker's license. Their activities concerned real estate rental agencies,
which have been held to fall within the terms of section 10131, Business and
Professions Code.  So far as pertinent it provides: "A real estate broker . . .
is a person who, for a compensation, . . . rents or places for rent, or collects
rent from real estate, or improvements thereon, for another or others."  It has
been held that the activities of such an agency require a broker's license as a
condition to lawful operation ( Dyer v. Watson, 121 Cal.App.2d 84, 89 [262 P.2d
873]; 18 Ops. Cal. Atty. Gen. 191). The commissioner's findings described such
activities as follows: "[That] the business of said rental agency consisted,
generally, of procuring information from landlords about places that were
available for rent and of selling service to registered clients for a fee, the
service consisting of making available to the clients information concerning
rental vacancies, as the information then appeared in the records of the rental
agency." A salesman cannot operate such a rental service on his own account; he
must be employed by and act for a broker.

   Norman Grand was licensed as a salesman under William C. Banta from August
19, 1952 to March 31, 1953.  He then transferred his license to Ellen L. Noy,
another broker, and remained so licensed until January 28, 1954; about May 19,
1954, he became licensed as a salesman under Oscar D. Ballew, another broker.

   Prior to employment by any broker Norman operated such a rental service under
the name "Guaranteed Rental Service" for about three weeks in August, 1952.
Having discovered that operation to be illegal he made a joint venture agreement
with broker Banta whereby he acquired a two-thirds interest in Banta's business,
known as "The Guaranteed Rental Service." The agreement required Grand to assume
complete responsibility for the business, operational costs being shared pro
rata.  All proceeds of the business were to be deposited in a bank, subject to
withdrawal on the signatures of both parties.  Banta's name was on the window.
This operation -- from  August, 1952 to April 1, 1953 -- led to bankruptcy of
Norman.

    On April 1, 1953, he made an agreement with broker Ellen L. Noy, to operate
a rental service under the name of Security Realty Service, paying her 25 per
cent of the net income and agreeing to protect her "from any and all added
responsibilities and incurred costs of this department." Norman operated rental
services for Mrs. Noy in four different localities.  She testified, in part: "Q.
Then the operation of the office was to be under your direction then, is that
correct?  A. At my office, but the rental department entirely under his -- Q.
Didn't you intend to supervise its direction?  A. It was not my job -- he was
there all the time.  Q. And was entirely under his contract?  A. He was in
complete charge of it.  Q. That's right, but you nevertheless were the directing
broker that controlled the office.  A. That was one of the services that I put
out in my office, but he was the manager of it and separate contractor on it."
This continued from April 1, 1953 to January 16, 1954, and Mrs. Noy testified
that "he was on a vacation most of the time." Late in April he went with Nelly
(whose name then was Ferrera) on a visit to Mexico, which seems to have been a
honeymoon trip for them.  He left his father William, his mother Verna, and his
brother Howard in charge of the rental service.  William had no salesman's
license to operate under Mrs. Noy until June of 1953, and the other two were not
licensed at all.

   In November, 1953, a new contract was made with Mrs. Noy.  Norman and Nelly
are named as "second party" therein.  It provides that Mrs. Noy "will continue
to permit the second party to operate a rental service under the fictitious name
'Security Realty,' which name is duly licensed to the first party by the State
of California Real Estate Commission;"  also, "that all bills, debts, wages,
rental service complaints, management, and control of above operation to be the
sole responsibility of the second party, in so far as Real Estate Law of the
State of California permits;" that Mrs. Noy should have 10 per cent of the net
profit and the second party 90 per cent thereof.  Norman was in complete charge
of this rental service so far as Mrs. Noy was concerned, but Nelly was helping
him to operate.  Norman testified that he divided the profits with William.
Because of debts owing her from Norman and Nelly, Mrs. Noy took over the
Whittier rental office in January, 1954.  The commissioner found in this
connection: "That during said periods said respondent Norman Nathan Grand
deposited funds received in the operation of the respective rental agencies into
bank accounts; that these  said accounts provided for withdrawals by the said
respondent only; that he assumed to pay all expenses incurred in connection with
these said agencies; that he had full authority and did exercise full authority
to employ and discharge personnel needed to assist him in his business, to
compensate such personnel and to pay all other expenses incurred in said
businesses," and the trial court held the finding to be supported by the weight
of the evidence.

   The commissioner also found that Norman, during the months of May to August,
inclusive, of 1953, employed Verna Grand, his mother, in the business; that she
in 158 specific instances "interviewed, determined their needs, filled out
registration cards and accepted registration fees from prospective tenants and
clients;" that she had no license whatever and the fact was known to Norman.  It
was also found that Nelly was employed by Norman and did the same type of work
during a period when she had no license, as Norman knew.

   William Grand, the father, made an agreement with broker Oscar D. Ballew in
December, 1953, for operation of a rental business under the name "Select
Realty," Grand to be responsible for all expenses and to handle all receipts and
to pay Ballew 10 per cent of the profit derived from  the rental business.
Ballew worked for the telephone company every day except Saturday and Sunday,
and was in the office only on those days.  William testified: "A. Yes, after I
resigned with Mrs. Noy I did have Mr. Ballew for a couple of months -- he was in
the office and had desk space.  I opened up the Select Realty with him as my
broker in San Gabriel." The commissioner further found that William employed
Howard Grand to interview prospective renters, etc., during the period from July
15 to November 1, 1954; that Howard had no license, as William knew, and that he
received compensation from William for said services; also, that William's wife
Verna was employed and acted for him in the same capacity, she having no license
and William being cognizant of that fact.  Commissioner's finding XXIV says:
"That the interviewing of prospective renters, determining their needs,
completing registration cards, and accepting fees from these prospective renters
for the purpose of giving them information concerning places available for rent,
was and is a real estate activity requiring a real estate broker or salesman
license under the provisions of Sections 10131 and 10132 of the Business and
Professions Code of the State of California." By way of "determination of
issues" the commissioner further found  that each of the three respondents "was
and is in violation of Sections 10130, 10131, 10137, 10177(d) and 10177(f),
Business and Professions Code of the State of California."

    Though counsel for appellants Norman and William Grand repeatedly asserts
insufficiency of the evidence, his brief does not comply with the rule or the
authorities governing such a claim.  Rule 15(a) of the Rules on Appeal requires:
"Each point in a brief shall appear separately under an appropriate heading,
with subheadings if desired.  Such headings need not be technical 'assignments
of errors' but should be concise headings which are generally descriptive of the
subject matter covered.  The statement of any matter in the record shall be
supported by appropriate reference to the record.  . . ." Appellants have not
complied with these requirements.  Nor has counsel furnished adequate basis for
a review of the evidence.

 "The rule is well established that a reviewing court must presume that the
record contains evidence to support every finding of fact, and an appellant who
contends that some particular finding is not supported is required to set forth
in his brief a summary of the material evidence upon that issue.  Unless this is
done, the error assigned is deemed to be waived.  ( Kruckow v. Lesser, 111
Cal.App.2d 198, 200 [244 P.2d 19].)

 It is incumbent upon appellants to state fully, with transcript references, the
evidence which is claimed to be insufficient to support the findings.  The
reviewing court is not called upon to make an independent search of the record
where this rule is ignored.  ( Goldring v. Goldring, 94 Cal.App.2d 643, 645 [211
P.2d 342].)" ( McCosker v. McCosker, 122 Cal.App.2d 498, 500 [265 P.2d 21].)

    "A claim of insufficiency of the evidence to justify findings, consisting of
mere assertion without a fair statement of the evidence, is entitled to no
consideration, when it is apparent, as it is here, that a substantial amount of
evidence was received on behalf of the respondents.  Instead of a fair and
sincere effort to show that the trial court was wrong, appellant's brief is a
mere challenge to respondents to prove that the court was right.  And it is an
attempt to place upon the court the burden of discovering without assistance
from appellant any weakness in the arguments of the respondents.  An appellant
is not permitted to evade or shift his responsibility in this manner." ( Estate
of Palmer, 145 Cal.App.2d 428, 431 [302 P.2d 629].) See also 3 Witkin,
California Procedure,  section 149, page 2330.

   Appellants' counsel actually has shown that the claim of  insufficiency of
the evidence is not a substantial one, for the opening brief says: "Through oral
and documentary evidence it was established that the Appellants entered into
agreements either oral or written with various brokers under whom they were
licensed, under the terms of which, they would act as managers  of real estate
offices operated under a fictitious name or otherwise which were duly registered
with the Real Estate Commission, as the office of the particular broker and
naming the Appellants as salesmen and naming the broker as the responsible
broker. Under these agreements the Appellants were to accept the responsibility
of the management of the office, the hiring and firing of employees, the banking
of the receipts of the real estate office, the payment of the bills from the
proceeds thereof, maintenance of bank accounts in the names of the Appellants
and the placing of advertising in the various newspapers, charging the cost
thereof on some occasions to the Appellants."

    The gist of appellants' contention is a claim that the judgment is against
law in that it is not supported by the findings.  The argument runs as follows:
"Appellants contend that with the registration of a licensed salesman with the
Real Estate Commission by a duly licensed broker, wherein the broker names
himself as the responsible broker under the Real Estate Law, as set forth in the
Business and Professions Code, that thereafter the salesmen could not be charged
with acting as a broker unless, his acts complained of were without the
knowledge or without the consent of the broker. The mere assumption of
responsibility which has been accepted by the salesman at the direction of the
broker could certainly never be construed to mean that the salesman is
attempting to act as a broker for the very obvious reason that a salesman
accepting authority delegated to him by the broker as manager of the office
would be in constant peril of the loss of his license. Under sections 10131 and
10132 of the Business and Professions Code it will be noted that the duties and
capacity of a broker and a salesman are identical excepting a salesman must be
employed by a broker, therefore the salesman has the power and authority to do
anything that a broker can do except that he must perform the acts as an
employee of the broker." It rests upon a misconception drawn from the similarity
of language used in sections 10131 and 10132, Business and Professions Code.

   Section 10131, at the time pertinent to these proceedings, defined the term "
real estate broker" as follows: "A real estate broker within the meaning of this
part is a person  who, for a compensation, sells or offers for sale, buys, or
offers to buy, lists, or solicits for prospective purchasers, or negotiates the
purchase or sale or exchange of real estate, or who, for compensation,
negotiates loans on real estate, leases, or offers to lease, or negotiates the
sale, purchase, or exchange of leases, rents, or places for rent, or collects
rent from real estate, or improvements thereon, for another or others." Section
10132 defined real estate salesman: "A real estate salesman within the meaning
of this part is a natural person who for a compensation is employed by a
licensed real estate broker to sell, or offer for sale, or to list, or to buy,
or to offer to buy, or to negotiate the purchase or sale or exchange of real
estate, or to solicit for prospective purchasers of real estate, or to negotiate
a loan on real estate, or to lease, or to negotiate the sale, purchase or
exchange of leases, or offer to lease, rent or place for rent, any real estate,
or improvements thereon." The differences in language are small, but the
divergence in import is large.  A broker performs the specified services "for
another or others," meaning the public, while a salesman must be "employed by a
licensed real estate broker." Both act for compensation, but the salesman cannot
"be employed by or accept compensation from any person other than the broker
under whom he is at the time licensed." (§ 10137.) 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   All
section references herein relate to the Business and Professions Code.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In order to obtain a salesman's license one must present "the recommendation
of the broker who is to be his employer, certifying that the applicant is
honest, truthful and of good reputation." (§ 10151.) This is all he needs except
to pay a small fee and pass the required examination, which is less exacting
than the one given to a prospective broker. When a salesman's application is
granted his license goes into possession of his broker-employer and there
remains until cancelled or the salesman leaves the employ of the broker. (§
10160.) When one of these events occurs the license goes not to the salesman,
but to the commissioner for cancellation.  (§ 10161.) When the salesman makes a
contact with a new broker the process is repeated.  (§ 10219.) The broker must
"exercise reasonable supervision over the activities of his salesmen" or hazard
the suspension or revocation of his own license (§ 10177h).  A salesman can
graduate into the status of broker only after arriving at the age of 21 (10 Cal.
Admin. Code, § 2720); a salesman's license can issue at age 18 (10  Cal. Admin.
Code, § 2750); a broker must be a citizen of the United States (§ 10150.5),
although this is not true of a salesman.

   The applicant for broker's license must have had two years' experience as a
salesman, or "at least the equivalent of two years' general real estate
experience or graduation from a four-year college or university course, which
course included specialization in real estate." (§ 10150.6.) He must be
recommended by two real estate owners of the county of his residence or
business, "certifying that the applicant is honest, truthful and of good
reputation and recommending that a real estate broker's license be granted to
him." (§ 10150.) He must also be approved by a committee of not less than three
members of the State Real Estate Board.  (§ 10150.6.)



    It is evident that brokers and salesmen belong in distinctly different
categories and that the broker, because of his superior knowledge, experience
and proven stability is authorized to deal with the public, contract with its
members and collect money from them; the salesman, on the other hand, is
strictly the agent of the broker. He cannot contract in his own name ( Tatterson
v. Standard Realty Co., 81 Cal.App. 23, 29 [253 P. 770]; Weber v. Tonini, 151
Cal.App.2d 168, 170-171 [311 P.2d 132]; 9 Cal.Jur.2d, § 70, p. 227), nor accept
compensation from any person other than the broker under whom he is licensed; it
is a misdemeanor for anyone, whether obligor, escrow holder, or otherwise, to
pay or deliver to anyone other than the broker compensation for services within
the scope of the act.  (§ 10138.)

    The entire statutory scheme requires the broker actively to conduct his
brokerage business and to supervise the activities of his salesmen. It precludes
a salesman from taking charge of or conducting a business such as a rental
agency which requires a broker's license.

   The revocation of the licenses of Norman and William Grand was clearly
justified by the facts and applicable law.

   Cross-Appeal of Real Estate Commissioner

   The commissioner appeals from the portion of the judgment in favor of Nelly
Grand.  The ruling seems to be based upon a finding "that the Commissioner's
Findings, to the extent that they find that Nelly Grand acted as a real licensee
for compensation, are not supported by the weight of the evidence; and to that
extent the Real Estate Commissioner has abused his discretion to the prejudice
of Nelly Grand."



     The brief of appellants Norman Grand and William Grand says: "As the lower
court ruled in favor of Nelly Grand, and directed that the order made revoking
the license of the said Nelly Grand be vacated and set aside, the entire
statement of facts and argument will concern themselves only with these
Appellants no further reference will be made to any evidence concerning the said
Nelly Grand." No brief in response to cross-appellants' opening brief was filed
on behalf of Nelly Grand.  Thereby she admitted the facts to be as stated by
cross-appellants, and in effect consented to a reversal.  (See rule 17(b) of
Rules on Appeal; Postin v. Griggs, 66 Cal.App.2d 147, 148 [151 P.2d 887];
Guardianship of Brazeal, 117 Cal.App.2d 59, 60  [254 P.2d 886]; Wantz v. Union
Bank & Trust Co., 137 Cal.App. 98, 102 [29 P.2d 882, 31 P.2d 826]; 4 Cal.Jur.2d,
§ 487, p. 323; 3 Witkin, California Procedure, § 154, p. 2340.)

    The attorney general's brief relies in part upon the claim that it was
stipulated that Nelly Grand did act as a real estate licensee for compensation.
The written stipulation which was filed at the commissioner's hearing says:
"[That] the following facts and allegations in said Amended Accusation are true
and that no further proof will be required thereof." Paragraph VI of the
stipulation says: "That the year in Line 16 of Paragraph VIII is changed to
'1953' instead of '1954,' and further, in Line 17 of the same paragraph, that
the word 'respondent' may be stricken." Fairly construed this was an adoption of
said paragraph VIII as corrected.  Said paragraph VIII, to which reference is
thus made, reads: "That during the month of April 1954 respondent Norman Nathan
Grand had in his employ his brother, respondent Howard Grand, his mother, Verna
Grand, and respondent Nelly Ferrera, who is now his wife and known as Nelly
Grand; that each and all of said persons negotiated with prospective tenants and
with landlords in said rental business and received compensation therefor from
respondent Norman Grand; that each and all of said persons were not then
licensed as real estate salesmen."

   [EDITOR'S NOTE: TEXT WITHIN THESE SYMBOLS [O> <O] IS OVERSTRUCK IN THE
SOURCE.]

   Paragraph IX of the stipulation relates to paragraph XII of the amended
accusation, which paragraph does not mention the subject of compensation.
Paragraph IX of the stipulation in its present condition is as follows: "As to
Paragraph XII that Nellie Grand, wife of respondent Norman Grand, then known as
'Nellie Ferrera,' while employed by respondent Norman Grand [O>
for-a-compensation therefor, <O] and while not  licensed by the Division of Real
Estate interviewed, filled out registration cards, and accepted registration
fees from the persons and on the dates so indicated, beginning on Line 22 in
said paragraph." The striking of the words "for a compensation therefor" may be
explained as the correction of an inadvertence, inasmuch as paragraph XII of the
accusation makes no such allegation.  Had the attorneys intended to negative the
receipt of compensation they normally would not have stopped with elimination of
"for a compensation therefor" but would have substituted the word "without" for
the word "for." They also probably would have made a change in the stipulation
concerning paragraph VIII of the accusation had they been bent on saying that
Nelly had acted without compensation.  We conclude that the attorney general's
reliance upon the stipulation as proof of receipt of compensation by Nelly is
justified.

 Of course, a finding made contrary to a deliberate stipulation cannot stand in
the trial court or upon appeal.  ( Capital National Bank v. Smith, 62 Cal.App.2d
328, 343 [144 P.2d 665]; Munger & Munger v. McBratney, 131 Cal.App.2d Supp. 866,
868 [280 P.2d 232]; Haese v. Heitzeg, 159 Cal. 569, 575 [114 P. 816]; Steele v.
Steele, 132 Cal.App.2d 301, 303 [382 P.2d 171]; 23 Cal.Jur., § 12, p. 828.  But
the commissioner's appeal has additional substantial basis.

    On November 22, 1953, Norman and Nelly made the above mentioned contract
with Mrs. Noy which reduced her compensation to 10 per cent of the net profit
and expressly permitted Norman and Nelly to operate the rental service under the
name "'Security Realty,' which name is duly licensed to the first party [Noy]."
The Grands were to have full management and control and were to receive 90 per
cent of the net profit.  They did carry on the business together.  Nelly at that
time had no license whatever.  Obviously the business was conducted for
compensation, and it was unlawfully conducted so far as Nelly was concerned
because she was not licensed at all.

   During an earlier period of operation of "Guaranteed Rental Service" in
August of 1952, when Norman was confessedly operating without the blessing of
any  broker's name, Nelly opened a bank account where portions of the proceeds
of the business were deposited, and the only authorized signatures were those of
Norman and Nelly.  This was an activity which was unlawful when conducted by her
without any license.

    In 1953 and early 1954, before obtaining any license, Nelly "interviewed,
filled out registration cards, and accepted registration fees from the persons"
specified in paragraph XII of the amended accusation, 21 specific instances.  It
was so stipulated.  This was another series of violations of the law.

   In arguing the appeal of Norman and William their counsel asserts that
activities such as those just mentioned are purely clerical and routine and may
be performed by one who does not hold any license. The above cited ruling of the
attorney general (18 Ops. Cal. Atty. Gen. 191 (1951)) quotes the Real Estate
Commissioner's description of rental agencies as follows: "'(They) . . . solicit
listings of vacancies for rent through classified advertisements in local
newspapers, also via telephone.  Upon receipt of information thus solicited,
they assemble and classify it and then advertise it for sale at a fixed fee
which they refer to as a "registration fee" usually in the amount of $ 5.00
(although it ranges up to $ 25).  They apparently have no active or direct
connection with bringing landlord and tenant together.  It appears that they do
not introduce landlords and potential tenants to each other or take part in any
of the actual negotiations, such as discussions and settlement of the terms of
any rental or leasehold transaction, and contend that they do not act as agents
for either the owner or tenant and receive no compensation whatever except the
registration fee.  Their activities are apparently limited to office bookkeeping
and clerical work.  They do no field work, but sit in their offices, awaiting
responses to classified advertisements they run in local newspapers which
proclaim that they have an abundance of low-rent vacant rentals available in all
sections of the city that will be furnished applicants upon payment of the
required "registration or service charge fee."'" Substantially the same set of
facts was held in Dyer v. Watson, supra, 121 Cal.App.2d 84, 89, to require a
broker's license. The written stipulation at bar shows that Nelly did all of
these things except soliciting listings of vacancies, assembling and classifying
the information and then advertising it for sale.  Her work was a part of a
broker's function, and she was required under the law to have a broker's or
salesman's license. If Norman had had a broker's license, that would not have
been enough to cover Nelly's activities.  "No real estate license gives
authority to do any act specified in this chapter to any person, other than the
person to whom the license is issued." (§ 10157.)

     Section 10177, as amended in 1953, provided that the commissioner may
suspend or revoke the license of any real estate licensee who has done any of
the following: "(d) Wilfully disregarded or violated any of the provisions of
the Real Estate Law or of Chapter 1 of Part 2 or of the rules and regulations of
the commissioner for the administration and enforcement of the Real Estate Law
and Chapter 1 of Part 2.  . . .  (f) Acted or conducted himself in a manner
which would have warranted the denial of his application for a real estate
license." (Stats. 1953, ch. 762, § 3, p. 2027.) Clearly, Nelly had violated the
act prior to the issuance of a salesman's license to her in 1954, and had so
conducted herself as to have warranted a denial of her application had the
commissioner been apprised of her previous conduct.  The language of subdivision
(f) carries an implication that it covers acts antedating the application for a
license; conduct occurring after issuance thereof could not in the nature of
things have brought about a denial of the application.

   That the provisions of section 10177 are not confined to acts committed while
holding a license appears from a comparison of that section with section 10176.
The latter sets forth nine different categories of conduct which may bring about
suspension or revocation  of license. Prior to amendment of 1953 the right to
administer such discipline under section 10176 was limited to the doing of
proscribed acts "while a real estate licensee." The amendment of 1953 (Stats.
1953, ch. 762, § 2, p. 2025) made certain changes in the section, but the
phrasing "while a real estate licensee" was retained therein.  By way of
contrast, section 10177, which specifies additional grounds for suspension or
revocation, contained this general language prior to 1953: "The commissioner may
suspend or revoke the license of any real estate licensee, who within three
years immediately preceding has done any of the following." By that year's
amendment (Stats. 1953, ch. 762, § 3, p. 2026), the three-year limitation was
removed (i.e. transferred to § 10101) but the introductory language was not
otherwise changed.  This section did not contain the words "while a real estate
licensee" either before or after 1953.  The context of subdivisions (a), (d) and
(f) 3 indicates, as does the introductory language, that  section 10177 includes
conduct violative of the act though occurring before the issuance of the license
which is the subject of a particular suspension or revocation.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Section
10177 (Stats. 1953, ch. 762, § 3, pp. 2026-2027):

   "(a) Procured a real estate license, for himself or any salesman, by fraud,
misrepresentation or deceit, or by making any material misstatement of fact in
an application for a real estate license."

   "(d) Wilfully disregarded or violated any of the provisions of the Real
Estate Law or of Chapter 1 of Part 2 or of the rules and regulations of the
commissioner for the administration and enforcement of the Real Estate Law and
Chapter 1 of Part 2."

   "(f) Acted or conducted himself in a manner which would have warranted the
denial of his application for a real estate license."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In Hall v. Scudder , 74 Cal.App.2d 433 [168 P.2d 990], the court said at page
437: "Once the license is issued, the licensee becomes subject to disciplinary
procedure as to his acts and conduct committed while he is a real estate
licensee and 'within the immediately preceding three years.'" Colonial Liquor
Distributors v. O'Connell, 295 N.Y. 129 [65 N.E.2d 745], is persuasive.  It
dealt with revocation of a liquor license based upon conduct occurring prior to
the license period and under a procedure containing the following: "'2. A
license may be revoked for any of the following causes: "(c) Violation of any
provision of Chapter 478 of the Laws of 134 [sic] known as the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Law."'" (P. 748.) The court said at page 749: "The question of
law presented is whether a license may be revoked for violations which occurred
in a prior licensing period and were not discovered by the Authority until after
the issuance of the license sought to be revoked. One can of course conceive of
a situation in which a revocation for a long past offense would be an abuse of
the Authority's discretion but clearly this is not such a case." And at page
750: "The regulation authorized by statute specifies as cause for revocation
'Violation of any provision of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law', and we may
not limit the regulation by an absolute rule that no violation occurring before
issuance of a renewal license is cause for revocation thereof.  In this case the
violations were of such a character and were so closely identified in time and
circumstance with the business under regulation that we may not say that the
revocation was without authority or in any way an abuse of regulatory power."



    Because of her violations of the act prior to her application for a license
the commissioner properly could have denied Nelly's application.  "In these
cases all that is required is that the commissioner have reasonable grounds to
conclude that the applicant does not meet the conditions  set forth in the
statute." ( Glick v. Scudder, 69 Cal.App.2d 717, 719 [160 P.2d 90].)

   We have concluded that, for the reasons above stated, the granting of mandate
as to Nelly Grand was erroneous.

    The judgment is affirmed as to Norman Grand and William Grand and reversed
as to Nelly Grand, who is named as Nellie Grand in the judgment herein.


                               9 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            IRVING S. TUSHNER et al., Plaintiffs and Appellants, v.
          WYNNE A. SAVAGE, as Real Estate Commissioner, Defendant and
                                   Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 26350

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Four

          219 Cal. App. 2d 71; 33 Cal. Rptr. 247; 1963 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      2342


                                 August 6, 1963

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEALS from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  James M. McRoberts, Judge.

   Proceeding in mandamus to review an order of the Real Estate Commissioner
revoking real estate brokers' licenses.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Brokers--Licenses--Revocation.  --For the Real Estate Commissioner to have
jurisdiction to revoke a real estate broker's license, the licensee must have
been guilty of misconduct connected with his activities as a real estate broker.


(2) Id.--Licenses--Revocation: Real Property Loan Brokers.  --The Real Estate
Commissioner had jurisdiction to revoke real estate brokers' licenses for
violations of the Real Property Loan Brokers' Law, though such violations
occurred in the performance of their functions as mortgage loan brokers.

(3a) (3b) Id.--Licenses--Revocation.  --In a mandamus proceeding to review an
order of the Real Estate Commissioner revoking the real estate brokers' licenses
of mortgage loan brokers, which revocation was based in part on the brokers'
transaction of usurious loans in violation of the Real Property Loan Brokers'
Law, a finding that the brokers acted as lenders as well as brokers in the
questioned transactions, which required adding their broker's commission to the
interest stated in the loans in determining whether the loan was usurious, was
supported by evidence that the sister of one of the brokers, the purported
lender, was merely the alter ego of the brokers in the transactions in that the
money used to make the loans came out of bank funds deposited by the brokers to
her account, she kept her own money in a safe deposit vault, and the brokers
dominated both her and the account.

(4) Interest--Usury--Extra Charges.  --Where a lender charges interest plus a
brokerage fee on a loan, the fee is added to the interest rate in determining
whether the loan is usurious.

(5a) (5b) Brokers--Regulation--Real Property Loan Brokers.  --Mortgage loan
brokers' usurious loans in violation of the Real Property Loan Brokers' Law,
could not be characterized as mere "interim loans" where, except as to two of
the loans, there was no showing that the brokers had any specific ultimate
lender in mind at the time of the loan, and the other two loans were assigned to
a corporation that was a mere trade name for the brokers.

(6) Interest--Usury--Extra Charges.  --The "interim lending" concept, under
which the broker's commission is not treated as interest in determining whether
a loan is usurious, when the loan broker temporarily advances his own money to
the borrower pending negotiation of the loan with a third party lender, is not
part of the California law.

(7) Brokers--Regulation--Real Property Loan Brokers.  --The Real Estate Loan
Brokers' Law was applicable to persons who, while purporting to act as loan
brokers, in fact acted for themselves as lenders.

(8) Id.--Licenses--Revocation.  --In a mandamus proceeding to review an order of
the Real Estate Commissioner revoking the real estate brokers' licenses of
mortgage loan brokers, a finding that the brokers violated Bus. & Prof. Code, §
10176, subd. (d), by acting for both lender and borrower without full
disclosure, was proper where the brokers were properly found to be themselves
the lenders on certain loans, in which the purported lender was merely their
alter ego, and this fact was not disclosed to the borrowers.

(9) Id.--Licenses--Hearing.  --In a mandamus proceeding to review an order of
the Real Estate Commissioner revoking the real estate brokers' licenses of
mortgage loan brokers, the trial court did not err in determining that the
hearing officer went beyond the scope of the accusation in finding that the
brokers violated Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10176, subd. (d), (which makes undisclosed
representation of both lender and borrower a basis for revocation of a real
estate broker's license), as to the first, second, third, and fourth grounds of
such accusation, where only the first ground charged violation of § 10176, subd.
(d), and did not err in ordering the matter remanded for reconsideration of the
penalty, since it could not be determined whether the hearing officer's
recommendation as to the penalty would have been the same if he had considered
violation of § 10176, subd. (d), only as to the first ground.

(10) Id.--Regulation--Real Property Loan Brokers.  --In a mandamus proceeding to
review an order of the Real Estate Commissioner revoking the real estate
brokers' licenses of mortgage loan brokers, the trial court did not err in
finding that the hearing officer abused his discretion in determining that the
brokers violated Civ. Code, § 3081.2, subd. (a), requiring delivery to the
borrower of an itemization of the estimated maximum costs and expenses of making
the loan, which are to be paid by the borrower, where it appeared from the
record that the brokers fully complied with the section; § 3081.2, subd. (a),
requires only an estimation of maximum costs and expenses, not the exact amount
of the charges.

(11) Id.--Regulation--Real Property Loan Brokers.  --In a mandamus proceeding to
review an order of the Real Estate Commissioner revoking the real estate
brokers' licenses of mortgage loan brokers, defendants were properly found to
have violated Cal. Admin. Code, tit. 10, § 2843, providing that the loan charges
specified in Civ. Code, § 3081.3, "are the maximum rates chargeable and are to
be levied only when such costs, expenses and charges can be supported in fact,"
though § 2843 was amended at a time subsequent to that of the questioned loans,
where the pertinent language was in force at the time of the loans.

(12) Id.--Regulation--Real Property Loan Brokers.  --In a mandamus proceeding to
review an order of the Real Estate Commissioner revoking the real estate
brokers' licenses of mortgage loan brokers, the trial court's finding that loan
charges made pursuant to Civ. Code, § 3081.3, were not in fact "paid, incurred
or earned" within the meaning of the statute was fully substantiated by evidence
showing that charges were made for appraisals and credit investigations by a
corporation that was in reality the alter ego of the brokers and that the
charges were greater than the cost actually incurred by such corporation.

(13) Administrative Law--Judicial Review--Scope--Penalties.  --While the
established rule is that determination of the penalty to be imposed by an
administrative agency lies with the agency and not with the court, there is an
exception when the reviewing court finds some of the charges to be unsupported
by the evidence and cannot ascertain from the record whether the same penalty
would have been imposed had the agency recognized this fact.

COUNSEL: Alvin Hirsch, Ball, Hunt & Hart, Joseph A. Ball and Joseph D.
Mullender, Jr., for Plaintiffs and Appellants.

Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, and Arthur C. de Goede, Deputy Attorney General,
for Defendant and Appellant.

JUDGES: Kingsley, J.  Burke, P. J., and Jefferson, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: KINGSLEY

OPINION

     This case involves appeals by both sides from a judgment of the superior
court in a writ of mandate proceeding to review  an order of the Real Estate
Commissioner revoking the real estate licenses of Irving S. Tushner and Louis
Harry Ragins.

    Since 1951, Tushner has been conducting a mortgage loan brokerage business
under the name of Union Mortgage Company.  From 1953 to 1959 Ragins was
Tushner's partner.  However, since 1959 Union Mortgage Company has been operated
solely by Tushner.  The function of a mortgage loan broker is to arrange a loan
for a borrower to be secured by a trust deed or other lien on the borrower's
real property.

   In 1955, the Legislature enacted the Real Property Loan Brokers' Law, which
became effective October 1, 1955.  1 The purpose of the law was to regulate the
activities of persons engaged in the business of negotiating loans secured by
real property.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Civ.
Code, §§ 3081.1- 3081.93.  These sections terminated by their own terms in 1959,
and were replaced by sections 3081.01-3081.096, which were repealed in 1961 by
Stats. 1961, ch. 886, p. 2343, § 29.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In March 1956 the Department of Finance commenced an audit of Union Mortgage
Company for the period of October 1, 1955, through March 1, 1956.  The purpose
of the audit was to determine whether there was compliance with the new law.  On
July 30, 1956, the Department of Finance made its report to the Real Estate
Commissioner.  The report was based on an examination of 50 per cent of Union's
loan transactions, which would have been approximately 250 loans for the period
in question.

   On April 4, 1957, the commissioner filed an accusation alleging violations of
the Real Property Loan Brokers' Law with respect to 14 of the 250 loan
transactions which had been audited.  An administrative hearing was held.  The
hearing examiner made findings and determinations that Tushner and Ragins had
negotiated usurious loans; that they acted for both lender and borrower without
full disclosure; and that they made excessive loan charges.  The hearing officer
recommended that their real estate broker's license be revoked.

   The findings of usury were based on the fact that the purported lender, Ester
Flink, who was Tushner's sister, was merely the alter ego of Tushner and Ragins.
This conclusion was based on the fact that most of the monies used by Flink to
make the loans came out of bank funds deposited by Tushner and Ragins to the
account of Flink, and that Flink kept her money in a safe deposit vault.  Since
Tushner and Ragins were, in fact, the lenders in these instances, the effect of
adding the broker's commission to the interest stated in the loan  increased the
total interest exacted to more than the permitted 10 per cent.

   The evidence in support of failure to disclose dual representation was that,
on certain loans, the lenders were employees or close relatives of Tushner and
Ragins, making the lenders their alter ego, which fact was not disclosed to the
borrowers.

   As to excessive loan charges, it was found that, on all loans, charges were
made for a credit investigation in the amount of $ 15, and for an appraisal in
the amount of $ 27.50.  These charges were paid to Secured Investment
Corporation, which also was found to be the alter ego of Tushner and Ragins, and
the cost to Secured Investment Corporation to render these services was found to
be less than that charged by Union to the borrowers.

   On June 12, 1958, the commissioner adopted, in toto, the proposed decision of
the hearing officer and made an order revoking Tushner's and Ragins' real estate
broker licenses. A petition for reconsideration was denied by the commissioner
on July 23, 1958.

   On July 29, 1958, Tushner and Ragins (hereinafter referred to as "licensees")
filed a petition for writ of mandate in the superior court for review of the
commissioner's orders.  The case was tried, and on July 14, 1960, the trial
judge filed a  memorandum opinion and order for judgment.  This opinion was
modified on July 28, 1960.  Findings of fact and conclusions of law were filed
on September 6, 1961.  On October 20, 1961, the trial court filed another
memorandum opinion.  The findings of fact and conclusions of law were thereafter
amended on November 21, 1961, and again on January 16, 1962.  The effect of the
findings, as amended, insofar as pertinent to this appeal, was that the court
sustained the determination of usury on the Flink loans, and sustained the
charges of dual representation and excessive appraisal and investigation fees
insofar as they were alleged in the accusation, but remanded the case for
reconsideration of penalty.  Judgment was entered on January 17, 1962, and a
peremptory writ of mandate issued to remand the case for reconsideration of
penalty.  The licensees appeal from the judgment insofar as it sustains any of
the commissioner's findings.  The commissioner, in his appeal, contends that all
findings should have been sustained, and that the case should not be remanded.

    1. Did the Real Estate Commissioner have jurisdiction to discipline a real
estate broker for violations   of the Real Property Loan Brokers' Law occurring
in 1955 and 1956

     In order for the Real Estate Commissioner to have jurisdiction to revoke a
real estate broker's license, the licensee must have been guilty of misconduct
connected with his activities as a real estate broker. ( Schomig v. Keiser
(1922) 189 Cal. 596, 598 [209 P. 550]; Buckley v. Savage (1960) 184 Cal.App.2d
18, 26 [7 Cal.Rptr. 328].)   However, licensees argue, there is no evidence that
they acted as real estate brokers, or that any of their alleged violations arose
out of a real estate transaction.  All of the evidence is that they were acting
as mortgage loan brokers, and that their violations, if any, of the Real
Property Loan Brokers' Law occurred in the performance of those functions.  As a
consequence, they contend, the commissioner lacked jurisdiction to revoke their
licenses.

    Business and Professions Code, section 10131, prior to its amendment in
1961, defining a real estate broker includes a person ". . . who, for
compensation, negotiates loans on real estate, . . ." Section 10130 of the
Business and Professions Code makes it unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of a real estate broker or a real estate salesman without first
obtaining a real estate license from the division.

   Licensees acknowledge that section 10131, in part, includes in the definition
of real estate broker one who for compensation negotiates loans on real estate
for another but contend that this definition only applies in situations where
there is a sale of real property. For this position they have cited no direct
case authority, and our research has uncovered none to that effect.
Furthermore, licensees contend that an analysis of the 1955 Real Estate Loan
Brokers' Law and its subsequent amendments in 1959 and 1960 show that it was not
until 1960 that a mortgage loan broker was required to be licensed as a real
estate broker. 2 In 1960, the then section 3081.01 of the Civil Code was amended
to provide that any person acting as a real estate property loan broker must
first obtain a real estate broker's license and register as a real property loan
broker. They assert it was not until 1961 that the Legislature amended section
10131 of the Business and Professions Code to define a real estate broker as
including a person who solicits or negotiates loans or collects  payments or
performs services for borrowers or lenders or note owners in connection with
loans secured directly or collaterally by liens on real property. This
amendment, licensees assert, would have been totally unnecessary if the prior
definition of negotiating loans on real estate had meant the same thing.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Civ.
Code, § 3081.01 as amended by Stats. 1960, 1st Ex. Sess., ch. 77, p. 431, §§ 1
and 2.  Repealed Stats. 1961, ch. 886, p. 2343.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Thus, they contend, prior to 1960, at least, anyone could have been a
mortgage loan broker, and a fortiori, a mortgage loan broker was someone other
than a real estate broker. Therefore, the fact that licensees were real estate
brokers is immaterial.  They were not performing the normal functions of a real
estate broker in conducting their loan business.  Consequently, they conclude,
the commissioner lacked all jurisdiction for subjecting their real estate
licenses to discipline for alleged misconduct in their loan business.

   Our interpretation of the history of this legislation does not support
licensees' position.  We believe that persons who negotiated loans on real
property, were (and still are) required to be licensed as real estate brokers.
They are therefore subject to discipline by the commissioner for violations of
either the Real Estate Act or the 1955 and 1959 enactments of the Real Property
Loan Brokers' Law. Since the 1919 amendment to section 10133 of the Business and
Professions Code, one was required to be licensed as a real estate broker in
order to negotiate loans on real property. The 1955 legislation was merely a
further regulation of such negotiations, primarily concerned with commissions,
costs, and expenses, balloon payments and information to be provided the
borrower concerning costs incurred in securing the loan.  The 1959 provisions
required one not only to be licensed as a real estate broker in order legally to
negotiate loans on real property, but also required him to register with the
commissioner as a real property loan broker.

   It follows that the commissioner had jurisdiction to discipline licensees for
the derelictions herein involved.

   2. Are the administrative and trial court's findings supported   by the
evidence

   I

     The hearing officer found that the licensees ". . . transacted usurious
loans in violation of sections 3081.3, subdivision (c), and 3081.92 of the Civil
Code which constitutes a cause for disciplinary action under the provisions of
section 10176, subdivision (i), 10177, subdivision (j) and 10177,  subdivision
(f), of the Business and Professions Code, thereby subjecting their licenses and
the right to renewal thereof to disciplinary action as provided by sections
10176, 10176.1 and 10177 of said Code." 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Section
3081.3 of the Civil Code establishes a maximum interest rate of 10 per cent per
annum in the circumstances herein involved.

    Section 3081.92 of the Civil Code provides: "The provisions of this chapter
pertaining to maximum costs and expenses, charges, and interest, together with
the penalties stated in this chapter, shall apply to any transaction involving a
third party as a purported lender or any other transaction which is used as a
subterfuge or means of avoiding or evading the provisions of this chapter."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -



   It is well settled that, where a lender charges interest plus a brokerage fee
on a loan, the fee is added to the rate of interest to determine whether or not
the loan is usurious. ( Haines v. Commercial Mortgage Co. (1927) 200 Cal. 609
[254 P. 956, 255 P. 805, 53 A.L.R. 725]; Wheeler v. Superior Mortgage Co. (1958)
160 Cal.App.2d 246 [325 P.2d 156].)  But the broker's commission cannot in any
event be called interest unless the broker is also the lender. To cross this
hurdle the hearing officer found that licensees were lending their own money.
Both the trial court and the hearing officer found that Flink, Tushner's sister,
was merely the alter ego of the licensees in these transactions.  There is ample
evidence to show that the licensees deposited most of the funds in the Flink
account, and that they dominated both her and the account.  Flink testified that
she kept her own money in a safe deposit vault.  The evidence adequately
substantiates the finding that licensees were, in fact, lending their own money.

   Whether resort is had to the "alter ego" concept (which the facts and
circumstances  adequately justify), or to the familiar concept of an undisclosed
principal, it is clear that the Flink loans were squarely within the inhibition
of section 3081.92 of the Civil Code quoted above in footnote 3.  The licensees'
contention as to this point is without merit.

     Licensees further argue that, assuming arguendo that the finding of alter
ego may be sustained so that the Flink loans may be treated as their loans, they
are not usurious because they were "interim loans" only.

     Interim lending occurs when the loan broker temporarily advances his own
money to the borrower pending the negotiation of a loan with a third-party
lender. In such situations the broker's commission is not treated as interest.
4

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   The
licensees cite the following cases as supporting this position: Equitable
Mortgage Co. v. Craft (8th Cir. 1893) 58 F. 613; Webb v. Southern Trust Co.
(1928) 227 Ky. 79 [11 S.W.2d 988]; Ashland Nat. Bank v. Conley (1929) 231 Ky.
844 [22 S.W.2d 270]; Chenault v. Southern Trust Co. (1932) 245 Ky. 305 [53
S.W.2d 369].
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     It will be noted that no California cases exist which have adopted the
"interim lending" concept.  It is not and should not be part of the California
law.   However, even if the concept were to be adopted, the cases cited by
licensees do not avail them under the facts herein involved.  At the best,
"interim lending" arises where the broker contemplates arranging a loan for a
known ultimate lender who, at the moment, is not in a position to advance funds
needed currently by the borrower. As to only two of the loans is there any
showing that licensees had any specific ultimate lender in mind -- the loans
were made merely in the hope that they could ultimately be sold to some, at that
date unknown, future investor.  The two other loans were assigned to Secured
Investment Company.  As we have above pointed out, since Secured Investment was
a mere trade name for licensees, there was no real assignment and those loans
were usurious.

     The licensees' last contention in regard to the findings of usury is that,
since the theory to support such is that they were lenders, then they could not
have violated Civil Code sections 3081.3, subdivision (c), and 3081.92, since
those statutes were expressly made applicable only to persons other than lenders
by section 3081.1 of the Civil Code.  5 However, it was sections 3081.7 and
3081.8 of the Civil Code which provided the exemptions from the statute and not
3081.1.  All that section 3081.1 purportedly provides is that a lender need not
deliver the statement in writing required by section 3081.2 before the borrower
becomes obligated to complete the loan.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   Section
3081.1 provided: "Every person, other than a lender, who, for compensation
payable by a borrower either directly or from the proceeds of a loan, negotiates
a loan to be secured by real property must, before the borrower shall be
obligated to complete the loan, deliver to the borrower a statement in writing,
containing all the information required by section 3081.2.  Such statement and
any other compensation agreement with the borrower shall be executed at the
place of business of the person negotiating a loan as specified in his license.
It shall be personally signed by the borrower, and by the person negotiating the
loan or his authorized representative.  The person negotiating the loan, or his
authorized representative, in said statement shall certify that the loan is
being made in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.  When so executed,
an exact copy thereof shall be delivered to the borrower at the time of its
execution.  The person negotiating the loan shall retain on file for a period of
three years after the date of such statement a true and correct copy thereof as
signed by the borrower."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     Furthermore, section 3081.92 of the Civil Code provided: "The provisions of
this chapter pertaining to maximum costs and expenses, charges, and interest,
together with the penalties stated in this chapter, shall apply to any
transaction involving a third party as a purported lender or any other
transaction which is used as a subterfuge or means of avoiding or evading the
provisions of this chapter."

    To allow a person, who purports to act as a loan broker, and, in fact, is
acting for himself without disclosing this fact, to claim that he is not within
the provisions of the Real Estate Loan Brokers' Law, would be to completely
undermine and circumvent the purposes of this legislation and render it impotent
against the very ills and unethical practices it was intended to remedy.
Therefore, neither in reason nor in logic do we find merit in licensees'
argument that they do not come within the provisions of the Real Estate Loan
Brokers' Law.

   II

     Licensees also attack the finding that they violated Business and
Professions Code, section 10176, subdivision (d), by "[acting] for more than one
party in a real estate transaction without the knowledge of all parties
thereto." In support of their position they claim that the lenders on these
loans were their employees or close relatives and that the mere fact that this
relationship was not disclosed to the borrowers is in no way a violation of
section 10176, subdivision (d).  We cannot agree.  The fallacy of this whole
line of reasoning is the premise that a failure to disclose a relationship
constitutes a finding of dual representation. As stated earlier, both the
hearing officer and trial court found that the licensees were the lenders,
because Flink was merely their alter ego in these transactions.  This finding is
substantially supported by the evidence.  The alleged violation of section
10176, subdivision (d), lies in the fact that the licensees acted both for the
borrower and lenders (themselves) without making such disclosure.  Such is a
violation of section 10176, subdivision (d).  ( Buckley v. Savage (1960) 184
Cal.App.2d 18 [7 Cal.Rptr. 328]; cf.  Abell v. Watson (1957) 155 Cal.App.2d 158
[317 P.2d 159].)

     The commissioner is also here appealing from the trial court's
determination that the hearing officer went beyond the scope of the accusation
in finding that the licensees violated section 10176, subdivision (d), as to the
first, second, third and fourth grounds of the accusation, because only the
first ground charged them with violation of 10176, subdivision (d).  The trial
court then concluded that, since it could not be determined whether the hearing
officer's recommendation of the penalty would have been the same if the
licensees were charged only with violation of section 10176, subdivision (d), as
to the first ground of the accusation, the matter should be remanded for
reconsideration of penalty.  We see no error in the trial court's determination
in this regard.

   III

   The third violation determined was that licensees made excessive loan charges
in violation of Civil Code sections 3081.2, subdivision (a), and 3081.3,
subdivision (a); and in violation of California Administrative Code, title 10,
section 2843.  6 Such constitutes cause for disciplinary action under the
provisions of section 10177, subdivisions (d), (f) and (j), of the Business and
Professions Code, thereby subjecting their licenses and the right to renewal
thereof to disciplinary action as provided by sections 10176.1 and 10177 of the
said Code.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   This
provision of the Administrative Code will be set forth and discussed infra, in
the body of the opinion.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      The trial court found that the hearing officer abused his discretion in
determining that there were violations of Civil Code section 3081.2, subdivision
(a), in that there was no evidence to support such a finding.  It appears from
the record that the licensees did fully comply with the requirements of this
section.  Licensees did in fact set forth the estimated maximum costs and
expenses of making the loans which were to be paid by the borrower. It appears
to us that section 3081.2, subdivision (a), requires no more than the
itemization of the estimated maximum costs and expenses of making the loan.
Conceivably,  the broker may not know what the exact amount of the charges will
be when the statement is first delivered.  Therefore, we see no error with the
trial court's finding on this point.

     On the other hand, licensees contend that they could not have violated
title 10, section 2843, of the Administrative Code because such was not
promulgated until September 19, 1957; and the evidence does not support the
finding that they violated section 3081.3, subdivision (a).

   Section 2843 of title 10 of the Administrative Code now provides as follows:

   "The costs, expenses and charges specified in section 3081.3 are the maximum
rates chargeable and are to be levied only  when such costs, expenses and
charges can be supported in fact.  Such charges shall not exceed similar charges
made for similar services in the community where such services are rendered."
(Italics added.)

   However, the 1957 amendment merely added the emphasized sentence of the
section.  The pertinent language here is contained in the forepart which was in
force at the time of licensees' transactions and contravenes licensees'
contention.

     The trial court, upon substantial evidence, found that the charges made
pursuant to section 3081.3, subdivision (a), were not in fact "paid, incurred or
earned" within the meaning of the statute.  The evidence shows that Secured
Investment, which made the appraisals and credit investigations, was in reality
the alter ego of licensees. It was also established by substantial evidence that
the cost actually incurred by Secured Investment for these services was less
than that charged to the borrowers. Therefore, the trial court's finding is
fully substantiated.

   3. Was the judgment of the trial court correct in remanding the case   for
reconsideration of penalty

     It is an established rule that the determination of the penalty to be
imposed by an administrative agency lies with the agency and not with the court.
( King v. Board of Medical Examiners (1944) 65 Cal.App.2d 644, 652 [151 P.2d
282].) However, there is an exception when some of the charges are unsupported
by the evidence and the court cannot ascertain from the record whether the same
penalty would have been imposed had the administrative agency recognized the
absence of evidence sufficient to support a part of the charges upon which the
licensee had been found guilty.  ( Thayer v. Board of Osteopathic Examiners
(1958) 157 Cal.App.2d 4, 9 [320 P.2d 28]; Garfield v. Board of Medical Examiners
(1950) 99 Cal.App.2d 219, 231 [221 P.2d 705].) Upon this authority, the trial
court did not err in remanding the case to the commissioner for reconsideration
of penalty.

   The judgment is affirmed.


                              10 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             CHARLES H. WISE, Respondent, v. W. F. RADIS, Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 4063

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SECOND APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION TWO

             74 Cal. App. 765; 242 P. 90; 1925 Cal. App. LEXIS 315


                           October 28, 1925, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:      APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County. Stanley Murray, Judge Presiding.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Real Estate Brokers' Act--Construction of Section 2--Single Act--Brokers.
--Under the provisions of section 2 of the Real Estate Brokers' Act (Stats.
1919, p. 1252), as amended (Stats. 1921, p. 1294), a single act, for
compensation, of buying or selling real estate, constitutes the person,
copartnership, or corporation making such offer, sale, or purchase a real estate
broker.

(2) Broker's Commissions--Unlicensed Broker--Right to Commissions--Illegal
Contracts.  --The contract of an unlicensed real estate broker to act for
another in the capacity of such broker for compensation is illegal and
unenforceable, and no subsequent compliance with the statute will cure the
illegality of the previous contract; but section 20 of the Real Estate Brokers'
Act permits a recovery by the broker, though he possessed no license when his
contract was entered into with the person agreeing to pay the commission, if he
in fact became a duly licensed broker at the time when his commission was earned
and became payable.

(3) Id. -- Action to Recover Commissions -- Failure to Procure License.  --Where
two real estate brokers enter into an agreement to work together as brokers in
negotiating the sale and purchase of real property and to divide equally the
profits and losses made and incurred by them in such deals, acts performed by
them in bringing buyer and seller together and in negotiating a sale of real
property for the owner are acts performed by them as real estate brokers for an
agreed compensation, and where one of said brokers did not procure the license
required by the Real Estate Brokers' Act until after the negotiation of a sale
of real property, he cannot recover from the other broker his share of the
commission earned in that transaction.

(4) Id.--Agreement to Share Profits--Joint Enterprise--Partnership.  --The
profits resulting from the joint enterprise in which said brokers were engaged,
and of which each was to receive an equal share, were "profits" in the strict
sense of that term, and did not constitute a compensation to be paid by one to
the other for services rendered. Their joint venture was an association of two
persons to carry on a definite joint enterprise and to divide the profits and
losses, and this in general constitutes a partnership under section 2395 of the
Civil Code.

(5) Id.--Right to Recover Commissions--Failure to Procure License.  --The
failure of one of the brokers to obtain the license required by the Real Estate
Brokers' Act until some time after the earning of the commissions and the
accrual of the cause of action therefor, rendered the transaction illegal and
void, so far as it affected the parties as real estate brokers, and no recovery
of the commission could have been enforced by the parties against the owner of
the property.

(6) Id.--Illegal Contract--Enforcement of Rights.  --A party to an illegal
contract or an illegal transaction cannot come into a court of law and ask it to
carry out the illegal contract or to enforce rights arising out of the illegal
transaction, and he cannot set up a case in which he necessarily must disclose
the illegal contract or the illegal transaction as the basis of his claim.

(7) Id.--Partnership--Illegal Contract--Relief.  --In an action by one of two
real estate brokers to recover from the other his share of a commission jointly
earned by them in negotiating the sale of certain real property, if the issuance
of a copartnership license was a necessary prerequisite to the legality of the
firm transactions which plaintiff and defendant jointly carried on as
copartners, and no license was ever issued or was ever in the contemplation of
the parties, the partnership contract was illegal from its inception, and the
court will not lend its aid to assist either party, notwithstanding the receipt
by defendant of partnership profits, but will leave both parties where it finds
them.

(8) Id.--Action to Enforce Illegal Contract -- Parties in Pari Delicto--Public
Policy.  --In such action, whether the partnership contract be regarded as
illegal from the beginning because of the failure to take out a partnership
license, or whether it became illegal by reason of plaintiff's failure to
maintain his status as a duly licensed real estate broker, the action must be
regarded as one to enforce an illegal contract, and both parties being in pari
delicto, the defendant will be permitted to set up its illegality as a defense,
even though in doing so he may allege his own moral turpitude, not out of any
regard for the defendant who sets it up, but only on account of public interest.


(9) Id.--Legal and Illegal Transactions--Defenses.  --Where there have been both
legal and illegal transactions, the defendant cannot set up, as a defense to an
action for an accounting of the legal transactions, the fact that some other
transactions are illegal, especially where the transactions are distinct and not
so connected as to require the court to pass upon those which are illegal.

(10) Id.--New Contract Settling Rights -- Accounting.  --The doctrine that if,
after an illegal contract has been executed, the parties make a new one settling
their rights as between themselves, the latter contract governs and the former
is not to be reckoned with, has no application in an action by a real estate
broker to recover his share of the profits of a joint enterprise, which is
defended on the ground that the contract between plaintiff and defendant, which
is still executory, was illegal because of the failure of plaintiff to procure a
broker's license.

COUNSEL: Clark, Law & Clay for Appellant.

C. C. Mishler, John F. Keogh, and Julius V. Patrosso for Respondent.

JUDGES: FINLAYSON, P. J. Works, J., concurred. CRAIG, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: FINLAYSON

OPINION

     FINLAYSON, P. J. This is an action to recover a sum which plaintiff claims
is due him as his share of a commission jointly earned by himself and defendant
in negotiating the sale of certain real property on behalf of the owner. The
commission was paid to the defendant by the owner of the property. The
complaint, which is cast in the form of a common count for money had and
received, alleges that defendant is indebted to plaintiff in the sum of $ 875
for money received by the former to and for plaintiff's use. From a judgment for
plaintiff in the sum sued for the defendant appeals.

   It is the theory of plaintiff that he and defendant were partners in the real
estate transaction in which was earned the commission that was paid to
defendant, and that, therefore, he is entitled to recover from defendant
one-half of the commission so received by the latter. Briefly, the facts are
these: During the year 1921 each of the parties to the action was a real estate
broker engaged in business as such in the city of Los Angeles. Each maintained
an office at his own residence and each had obtained a real estate broker's
license for the year 1921, issued to him individually. In the early part of that
year they orally agreed to work together as brokers in negotiating the purchase
and sale of real properties. They agreed to divide equally all profits and
losses made or incurred by them in each deal. Plaintiff testified that "each
deal would be closed up separately"; that upon closing each deal they "would
divide the profits after the expenses had been paid," and that they "arranged to
and did work together" on each deal. Some time in the month of November, 1921,
the property the sale of which resulted in the payment of the commission here in
question was listed by the owner with the parties to this action to negotiate a
sale thereof as real estate brokers. Thereupon plaintiff and defendant caused a
painted sign to be placed upon the premises which read, in part: "For Sale. See
Radis and  Wise . . .  exclusive agents." On January 6, 1922, plaintiff and
defendant commenced the negotiations with the prospective buyer who later
purchased the property; and on January 10, 1922, that person and the owner, who
meanwhile had been introduced to one another by the parties to this action, came
to an agreement upon the terms of the sale. On that date, therefore (January 10,
1922), plaintiff and defendant earned the commission which the vendor had agreed
to pay them for their services. Thereafter, and prior to the commencement of the
action, the vendor paid the full amount of the commission, amounting to $ 1,750,
to defendant, who keeps it and refuses to pay any part of it to plaintiff. It is
a fair inference from all the evidence in the case that defendant, before the
commencement of the negotiations with the person who later bought the property,
had applied for and had received his real estate broker's license for the year
1922. Plaintiff, however, did not apply for his license for the year 1922 until
January 28th of that year, and none was issued to him until the thirty-first day
of that month, or about three weeks after the sale of the property and the
accrual of any right of action against the owner for the agreed commission. It
may reasonably be inferred from all the testimony in the case that at no time
did plaintiff or defendant apply for or receive a copartnership real estate
broker's license, i. e., a real estate broker's license issued to the
copartnership, as such, in the firm name. Whatever license either possessed was
one which had been issued to him individually and not as a member of a
copartnership.

   Appellant contends: (1) That since he and respondent earned the commission as
copartners, the latter must fail in this action for the reason that one partner
cannot maintain assumpsit for moneys received by his copartner, but must resort
to equity for an accounting; and (2) that to succeed in his action respondent
must rely upon a contract which is  illegal under the provisions of the Real
Estate Brokers' Act. (Stats. 1919, p. 1252; amended 1921, Stats. 1921, p. 1294.)
In reply to appellant's first point respondent contends that each real estate
"deal" jointly participated in by them was a separate partnership transaction,
and that while it is the general rule that one partner cannot maintain an action
at law for moneys received by his copartner, but must resort to equity for an
accounting, there is an exception to this rule  which permits an action in
assumpsit where the right of action is based upon a single partnership
transaction and the facts are such that no complex account, involving a variety
of partnership transactions, is necessary. As bearing upon this reply to
appellant's first point, Jepsen v. Beck, 78 Cal. 540 [21 P. 184], and the
authorities cited in the note to Martin v. McBryde, 21 A. L. R. 57, 60, and 64,
may be consulted. However, if appellant's second point is well taken, and we
think it is, it will not be necessary to determine the question presented by his
first point. We shall proceed, therefore, to a consideration of appellant's
second point. This point involves two main questions: (1) Was the contract for a
commission which was made with the owner of the property illegal under the terms
of the Real Estate Brokers' Act? Or, what in effect amounts to the same thing,
was the transaction under which the commission was earned an illegal
transaction? (2) If the contract or transaction was illegal, must respondent
rely upon it in order to make out a case against appellant for his share of the
commission?

   The Real Estate Brokers' Act contains these provisions: Section 1. "It shall
be unlawful for any person, copartnership or corporation to engage in the
business, or act in the capacity of, a real estate broker . . . without first
obtaining a license therefor." Section 2. "A real estate broker within the
meaning of this act is a person, copartnership or corporation who, for a
compensation, sells, or offers for sale, buys, or offers to buy, or negotiates
the purchase or sale or exchange of real estate . . . for others, as a whole or
partial vocation . . . . One act, for a compensation, of buying or selling real
estate of or for another, or offering for another to buy or sell . . . real
estate . . . shall constitute the person, copartnership or corporation making
such offer, sale or purchase . . . a real estate broker within the meaning of
this act." Section 10. ". . . If the licensee be a copartnership, the license
issued to it shall entitle one member of said copartnership to engage in the
business of real estate broker within the meaning of this act. For each other
member of such copartnership who engages in the business of real estate broker
within the meaning of this act the annual fee shall be two dollars . . . all
licenses shall expire on December thirty-first of each year." Section 11. ". . .
Each person, firm or corporation licensed as a broker under the  provisions of
this act shall be required to have and maintain a definite place of business in
the State of California which shall serve as his [or its] office for the
transaction of business." By section 9 of the act it is provided that each
application for a license shall not only state the name of the person,
copartnership, or corporation applying for the same, but shall also state "the
location of the place or places of business for which such license is desired."
Section 11a provides that every individual, firm, or corporation licensed as a
broker "shall erect or maintain a sign on the premises wherein is located his
[or its] place of business, on which shall be plainly stated that he [or it] is
a real estate broker." Section 18. "It shall be unlawful for any licensed broker
to pay a commission for performing any of the acts herein specified to any
person who is not a licensed broker, or a licensed salesman." Section 20. "No
person, copartnership or corporation engaged in the business or acting in the
capacity of a real estate broker or a real estate salesman within this state
shall bring or maintain any action in the courts of this state for the
collection of compensation for the performance of any of the acts mentioned in
section two hereof without alleging and proving that such person, copartnership
or corporation was a duly licensed real estate broker or real estate salesman at
the time the alleged cause of action arose.

     The provision in section 2 to the effect that a single act, for a
compensation, of buying or selling real estate of or for another, or offering
for another to buy or sell real estate, constitutes the person, copartnership,
or corporation making such offer, sale, or purchase a real estate broker, means
precisely what it says. The particularity with which the clause is phrased
"leaves no room for any other interpretation than that which its plain terms
import." ( Haas v. Greenwald, 196 Cal. 236 [237 P. 38].)

   The licenses required by the act do not run from year to year. They
automatically expire at the close of each calendar year, and a new license must
be applied for and issued for the ensuing year. (Sec.  10, subd. 4; Firpo v.
Murphy, 72 Cal. App. 249 [236 P. 968].)

     The contract of an unlicensed real estate broker to act for another in the
capacity of such broker, for a compensation, is, without doubt, illegal and
unenforceable. ( Houston  v. Williams, 53 Cal. App. 267 [200 P. 55]; Gardner v.
Tatum, 81 Cal. 370 [22 P. 880].) It has been held in analogous cases that no
subsequent compliance with the statute will cure the illegality of the previous
contract. ( Gardner v. Tatum, supra; Luce v. Cook, 227 Pa. 224 [75 A. 1098].)
Section 20 of this act, however, does, in effect and somewhat as an act of
grace, permit a recovery by the broker, though he possessed no license when his
contract was entered into with the person agreeing to pay the commission, if he
in fact became a duly licensed broker by the time his cause of action arose, i.
e., at the time when his commission was earned and became payable. ( Houston v.
Williams, supra.) That, however, is not this case. No license was issued to
respondent for the year 1922 until after the "deal" was closed and the
commission was earned.

     With the above provisions of the statute in mind, we proceed now to a
consideration of the legality of the transaction which the parties to this
action carried on with the buyer and the seller of the property. It is obvious
that the acts performed by appellant and respondent in bringing buyer and seller
together and in negotiating the sale of the property on behalf of the latter
were acts performed by them as real estate brokers for an agreed compensation.
Those acts, therefore, constituted an illegal transaction, unless the requisite
license had been issued at the times when the negotiations were being conducted.
Equally obvious is it that if the requisite license was not issued, the
commission which was paid by the owner to appellant was paid as the result of an
illegal transaction.

     Under the facts of this case the transaction was illegal whether we regard
the relation between appellant and respondent as that of partners, in the true
sense of that term, or not -- though we incline to the view that they were
partners in the full meaning of the word. The profits resulting from the joint
venture in which they were engaged, and of which each was to receive an equal
share, were "profits" in the strict sense of that term, and did not constitute a
compensation to be paid by one to the other for services rendered. Their joint
venture was an association of two persons to carry on a definite joint
enterprise and to divide the profits and losses. This, in general, constitutes a
partnership. (Civ. Code, sec. 2395. See Gray v. Janss  Investment Co., 186 Cal.
634 [200 P. 401]; Quinn v. Quinn, 81 Cal. 14 [22 P. 264]; Hendy v. March, 75
Cal. 566, 569 [17 P. 702]; Westcott v. Gilman, 170 Cal. 562, 569 [Ann. Cas.
1916E, 437, 150 P. 777], and Sullivan v. Sullivan, 122 Wis. 326 [99 N.W. 1022].)
However, as we have stated, the result must be the same whether the relation
between appellant and respondent was or was not that of copartners.

   If the relation between appellant and respondent was such that a
copartnership existed between them, then, if the strict letter of the Real
Estate Brokers' Act must prevail, it may be gravely doubted whether a
copartnership license, issued to the firm as such, was not an essential
prerequisite to the validity of the negotiations which appellant and respondent
conducted in bringing the buyer and seller together. The language of section 1
of the act is that it "shall be unlawful for any . . . copartnership to engage
in the business, or to act in the capacity of, a real estate broker . . .
without first obtaining a license therefor." There would seem to be some reason
to believe that this language, when read in connection with other provisions of
the act, means that when a copartnership is acting as a real estate broker its
acts are illegal unless a copartnership license has been issued to it, and that
the issuance of a license to each copartner as an individual real estate broker
will not alone suffice to legalize acts done by them for their firm as
copartners. Not only does the statute expressly declare that it shall be
unlawful for any copartnership to engage in the business, or act in the capacity
of, a real estate broker without first obtaining a license therefor, but it also
is provided, in section 10, that "if the licensee be a copartnership, the
license issued to it shall entitle," etc. And in section 11 it is declared that
"each . . . firm licensed as a broker . . . shall be required to have and
maintain a definite place of business" in the state "which shall serve as his
[its]  office for the transaction of business"; and by section 11a that "each .
. . firm . . . licensed as a broker . . . shall erect and maintain a sign on the
premises wherein it is located his [its] place of business, on which shall be
plainly stated that he [it] is a real estate broker." We confess that we are
unable to perceive how a compliance with these regulatory provisions would be
possible where the business is conducted by a firm to which no copartnership
license has been issued, even though each of its  members may have procured the
issuance to him of an individual license, particularly where, as here, the
individual copartners have separate and distinct places of business.

     However, it is not necessary to decide whether a copartnership license is
necessary in a case such as this, and we expressly refrain from doing so; for
here one of the joint adventurers neglected to secure a license for the year
1922 until some time after the close of the negotiations which resulted in the
sale of the property, i. e., until some time subsequent to the earning of the
commission and the accrual of any cause of action therefor. Respondent's failure
to secure such license until after the sale of the property had been fully
negotiated and the stipulated commission had been earned rendered the
transaction illegal and void, so far as it affects the parties to this action as
real estate brokers, even if a copartnership license was not necessary. The
performance of services jointly by both respondent and appellant constituted the
consideration for the commission which the owner of the property agreed to pay.
If any part of this consideration was illegal the entire contract was void. (
Civ. Code, sec. 1608.) The rendition of services by respondent subsequent to
January 1, 1922, was, as we have seen, unlawful because those services were
rendered in direct violation of an express provision of the law and likewise in
direct  contravention of the express policy of the statute. (Civ. Code, sec.
1667.) It follows, therefore, that even if the parties to this action were not
copartners in the strict sense of the term, and even if the procurement of a
copartnership license in the firm name was not a necessary prerequisite, still,
since appellant and respondent had agreed to render their services jointly, the
contract for the payment of a commission became illegal and void after January
1, 1922; or, if the contract did not become illegal, the acts jointly performed
by appellant and respondent subsequent to that date -- acts which culminated in
the sale of the property through their joint efforts and which constituted the
consideration for the commission agreed to be paid them -- were illegal, and no
recovery of the commission could have been enforced by the parties to this
action against the owner of the property. (See Haas v. Greenwald, supra; McIver
v. Clarke, 69 Miss. 408 [10 So. 581]; Hittson v. Browne, 3 Colo. 304, and
Central Trust & S. D. Co. v. Respass, 112 Ky. 606,  [99 Am. St. Rep. 317, 56
L.R.A. 479, 66 S.W. 421].) This brings us to the second phase of the question:
Can respondent recover his share of the commission from appellant
notwithstanding the illegality of the transaction?

   It may be conceded, for the purpose of this decision only, that the
"commission" referred to in section 18 of the act means a commission paid by one
real estate broker to another for services performed by the latter for the
former in the way of assistance rendered in bringing buyer and seller together
or in otherwise helping in the negotiations, and that it does not include money
sought to be recovered by one partner, as his share of the partnership profits,
in an action by him against a copartner who has received the profits. It also
may be conceded, for the purpose of this decision only, that the "compensation"
referred to in section 20 of the act means the compensation which is due from
the principal to the broker, and that it does not include a partner's share of
such compensation after it has been paid by the principal to one of the members
of the brokerage firm which has effected the sale. It is claimed by respondent
that if it be conceded, as it is, for the purposes of this decision, that there
is nothing in either of these sections of the statute which directly inhibits
the recovery by him of his share of the commission paid to his copartner, then
he is entitled to such recovery notwithstanding the illegality of his acts in
earning the commission. His argument is substantially this: The contract which
he and appellant made with the owner of the property was fully executed on the
part of the latter, who paid appellant the agreed commission notwithstanding the
illegality of the transaction;  where an illegal contract or an illegal
transaction has been fully executed and one of the parties has the avails
thereof, all the harm that can be done to public policy has been done, and
therefore, so respondent argues, the party who has the avails can be compelled
to pay them, or a proportionate share thereof, to the other party.

     We are unable to agree with respondent's reasoning. No principle of law is
better settled than that a party to an illegal contract or an illegal
transaction cannot come into a court of law and ask it to carry out the illegal
contract or to enforce rights arising out of the illegal transaction. He cannot
set up a case in which he necessarily must disclose the  illegal contract or the
illegal transaction as the basis of his claim. In Moore v. Moore, 130 Cal. 110
[80 Am. St. Rep. 78, 62 P. 294], our supreme court quotes Judge Duncan in Swan
v. Scott, 11 Serge. & Rawle 155, 164, as follows: "The test whether a demand
connected with an illegal transaction is capable of being enforced is whether
the plaintiff requires the aid of the illegal transaction to establish his case.
If the plaintiff cannot establish his case without showing that he has broken
the law, the court will not assist him, whatever his claim in justice may be
upon the defendant."

     If the issuance of a copartnership license was a necessary prerequisite to
the legality of the firm transactions which appellant and respondent jointly
carried on as copartners, then, since no such license was ever issued, or was
ever even within the contemplation of the partners, the partnership contract was
illegal from its inception; for in that case the partnership contract
necessarily would involve the performance of illegal acts. And since respondent,
in order to establish his case, necessarily must invoke the partnership
contract, it follows that, if the issuance of a copartnership license was
requisite, the court will not lend its aid to assist either party to the
contract in an action against the other, notwithstanding the receipt by the
latter of partnership profits, but will leave both parties where it finds them.
( Chateau v. Singla, 114 Cal. 91 [55 Am. St. Rep. 63, 33 L.R.A. 750, 45 P. 1015]
; Moore v. Moore, supra; Woodson v. Hopkins, 85 Miss. 171 [107 Am. St. Rep. 275,
70 L.R.A. 645, 38 South. 298]; Kennedy v.  Lonabaugh, 19 Wyo. 352 [Ann. Cas.
1913F, 133, 117 P. 1079]; McMullen v. Hoffman, 174 U.S. 639 [43 L. Ed. 1117, 19
S. Ct. 839, see, also, Rose's U.S. Notes]; Vandegrift v. Vandegrift, 226 Pa. 254
[18 Ann. Cas. 404, 75 A. 365]; King v. Winants, 71 N.C. 469 [17 Am. Rep. 11].)
In Chateau v. Singla, supra, our supreme court held that a partnership formed to
carry on the business of letting furnished apartments for the purpose of
prostitution is illegal, and that, therefore, one partner could not maintain an
action against the other for an accounting of the rents collected by the latter.

   The same result must follow if it be held that the issuance of an individual
broker's license to each partner would satisfy the requirements  of the statute,
and that the issuance of  a copartnership license in the firm name was not a
sine qua non. If, in a case like this, the issuance to each partner of an
individual broker's license satisfies the requirements of the statute, then,
even though the contract of copartnership may have been valid at its inception
and during all of the balance of the year 1921, nevertheless the real estate
transaction in which the partners engaged in January, 1922, and out of which
grew the payment of the commission to appellant, was an illegal transaction, for
the reasons stated in Haas v. Greenwald, supra. And with respect to that
transaction respondent was in pari delicto. Indeed, he was, if anything, more
guilty than appellant, for it was he who failed to make timely application for a
license for the year 1922. According to respondent's testimony, it was agreed,
when the partnership was formed, that the two should work together on each deal.
This agreement, therefore, if we assume that a firm license was not essential,
involved the implied undertaking on the part of each that at all times during
the existence of the partnership he would maintain his status as a duly licensed
real estate broker. But this respondent failed to do for the period of almost a
month, and it was during this period that the partners initiated and consummated
the deal out of which grew respondent's claim to a share of the commission paid
to appellant. It was because of respondent's delinquency that the real estate
transaction, in so far as it affected appellant and respondent as real estate
brokers,  was an illegal and void transaction.

   Respondent testified that each of the transactions in which he and appellant
jointly participated was treated separately, and that upon the termination of
each "deal" the net profit was divided between them. Hence there was, in effect,
a separate oral partnership contract as to each transaction. To entitle
respondent to a recovery in this action he must rely upon the contract which he
had with appellant to co-operate with the latter in this particular "deal" and
to share equally in the commission to be earned, after deducting all expenses.
But on January 1, 1922, this contract, as an agreement by two persons one of
whom was not a licensed real estate broker, to jointly negotiate the sale of
real property, became, and until the final consummation of the deal between the
buyer and the seller, continued to be and was, through respondent's fault, an
illegal contract -- a contract  which involved the doing of an unlawful act.
Respondent's cause of action grows directly out of this illegal contract between
himself and appellant. Only through it and by proving it can he get at his share
of the commission. There is nothing collateral, in respect of which, the
partnership contract being out of the question, a collateral demand arises, as
was the case in some of the decisions cited by respondent. "Here," as was said
by the Master of the Rolls in Sykes v. Beadon, 11 Ch. D. 170, "you cannot stir a
step but through that illegal agreement." In it respondent's case is
inextricably entangled.

     Our conclusion from the foregoing is that whether the partnership contract
be regarded as illegal from the beginning because of the failure of the joint
adventurers to take out a partnership license, or whether it became illegal on
and after January 1, 1922, by reason of respondent's failure to maintain his
status as a duly licensed real estate broker, in either case the action must be
regarded as one to enforce an illegal contract. The courts refuse to enforce
such a contract, and permit the defendant to set up its illegality as a defense.
While the defense is not an honorable one, yet the courts permit it to be set up
even though in doing so the defendant may allege his own moral turpitude.
Violators of the law who are parties to such illegal contracts are repudiated by
the courts because of the great supervening principle of public policy involved,
without reference to the attitude which one of the parties may occupy to the
other, where both are in pari delicto. As pungently put in McMullen v. Hoffman,
supra: "The court refuses to enforce such a contract, and it permits defendant
to set up its illegality, not out of any regard for the defendant who sets it
up, but only on account of the public interest. It has been often stated in
similar cases that the defense is a very dishonest one, and it lies ill in the
mouth of the defendant to allege it, and it is only allowed for public
considerations and in order the better to secure the public against dishonest
transactions. To refuse to grant either party to an illegal contract judicial
aid for the enforcement of his alleged rights under it tends strongly towards
reducing the number of such transactions to a minimum."

   The decisions relied upon by respondent, and now to be adverted to, are
clearly distinguishable from this case. In  Walker v. Kremer, 29 N.D. Cas. No.
17,076, the complainant sued upon an account stated, and the action was based
not upon the illegal contract, but upon a collateral contract, namely, the
implied agreement to pay the balance shown to be due by the account stated. In
Penn Mut. L. Ins. Co. v. Bradley, 66 Hun, 635, 21 N.Y.S. 876, the complaint
alleged, and the answer admitted, facts which showed that the contract was not
an illegal one. In Decell v. Hazlehurst etc. Co., 83 Miss. 346 [35 So. 761],
complainant sought an accounting from its agent for moneys received by him in
that part of complainant's business which was confessedly legal.   It is well
established that where there have been both legal and illegal transactions the
defendant  cannot set up, as a defense to an action for an accounting of the
legal transactions, the fact that some other transactions are illegal,
especially where the transactions are distinct and not so connected as to
require the court to pass upon those which are illegal. ( Central Trust & S. D.
Co. v. Respass, supra. See, also, note to Fryer v. Harken, 23 L.R.A. (N.S.)
485.) Baldwin v. Potter, 46 Vt. 402, is more nearly but not quite in point. It
was a case where an agent, in the course of his agency, received from third
parties for his principals the proceeds of illegal contracts to which his
principals were parties, and who, therefore, were in pari delicto. The agent
likewise was a participant in the making of the illegal contracts, and he,
therefore, also was in pari delicto. It was held that the agent could not set up
the illegality of the contracts to defeat a recovery by his principals of the
moneys which he had received for the latters' use. This Vermont case, though it
is in line with a number of decisions from other jurisdictions which support the
doctrine there announced, is opposed by such well-reasoned cases as Woodson v.
Hopkins, supra, where the authorities on both sides of the question are
collected and exhaustively analyzed. See, also, 15 Am. & Eng. Ency. of Law, 2d
ed., pp. 1009, 1010. However, the Vermont case is not strictly in point, for the
reason that here both appellant and respondent were principals in their contract
with the owner of the property, and the money was paid to appellant, not as an
agent to receive it for respondent, but as one of the principals to that
contract. In Woodson v. Hopkins, supra, the court says: "The other misconception
is in confusing the case of a suit by one  of two parties to an illegal contract
against the other with a suit by one of the parties against a third party, no
way connected with the illegal contract [italics ours], to collect money paid by
the other party to the illegal contract, which has been executed, to such third
person for the use of the party suing. This principle is clearly stated at page
1007, 2 Am. & Eng. Ency. of Law, paragraph 9, and it is stated there, with great
exactitude of statement, that the reason that the third person cannot defend an
action by the latter is 'that in such a case the action is not based on the
illegal contract, but, instead, upon the independent contract of such third
person to deliver over the property received by him.'" We may add that the
author of the article in the American & English Encyclopedia of Law states with
equal exactitude the rule which obtains where, as here, one partner is suing
another for his share of the profits of an illegal transaction. The author says:
"Where an illegal contract entered into by a partnership as a party of the one
part is fully executed, and profits arising therefrom come into the hands of one
of the partners, the general rule [italics ours] seems to be that he will not be
compelled to account to his copartners for their share of such profits; and
where the agreement of partnership is illegal on account of the consideration
moving between the partners, or the character of the business to be transacted,
the court will not, if business has been transacted and the profits of the
transaction have been received by one partner, compel him to account to the
others for their share of the profits. In some cases [italics ours], however,
the proposition has been advanced that if the illegal purpose of the partnership
has been accomplished the courts may direct a division of the profits." (15 Am.
& Eng. Ency. of Law, 2d ed., p. 1011.) Referring to the last sentence in this
quotation, the court in Woodson v. Hopkins, supra, says of it that "the text
repudiates this as unsound." And the Mississippi court is right. The doctrine
referred to in the last sentence of the quotation is unsound. The doctrine which
has the support of reason and the weight of authority, and the one which has
been recognized by our own supreme court in such cases as that of Chateau v.
Singla, supra, is the doctrine which is set forth in the preceding sentence of
our quotation from the American & English Encyclopedia of Law.

     It is a generally recognized doctrine that if, after an illegal contract
has been executed, the parties thereto make a new one settling their rights as
between themselves, the latter contract governs their relations and the original
becomes functus officio and no longer is to be reckoned with. That was the
doctrine announced and applied by the district court of appeal in Johnson v.
Davidson, 54 Cal. App. 251 [202 P. 159]. That doctrine, however, is not
applicable to the facts of this case. Here respondent is seeking to enforce a
contract which he says he had with appellant. As between the parties to this
action that contract is yet executory, and appellant has repudiated it.

   We do not deem it necessary to prolong this discussion by referring further
to specific cases. It is sufficient to say that the better reasoning and the
great weight of authority condemns the doctrine of an implied promise in the
matter of the division of the profits of an illegal contract between partners or
joint adventurers who are in pari delicto.

   The judgment is reversed.

   Works, J., concurred.

CONCUR BY: CRAIG

CONCUR

   CRAIG, J., Concurring.  I concur, but am not prepared to say that where two
brokers engage in a partnership for the sale of a single unit of property and
each at the time holds a broker's license which he retains throughout the
transaction, the law requires these brokers to secure a license in the name of a
firm to be organized for that particular transaction. This point is in no way
involved in the instant case, and I therefore expressly reserve judgment upon
it.


                              11 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             ALFRED L. NORMAN et al., Plaintiffs and Appellants, v.
          DEPARTMENT OF REAL ESTATE et al., Defendants and Respondents

                                 Civ. No. 42976

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                  Division One

            93 Cal. App. 3d 768; 155 Cal. Rptr. 715; 1979 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1807


                                  May 3, 1979

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of San Mateo County, Nos. 197319, 197505,
197536, Lyle R. Edson, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1) Appellate Review § 152 -- Review -- Questions of Law and Fact -- Sufficiency
of Evidence -- Consideration of Evidence.  --When a court's finding or a jury's
verdict is attacked on the ground that it is not sustained by the evidence, the
power of an appellate court begins and ends with the determination whether there
is any substantial evidence, contradicted or uncontradicted, that will support
the finding or verdict.  Questions of credibility must be resolved in favor of
the factfinder's determination, and when two or more inferences can reasonably
be drawn from the evidence, a reviewing court may not substitute its deductions
for those of the trier of fact.  If on any material point the evidence is in
conflict, it must be assumed that the court or jury resolved the conflict in
favor of the prevailing party.

(2a) (2b) Brokers § 5 -- Regulation of Brokers -- Grounds for Discipline and
Defenses -- Real Estate -- Substantial Misrepresentation; Fraud or Dishonest
Dealing.  --The superior court's judgment in denying mandate relief following
revocation and suspension of plaintiffs' real estate salesman's licenses for
transactions involving substantial misrepresentation and fraud or dishonest
dealing in violation of Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10176, was patently supported by
substantial evidence, where the corporation employing plaintiffs had released
from a title insurance company half of a borrower's prepaid interest back to the
borrower without the knowledge of investors in the loan.  Plaintiffs were father
and son; the father, whose license was revoked, held a top management position,
was the corporation's loan negotiator, and was in direct charge of the title
insurance company transactions, while the son had handled title insurance
company matters under his father's supervision.  Furthermore, no complaint or
corrective action had been taken by plaintiffs after the improper release of the
prepaid interest.

(3) Brokers § 5 -- Regulation of Brokers -- Grounds for Discipline -- Sale of
Unsecured Promissory Notes.  --A licensed real estate broker, or real estate
salesman, in the course of his occupation, may not accept payment from a
prospective purchaser for all or part of an unsecured promissory note or loan (
Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10231).

(4a) (4b) Brokers § 5 -- Regulation of Brokers -- Grounds for Discipline and
Defenses -- Sale of Unsecured Promissory Note.  --The active participation of
plaintiff, a real estate salesman, in a corporation's practice of offering for
sale to investors its unsecured promissory notes, in violation of Bus. & Prof.
Code, § 10231, was supported by substantial evidence, and plaintiff's petition
for writ of mandate following suspension of his salesman's license was properly
denied, where plaintiff had instructed the corporation's salespersons to offer
its unsecured promissory notes to investors on an interim basis, until such time
as the investor purchased a specifically secured investment, where plaintiff was
aware that the corporation was selling and issuing such unsecured notes, and
where plaintiff was in a position to prevent or countermand such conduct.

(5a) (5b) Brokers § 21 -- Duties and Liabilities of Brokers -- Corporate
Violation of Real Estate Law -- Sale of Unsecured Promissory Notes.  --Where a
corporation is licensed by the commissioner as a real estate broker, it must
appoint a similarly licensed individual as its designated real estate broker.
Such a designated broker must reasonably be charged with responsibility for the
corporate compliance with the Real Estate Law (see Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10000),
for otherwise, with no such fixed responsibility, the statutory purpose would be
frustrated.  The statutory scheme requires the broker actively to conduct his
brokerage business and to supervise the activities of his salesmen. Thus,
plaintiff's real estate broker's license was properly suspended, even though
moral turpitude, dishonesty, or corruption was patently absent from the
evidence, and though there was no contention that plaintiff had anything to do
with the subject matter of a Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10231, violation, where
plaintiff was the designated real estate broker of a corporation that had
engaged in the practice of offering for sale to investors its unsecured
promissory notes, payable on demand, the proceeds of which were used by it on an
interim basis, until such time, if ever, as the investor purchased a
specifically secured real estate investment.

(6) Brokers § 7 -- Regulation of Brokers -- Court Review of Discipline --
Suspension and Revocation of Licenses.  --The discipline imposed on a corporate
officer, an employee real estate salesman, and a real estate broker, was not so
severe as to amount to an abuse of discretion of the commissioner, or of the
superior court, where only the salesman's license of the corporate officer was
revoked, since he was the person principally responsible for the corporation's
established derelictions, and where the discipline imposed on the other two was
minimal: their licenses were suspended for three months and each suspension was
stayed.

(7) Administrative Law § 117 -- Judicial Review -- Scope and Extent -- Abuse of
Discretion -- Arbitrary, Capricious or Unreasonable Action.  --In determining
whether there has been an abuse of discretion by an administrative body, if
reasonable minds might differ as to the propriety of the penalty imposed, this
fact serves to fortify the conclusion that the body acted within the area of its
discretion.  In reviewing the penalty imposed by an administrative body that is
duly constituted to announce and enforce such penalty, neither a trial court nor
an appellate court is free to substitute its own discretion as to the matter;
nor can the reviewing court interfere with the imposition of the penalty on the
grounds that, in the court's own evaluation of the circumstances, the penalty
appears to be too harsh.  Such interference will be sanctioned only when there
is an arbitrary, capricious, or patently abusive exercise of discretion.

(8) Brokers § 6 -- Regulation of Brokers -- Grounds for Discipline and Defenses
-- Good Faith.  --Disciplinary procedures provided for in the Business and
Professions Code are to protect the public not only from conniving real estate
salesmen but also from the uninformed, negligent, or unknowledgeable salesman.
Their purpose is not to punish but to afford protection to the public.  Thus,
reinstatement of the licenses of a real estate broker and a salesman, whose
licenses had been suspended, and of a corporate officer, whose salesman's
license had been revoked, for violations of Bus. & Prof. Code, §§ 10176, 10231,
could not validly be predicated on the claim that their acts were in good faith,
not wilful, and in accord with legal advice.

COUNSEL: Chase & Schneider and Gerald M. Schneider for Plaintiffs and
Appellants.

Evelle J. Younger, Attorney General, and Julian O. Standen, Deputy Attorney
General, for Defendants and Respondents.

JUDGES: Opinion by Elkington, J., with Racanelli, P. J., and Newsom, J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: ELKINGTON

OPINION

     Following appropriate administrative proceedings, the Department of Real
Estate of the State of California and Robert W. Karpe, Real Estate Commissioner
of California (hereafter collectively and for convenience, Commissioner),
imposed disciplinary sanctions upon Homeowners Loan Corporation (hereafter
Homeowners) and certain individuals affiliated in one way or another with that
corporation.  The real estate broker's license of Homeowners and the real estate
salesman's license of its "chairman of the board," Alfred L. Norman, were
revoked. The real estate salesman's license of its employee, Robert Norman, and
the real estate broker's license of its "designated real estate broker," John A.
Colistra, were suspended.

   The proceedings arose out of alleged violations of Business and Professions
Code section 10176, subdivisions (a) and (i), and section 10231.

   Homeowners sought no review of the Commissioner's order revoking its real
estate broker's license, and that order is now final.  As to appellants Alfred
L. Norman, Robert Norman and John A. Colistra, those parties were denied Code of
Civil Procedure section 1094.5 mandate relief by a judgment of the superior
court.  The instant appeal was taken by them from that judgment.

   Properly applying the independent judgment standard upon review of the entire
administrative record, the superior court had concluded that the Commissioner's
findings,  conclusions, and orders were supported by the weight of the evidence.
It becomes our function to determine whether the superior court's judgment was
supported by substantial evidence.

    When a court's finding or a jury's verdict is attacked on the ground that it
is not sustained by the evidence, the power of an appellate court begins and
ends with the determination whether there is any substantial evidence,
contradicted or uncontradicted, which will support the finding or verdict.
Questions of credibility must be resolved in favor of the fact-finder's
determination, and when two or more inferences can reasonably be drawn from the
evidence, a reviewing court may not substitute its deductions for those of the
trier of fact.  If on any material point the evidence is in conflict, it must be
assumed that the court or jury resolved the conflict in favor of the prevailing
party.  (See Nestle v. City of Santa Monica, 6 Cal.3d 920, 925 [101 Cal.Rptr.
568, 496 P.2d 480]; Green  Trees Enterprises, Inc. v. Palm Springs Alpine
Estates, Inc., 66 Cal.2d 782, 784 [59 Cal.Rptr. 141, 427 P.2d 805].) We consider
the record before us in the light of this well-known rule.

   Homeowners was engaged in the business of brokering loans secured by trust
deeds on real property, in the manner described by Business and Professions Code
sections 10131, subdivisions (d) and (e), and 10131.1.  Typically, with its own
funds it would lend money on the security of such trust deeds, and then sell
interests in the loans and their security to individual public "investors" (a
term which we shall hereafter use).  When such interests were sold, Homeowners
would collect the loans' agreed payments and distribute them proportionately to
investors according to their interests.  Generally the investors purchased their
interests in the loans through outside brokers who were not otherwise affiliated
with Homeowners.  Those brokers were paid commissions by Homeowners for their
services.

    Business and Professions Code section 10176, as relevant to the appeal,
follows: "The [Commissioner] may, upon his own motion, and shall, upon the
verified complaint in writing of any person, investigate the actions of any
person engaged in the business or acting in the capacity of a real estate
licensee within this state, and he may temporarily suspend or permanently revoke
a real estate license at any time where the licensee, while a real estate
licensee, in performing or attempting to perform any of the acts within the
scope of this chapter has been guilty of any of the following: (a) Making any
substantial misrepresentation.  . . .  (i) Any other conduct, whether of the
same or a different character than specified in this section, which constitutes
fraud or dishonest dealing."

    The claimed violations of section 10176 related to the "Bodinson" and
"Kuburovich" loans made by Homeowners.  The borrowers, as additional security
for their loans, had prepaid interest, respectively, in the amounts of $ 22,500
and $ 33,000.  Prospective investors, among other things, were so advised, and
some invested in the loans.  For some reason Homeowners released from a title
insurance company "escrow" and back to Bodinson all, and to Kuburovich half, of
their loans' prepaid interest.  The releases were without the knowledge or
consent of the affected investors, and of course had the effect of substantially
reducing the loans' security.  (It is noted that Bodinson soon thereafter became
bankrupt.)

   The above noted transactions of Homeowners were found by the Commissioner and
the superior court to involve "substantial misrepresentation,"  and to
constitute "fraud or dishonest dealing" according to section 10176.  Those
conclusions were, beyond any doubt, properly reached on the case's
uncontroverted, and therefore substantial, evidence.

    Business and Professions Code section 10231, as relevant, provides: "No
person in doing any of the acts set forth in subdivision (d) of Section 10131,
subdivision (e) of Section 10131, and Section 10131.1 shall accept any purchase
or loan funds or other consideration from a prospective purchaser or lender, . .
. except  as to a specific loan or a specific real property sales contract or
promissory note secured directly or collaterally by a lien on real property . .
. ."

    As to this statute and those therein mentioned, it will be seen that a
licensed real estate broker, or real estate salesman, in the course of their
occupations, may not accept payment from a prospective purchaser for all or part
of an unsecured promissory note or loan.

   In respect of the charged violation by Homeowners of section 10231, the
evidence, again undisputed, discloses the following.

     Homeowners had engaged in the practice of offering for sale to investors
its unsecured promissory notes, payable on demand, the proceeds of which were
used by it "on an interim basis, until such time [if ever] as the investor
purchases a specifically secured [real estate] investment." Some investors had
purchased such unsecured promissory notes from Homeowners.

   In respect of those transactions Homeowners had patently violated section
10231.  Here also, there was substantial evidence supportive of the sanctions
against Homeowners.

   No party to this appeal appears to make any real contention that the sanction
imposed upon Homeowners by the Commissioner was not supported in law, and by
substantial evidence. But a corporation such as Homeowners may act only through
its officers, agents, and employees.  The question here presented is whether
appellants Alfred L. Norman, Robert Norman and John A. Colistra, or any of them,
participated as a matter of law, or of fact, in the charged Business and
Professions Code violations.  We continue in our narration of the relevant
evidence in accordance with the substantial evidence rule, and as it tends to
support the superior court's judgment.

    Appellant Alfred L. Norman was licensed by the Commissioner as a real estate
salesman.  He was an employee of Homeowners in a top management position and, as
noted, the "chairman of its board." He was the loan negotiator for the
corporation and in charge of its escrow and other transactions with title
insurance companies.

   Appellant Robert Norman was the son of appellant Alfred L. Norman, and was a
licensed real estate salesman.  He was an employee and "trainee" of Homeowners
and was active in its management.  His principal duty, under his father's
supervision, was dealing with title insurance companies.

   Appellant John A. Colistra was an attorney at law and a licensed real estate
broker.  He was not a paid employee of Homeowners, nor was he actively involved
in its management or in its loan negotiations.  In return for occasional legal
advice and some other services, he had been furnished free office space at the
corporation's headquarters where he conducted a private law practice.  Among the
services so rendered Homeowners was the signing of checks because "the bank
required two signatures," and his consent to act as Homeowners' "designated real
estate broker" during the period May 11, 1973, to March 21, 1974.

   We first consider Homeowners' Business and Professions Code section 10176
violations relating to improper release of prepaid interest on the Bodinson and
Kuburovich loans.  Alfred L. Norman and Robert Norman (and not John A. Colistra)
were found to have participated in those transactions.  Each of them, in respect
of the Bodinson loan, placed the blame for release of the money from a title
insurance company escrow upon an office worker of Homeowners, one Betsy.
However, Betsy testified that she instructed the title insurance company to
release the money on instructions from Alfred L. Norman personally, or from
Robert Norman on behalf of his father.  Alfred L. Norman and Robert Norman
conceded that they had ordered release of half of the Kuburovich prepaid
interest.  Here they contended unawareness that the "offering circular" to
investors did not reflect the prepaid interest's release.  It was the
responsibility, they said, of some unnamed member of the "loan committee" to
insure the offering circular's accuracy.

    And, as noted, Alfred L. Norman held a top management position with
Homeowners.  He was its loan negotiator, a responsibility which would reasonably
cover such things as return of prepaid interest to a borrower. He was in direct
charge of title insurance company transactions, which  would include directing
return of such prepaid interest held, as here, by such companies in escrow. One
of the principal duties of Robert Norman's management position with Homeowners
was, as previously pointed out, handling its title insurance company matters and
escrows, under his father's supervision.  And it is of special significance that
the record shows no complaint or attempted corrective action by Alfred L. Norman
or Robert Norman in respect of Betsy, or the title insurance company, or the
borrowers, or anyone, after the prepaid interest's improper release.

    The superior court's judgment in respect of Alfred L. Norman, and Robert
Norman in respect of the Business and Professions Code section 10176 violation,
was patently supported by substantial evidence.

   We advert now to the Business and Professions Code section 10231 violation,
of which appellants Alfred L. Norman and John A. Colistra (and not Robert
Norman) were found responsible.

   Alfred L. Norman concedes that he had instructed Homeowners' salespersons to
offer the corporation's unsecured promissory notes to investors "on an interim
basis, until such time as the investor purchases a specifically secured
investment." He was aware that the corporation was selling and issuing such
unsecured notes.  And he was in a position to prevent or countermand such
conduct.   His active participation in Homeowners' section 10231 violation was
abundantly supported by substantial evidence.

   John A. Colistra's responsibility for that violation is not so readily
apparent.  It was based solely upon the theory that he was Homeowners'
"designated real estate broker" during the period in which it was committed.
Otherwise, the Commissioner makes no contention that Colistra had anything to do
with the subject matter of that violation.

    Where a corporation is licensed by the Commissioner as a real estate broker
(as was Homeowners), it is required that it appoint a similarly licensed
individual as its "designated real estate broker." (See Bus. & Prof. Code, §
10211; Cal. Admin. Code, tit. 10, § 2740.) Colistra was, as indicated, so
designated, and he appears to have been the only licensed real estate broker
affiliated with Homeowners.  (Alfred L. Norman and Robert Norman, it will be
recalled, were licensed as "real estate salesmen.") Such a designated real
estate broker must reasonably be charged with responsibility for the corporate
compliance with the Real  Estate Law (see Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10000), for
otherwise with no such fixed responsibility, the statutory purpose would be
frustrated.  As said in Grand v. Griesinger, 160 Cal.App.2d 397, 406 [325 P.2d
475]: "The entire statutory scheme requires the broker actively to conduct his
brokerage business and to supervise the activities of his salesmen." In this,
although moral turpitude, dishonesty or corruption was patently absent, Colistra
was clearly remiss.  The law, and substantial evidence, thus supported his
accountability for Homeowners' Business and Professions Code section 10231
violation.

   Appellants contend also that the discipline imposed upon them was so severe
as to amount to an abuse of discretion of the Commissioner, and of the superior
court.

   As noted, only the real estate salesman's license of Alfred L. Norman was
revoked. Since he obviously was the person principally responsible for
Homeowners' established derelictions, no abuse of discretion is apparent.  The
discipline imposed upon Robert Norman and John A. Colistra was minimal;  their
respective licenses were suspended for three months only, and each of the
suspensions was stayed.   Again no abuse of discretion is observed.

    "In determining whether there has been an abuse of discretion the Supreme
Court of this state has stated that 'If reasonable minds might differ as to the
propriety of the penalty imposed, this fact serves to  fortify the conclusion
that the . . . [administrative body] acted within the area of its discretion.'
[Citations.] It is equally well settled that in reviewing the penalty imposed by
an administrative body which is duly constituted to announce and enforce such
penalties, neither a trial court nor an appellate court is free to substitute
its own discretion as to the matter; nor can the reviewing court interfere with
the imposition of a penalty by an administrative tribunal because in the court's
own evaluation of the circumstances the penalty appears to be too harsh.
[Citations.] Such interference, in the light of the foregoing authorities, will
only be sanctioned when there is an arbitrary, capricious or patently abusive
exercise of discretion." ( Brown v. Gordon, 240 Cal.App.2d 659, 667 [49
Cal.Rptr. 901];  and see Barber v. State Personnel Bd., 18 Cal.3d 395, 404 [134
Cal.Rptr. 206, 556 P.2d 306]; Nightingale v. State Personnel Board, 7 Cal.3d
507, 515 [102 Cal.Rptr. 758, 498 P.2d 1006]; Macfarlane v. Dept. Alcoholic Bev.
Control, 51 Cal.2d 84, 91 [330 P.2d 769].)

     No merit is seen in appellants' insistent contentions that since their acts
were in good "faith," and not "willful," and in accordance with "legal advice,"
they were improperly subjected to discipline. "Disciplinary procedures provided
for in the Business and Professions Code . . . are to protect the public not
only from conniving real estate salesmen but also from the uninformed,
negligent, or unknowledgeable salesman." ( Handeland v. Department of Real
Estate, 58 Cal.App.3d 513, 518 [129 Cal.Rptr. 810]; italics added.) Their
purpose "is not to punish but to afford protection to the public . . . ." (
Borror v. Department of Investment, 15 Cal.App.3d 531, 540 [92 Cal.Rptr. 525].)

   Nor is merit found in any of the several incidental points raised throughout
the briefs of appellants.  Their respective violations were manifestly
established by legally admissible, and essentially uncontroverted, evidence.

   For the foregoing reasons the judgment of the superior court will be
affirmed.

   Affirmed.


                              12 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          BERNICE MIDDELSTEADT, Plaintiff and Appellant, v. ROBERT W.
            KARPE, as Real Estate Commissioner, etc., Defendant and
                                   Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 35164

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

            52 Cal. App. 3d 297; 124 Cal. Rptr. 840; 1975 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1456


                                October 20, 1975

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Contra Costa County, No. 114629, Jackson C.
Davis, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1) Brokers § 25--Reimbursement From Real Estate Education, Research and
Recovery Fund--Loss of Broker Through Fraud of Salesperson.  --The trial court
erred in entering judgment directing the state Real Estate Commissioner to pay a
licensed real estate broker, from the Real Estate Education, Research and
Recovery Fund, the actual loss she had suffered by reason of a real estate
saleswoman's failure to divide commissions earned by her with the broker in
accordance with their oral agreement. Though a judgment obtained by the broker
against the saleswoman remained unsatisfied, she could not be regarded as an
"aggrieved person" within the meaning of Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10471, a part of
the Real Estate Brokers' Act. The primary purpose of the act is to raise the
standards of the real estate profession by requiring its members to deal fairly
and ethically with their clients, and the fund therefore may not be resorted to
by real estate licensees themselves.

COUNSEL: Paul G. Dobbins for Plaintiff and Appellant.

Evelle J. Younger, Attorney General, and Mervin R. Samuel, Deputy Attorney
General, for Defendant and Appellant.

JUDGES: Opinion by Kane, J., with Taylor, P. J., and Rouse, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: KANE

OPINION

     Defendant Robert W. Karpe, Real Estate Commissioner of the State of
California ("appellant") appeals from the trial court's judgment ordering the
payment of funds to respondent out of the Real Estate Education, Research and
Recovery Fund ("Recovery Fund"); respondent Bernice Middelsteadt cross-appeals
from that portion of the judgment disallowing interest on the sum awarded.

   The undisputed facts reveal that in July 1967 respondent, a licensed real
estate broker, engaged the services of Mary Ann Lowell ("Mary"), a  licensed
real estate saleswoman. The oral agreement entered between them provided for a
50-50 division of commissions earned by Mary.  On or about November 16, 1967,
while in the employ of respondent, Mary, together with Ernest R. Smith
("Smith"),  a licensed real estate broker, negotiated and consummated an
exchange of an apartment house owned by one Pasquet for two parcels of
unimproved real property owned by Dalton and Ima Ford ("Fords").  For
negotiating the aforesaid transaction Mary received $ 12,750 commission from
Fords and $ 10,000 from Pasquet.  It is uncontradicted that Mary obtained the
commissions without the knowledge, consent or authorization of respondent; and
that although not holding herself out as a broker, she failed to reveal to the
parties that she was employed by respondent as a saleswoman. The commissions in
dispute were paid through Western Title Insurance Company, the escrow holder for
the parties.

   Based upon the foregoing facts, on November 14, 1968, an accusation was filed
against Mary for violation of Business and Professions Code, 1 sections 10137, 2
and 10177, subdivisions (f) and (j). 3 After a  hearing and receiving evidence,
the commissioner found Mary guilty as charged and, by a decision dated March 4,
1969, temporarily revoked her real estate license.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Unless
otherwise indicated, all references will be made to the California Business and
Professions Code.
2   Section 10137 reads in part that "No real estate salesman shall be employed
by or accept compensation from any person other than the broker under whom he is
at the time licensed.

   "It is unlawful for any licensed real estate salesman to pay any compensation
for performing any of the acts within the scope of this chapter to any real
estate licensee except through the broker under whom he is at the time licensed.

   "For a violation of any of the provisions of this section, the commissioner
may temporarily suspend or permanently revoke the license of the real estate
licensee, in accordance with the provisions of this part relating to hearings."
(Italics added.)
3   Section 10177 provides in part "The commissioner may suspend or revoke the
license of any real estate licensee, or may deny the issuance of a license to an
applicant, who has done any of the following: . . .

   "(f) Acted or conducted himself in a manner which would have warranted the
denial of his application for a real estate license. . . .

   "(j) Any other conduct, whether of the same or a different character than
specified in this section, which constitutes fraud or dishonest dealing."
(Italics added.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Thereafter, respondent filed suit against Mary, Smith, Pasquet, Fords and
Western Title Insurance Company.  The first amended complaint, filed on August
8, 1969, charged inter alia that Mary concealed from the other parties her
employment with respondent, entered into negotiations with defendants for the
exchange of certain real property without respondent's consent or knowledge, and
in violation of the oral  agreement with respondent accepted commissions from
defendants in her own name (first cause of action).  In the second and third
causes of action respondent leveled charges against defendant Western Title
Insurance Company for breach of fiduciary duty and for professional negligence
in handling the escrow of the parties.

   The case came up for trial on September 28, 1972.  Counsel for Mary moved the
court to withdraw from the case on account of his client's disappearance.  The
court granted the motion and entered a default judgment obligating Mary to pay $
17,800.94 principal, $ 6,168.20 interest, and costs.

   Due to Mary's disappearance with the absconded funds, the judgment rendered
against her remained unsatisfied. Thereupon, in reliance on sections 10471 and
10472 respondent filed an application in the lower court for an order directing
appellant to pay the amount of the underlying judgment out of the Recovery Fund.
After a trial, the lower court found that the final judgment against Mary was
founded on fraud and deceit directly arising out of a real estate transaction
for which a real estate license was required and that the aggrieved person
contained in section 10471 included a real estate broker who had been defrauded
by his real estate agent.  The trial court likewise concluded that respondent
fully complied with the provisions of section 10472 as well, and accordingly
obligated appellant to satisfy respondent's actual loss totaling $ 8,875 out of
the Recovery Fund.  At the same time the trial court held that the "actual and
direct loss" provided by section 10471 does not include legal interest on the
judgment and costs of the suit.  The present appeal and cross-appeal followed.

   Although appellant also assails the judgment on procedural grounds, his main
contention on appeal is that a reversal of the judgment is imperative because
several provisions of section 10471 4 and  10472 5  were not met.  Thus, it is
contended that the statutory phrase "any aggrieved person" should be interpreted
in light of the purpose of the real estate law to protect the public from
dishonest real estate licensees and that this interpretation would exclude a
claim by one licensee against another.  Moreover, it is argued that the judgment
against Mary was not obtained upon grounds of fraud, misrepresentation, deceit
or conversion of trust funds as required by section 10471, and that the
emphasized provisions of section 10472 were not complied with by respondent.
For the reasons which follow, we agree with appellant and therefore reverse the
judgment.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   Section
10471 provides that "When any aggrieved person obtains a final judgment in any
court of competent jurisdiction against any person or persons licensed under
this part, under grounds of fraud, misrepresentation, deceit, or conversion of
trust funds arising directly out of any transaction when the judgment debtor was
licensed and performed acts for which a license is required under this part, and
which cause of action occurred on or after July 1, 1964, the aggrieved person
may, upon the judgment becoming final, file a verified application in the court
in which the judgment was entered for an order directing payment out of the Real
Estate Education, Research and Recovery Fund of the amount of actual and direct
loss in such transaction up to the sum of ten thousand dollars ($ 10,000) of the
amount unpaid upon the judgment, provided that nothing shall be construed to
obligate the fund for more than ten thousand dollars ($ 10,000) per transaction
regardless of the number of persons aggrieved or parcels of real estate involved
in such transaction.

   "A copy of the verified application shall be served upon the commissioner and
the judgment debtor and a certificate or affidavit of such service filed with
the court." (Italics added.)
5   Section 10472 sets forth that "The court shall conduct a hearing upon such
application 30 days after service of the application upon the Real Estate
Commissioner.  Upon petition of the Real Estate Commissioner, the court shall
continue the hearing up to 60 days further; and upon a showing of good cause may
continue the hearing for such further period as the court deems appropriate.  At
the hearing the aggrieved person shall be required to show:

   "(a) He is not a spouse of debtor, or the personal representative of such
spouse.

   "(b) He has complied with all the requirements of this article.

   "(c) He has obtained a judgment as set out in Section 10471, stating the
amount thereof and the amount owing thereon at the date of the application.

   "(d) He has obtained issuance of an order pursuant to Section 714 of the Code
of Civil Procedure and examined the judgment debtor under oath concerning his
property.

   "(e) He has made all reasonable searches and inquiries to ascertain whether
the judgment debtor is possessed of real or personal property or other assets,
liable to be sold or applied in satisfaction of the judgment.

   "(f) That by such search he has discovered no personal or real property or
other assets liable to be sold or applied, or that he has discovered certain of
them, describing them, owned by the judgment debtor and liable to be so applied,
and that he has taken all necessary action and proceedings for the realization
thereof, and that the amount thereby realized was insufficient to satisfy the
judgment, stating the amount so realized and the balance remaining due on the
judgment after application of the amount realized.

   "(g) That he has diligently pursued his remedies against all the judgment
debtors and all other persons liable to him in the transaction for which he
seeks recovery from the Real Estate Education, Research and Recovery Fund.

   "(h) That he is making said application no more than one year after the
judgment becomes final.

   "(i) That he has posted a bond to guarantee court costs, including reasonable
attorney's fees, should his application be denied, in the amount of 10 percent
of the recovery he seeks from the Real Estate Education, Research and Recovery
Fund at least 20 days before the hearing upon his application." (Italics added.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      Turning to appellant's first contention, it is to be noted that one of the
main requisites of seeking redress from the Recovery Fund is that the judgment
creditor whose judgment has remained unsatisfied be an aggrieved person within
the meaning of section 10471.  The issue of who  is qualified as an aggrieved
person under the statute is one of first impression which has not been explained
either by the Legislature or by any case authority.  As a consequence, in
defining the statutory meaning of "aggrieved person" we must look to the general
purpose of the real estate law and case authorities which have dealt with
analogous problems.

   While the code section is couched in broad terms which seemingly embrace any
person inside and outside the real estate profession, the language used therein
is far from being explicit.  Under these circumstances the meaning of the
statutory phrase must be resolved with reference to the Real Estate Brokers'
Act, of which section 10471 is but a part (cf.  Schantz v. Ellsworth (1971) 19
Cal.App.3d 289, 292 [96 Cal.Rptr. 783]). The cases, in turn, are legion both in
California and elsewhere which hold that the primary purpose of the real estate
act is to raise the standards of the real estate profession by requiring its
members to deal fairly and ethically with their clients.  ( California Emp.
Stab. Com. v. Morris (1946) 28 Cal.2d 812, 817 [172 P.2d 497]; Circle Oaks Sales
Co. v. Smith (1971) 16 Cal.App.3d 682, 685 [94 Cal.Rptr. 232]; De St. Germain v.
Watson (1950) 95 Cal.App.2d 862, 867 [214 P.2d 99]; Koeberle v. Hotchkiss (1935)
8 Cal.App.2d 634, 640 [48 P.2d 104]; Houston v. Williams (1921) 53 Cal.App. 267,
271 [200 P. 55]; 10 Cal.Jur.3d, § 8, p. 484; see also: Cannon v. Florida Real
Estate Commission (Fla.App. 1969) 221 So.2d 240, 241; Phoenix Assurance Company
of New York v. Young (1961) 104 Ga.App. 55 [121 S.E.2d 70, 71]; Eberman v.
Massachusetts Bonding & Ins. Co. (D.C.Mun.App. 1945) 41 A.2d 844, 845). Or to
put it another way, the protected  class under the act is not the real estate
licensees but the clients ( Iusi v. Chase (1959) 169 Cal.App.2d 83, 87 [337 P.2d
79]; Ferguson v. Schuenemann (1959) 167 Cal.App.2d 413 [334 P.2d 668]; Cannon v.
Florida Real Estate Commission, supra).

   As pointed out earlier, the instant case grew out of an internal dispute
between a broker and saleswoman over the division of commissions earned by the
saleswoman and did not involve fraud or deceit worked upon the clients.  It
follows, therefore, that in light of the stated policy underlying the real
estate act, the broad provision of section 10471 must be read to the effect that
the aggrieved person who is entitled to compensation from the Recovery Fund must
be a client or a member of the general public. Conversely, the Recovery Fund,
which provides a limited amount for the protection of the public, may not be
resorted to by the real estate licensees themselves who are in a better position
to guard against the deceitful and fraudulent acts of their colleagues and who
therefore fall outside the class protected by the statute.

    We are confirmed in our view by cases addressing and deciding similar issues
in analogous situations.  Thus, in Gilewicz v. Home Indemnity Company
(D.C.Mun.App. 1959) 150 A.2d 627, plaintiff, a licensed real estate saleswoman,
was employed by one Wright, a licensed real estate broker. Under the terms of
the employment agreement Gilewicz was entitled to a commission on all sales
consummated by her on the broker's behalf.  As a result of her efforts, Gilewicz
effected a sale of real estate and thereby earned a commission.  However, in
violation of the agreement of employment the broker paid only a portion of the
commission due.  By statute, a real estate broker in the District of Columbia
was required to post a surety bond with his application for a license. 6
Gilewicz, therefore, brought an action against the surety to recover the balance
of the commission.  Similar to the case at bench, the issue before the court was
whether the statutory phrase "any aggrieved person" covered a real estate
licensee. Holding that it did not, the court pointed out that: "'The purpose and
design of the [Real Estate License] Act primarily are, as stated in its title,
"to protect the public against fraud in real-estate transactions." [Citations
omitted.] The protection of the public interest is the basis for the exercise of
the police power in the enactment of such a law.  [Citations omitted.] The bond
required by the Act is, therefore, for the protection of the public, and the
question here presented is whether a real estate salesman is within the general
public intended to be protected by the Act and the bond given pursuant to it.
The provisions of the Act must be construed in the light of the purpose of the
Act and the evils it was designed to protect against.  When the legislature
enacts a statute regulating a business for the purpose of protecting the public
against existing or potential evils in that business, those engaged in the
business are not generally regarded as a part of that public.  The public is
protected against them and not they against their fellow businessmen.'" (Italics
partially added.  See to the same effect: Eberman v. Massachusetts Bonding &
Ins. Co., supra; Collier v. Hartford Acc. & Indem. Co. (D.C.Mun.App. 1962) 180
A.2d 846; Phoenix Assurance Company of New York v. Young, supra.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   District
of Columbia Code (1951) section 45-1405, provided in part that "Every
application for a license shall be accompanied by a bond in the sum of $ 2,500
in the case of a broker . . . running to the District of Columbia executed by a
surety company duly authorized to do business in the District of Columbia . . .
.  Said bond shall be in form approved by the [Real Estate] Commission, and
conditioned that the applicant shall conduct himself and his business in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter; and for his failure so to do
any person aggrieved thereby shall have, in addition to his right of action
against the principal thereof, a right to bring suit against the surety on said
bond . . ." (italics added).
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      The applicability of the aforecited cases to the case at bench is quite
obvious.  It requires no strenuous effort to see that the statutory bond, which
affords a limited amount of recovery from an independent source in case the real
estate licensee commits some wrongdoing and defaults, serves the very same
purpose as the Recovery Fund in California, and as a consequence the policy
reasons set out with regard to the surety bond apply with equal force to the
nature of, and a satisfaction from, the Recovery Fund.

   Although the conclusion reached above is in itself determinative of the
outcome of the present appeal, we parenthetically note that the judgment is
subject to reversal for the additional reason that respondent failed to comply
with several provisions of section 10472.

   Thus, the record before us demonstrates that while counsel for respondent
filed a declaration with the trial court stating that Mary's address and
whereabouts were unknown and he was unable to execute the judgment on any
properties of Mary because they were not known to the declarant, there is a
total failure to show that respondent made all reasonable searches and inquiries
to ascertain Mary's property assets and that such diligent search failed to lead
to the discovery of any personal or real property of the judgment debtor (§
10472, subds. (e) and (f)).  More significantly, however, the record is entirely
devoid of any indication that respondent has diligently pursued his remedies
against the other defendants who had been named along with Mary in the original
action (§ 10472, subd. (g)).  This proposition is especially applicable to
Western Title Insurance Company, against which valid causes of action were
stated for breach of fiduciary duty and professional negligence in handling the
escrow.  It goes without saying that these allegations, if pursued to successful
conclusion, would have yielded a recovery of damages against the title insurance
company defendant.

   In view of our resolution of the case, the additional issues raised on appeal
and cross-appeal need not be decided.

   The judgment is reversed.  The cross-appeal is dismissed.


                              13 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In the Matter of the Estate of R. GRACEY, Deceased.  JAMES
           SHIELDS GRACEY, as Executor, etc., et al., Appellants, v.
              CITY OF MERCED (a Municipal Corporation), Respondent

                                 Sac. No. 3916

                          Supreme Court of California

                 200 Cal. 482; 253 P. 921; 1927 Cal. LEXIS 566


                               February 21, 1927

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Rehearing denied.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a decree of distribution of the Superior Court of
Merced County.  J. J. Trabucco, Judge Presiding.

COUNSEL: Devlin & Devlin and M. S. Zarick for Appellants.

F. W. Henderson, City Attorney, for Respondent.

JUDGES: In Bank. Shenk, J.  Richards, J., Seawell, J., Curtis, J., Preston, J.,
Langdon, J., and Waste, C. J., concurred.

OPINION BY: SHENK

OPINION

     Robert Gracey died testate on the twenty-fifth day of September, 1913, in
the state of Pennsylvania.  At the time of his death he was and for many years
prior thereto had been a resident of that state and left real and personal
property therein.  He also left property in California consisting of money in
bank and other personal property  and an interest  in the estate of Sarah Jane
Thursby, then in course of probate in Merced County.  Sarah Jane Thursby died
testate in Merced County on the third day of February, 1913, leaving an estate
in said county consisting of real and personal property. Her will, holographic
in form, was admitted to probate in that county.  After making provision for the
payment of debts, expenses of last illness, and certain legacies, her will set
forth the following residuary clause: "11th.  After the funeral expenses and
bequests are paid, should there still remain any money or property of whatsoever
nature I die possessed of, I give to Robert Gracey of Pennsylvania." The will
next contained the following provision: "12th.  I appoint John Olcese of Merced,
California, my executor, to carry out the provisions of this last will, and also
give him power to sell all or any of my real estate or personal property without
any order from court. . . . "

   At the time of the death of Sarah Jane Thursby her estate consisted largely
of real property, all situated in the state of California.  During the course of
the administration of her estate in Merced County it was determined that the
personal estate, after payment of debts, funeral expenses, costs and expenses of
administration, was insufficient to pay the bequests mentioned in her will and
it was found necessary to sell a portion of the real estate in order to
discharge said bequests. Instead of selling a portion of said real property for
said purpose it was deemed for the best interests of the estate to sell the
whole of said real property. After such sale a considerable sum of money, being
the proceeds of the sale of said real property, remained for the benefit of the
residuary legatee and devisee. The proper distribution to be made of this
residuum forms the basis of this controversy.

   On February 12, 1913, or nine days after the death of Sarah Jane Thursby,
Robert Gracey, the said residuary legatee and devisee, while domiciled in the
state of Pennsylvania, appended to his existing holographic will the following
codicil, holographic in form: "Of all money or [moneys] derived from sale of
real estate to come to me from the estate of Sarah J. Thursby, decd. of Merced,
California, that is of all the net amount that may come to me from said estate,
I bequeath one-half thereof to the Public Library of Merced City, California,
and the remaining one-half to be equally  divided and distributed to Westminster
College, mentioned in sec. 6 above, and the Boards of Home and Foreign Missions
of the United Presbyterian [Church of North America] mentioned in secs. 2 and 5
above." The effect to be given to this codicil is the principal subject for
determination on this appeal.  Upon the death of Robert Gracey his last will was
admitted to probate in the state of Pennsylvania and subsequently said will and
codicil were admitted to probate in Merced County.  James Shields Gracey was
named executor in both jurisdictions.  On proceedings to settle the final
account and for distribution of the Gracey estate in Merced County the executor
petitioned the court to turn over the entire California estate to the executor
acting under the Pennsylvania administration.  The City of Merced filed
objections to said final account and also a cross-petition, in which it prayed
that one-half of the amount of the estate in the hands of the California
executor be paid to the City of Merced for and on behalf of its public library
pursuant to the provisions of said codicil. After a hearing the court made an
order in which the final account was settled and approved.  The court found that
the moneys on hand in the possession of the California executor were derived
from the sale of the real estate in California devised to Robert Gracey,
deceased, by the terms of the residuary clause contained in the will of Sarah
Jane Thursby, deceased, and that the said moneys must be distributed as real
estate in California according to the laws of California and not as personal
property under the laws of Pennsylvania, the domicile of Robert Gracey,
deceased. It was further found that the total net value of the estate of Robert
Gracey, deceased, in California and elsewhere amounts to the sum of $ 65,509.59,
and that under and pursuant to section 1313 of the Civil Code the sum of $
21,836.53 is the total aggregate sum that can be bequeathed or devised to the
said City of Merced, Westminster College, and the Boards of Home and Foreign
Missions of the United Presbyterian Church.  The court further found that the
remainder of said property, to wit, the sum of $ 16,714.66 and certain other
personal property not reduced to cash should be distributed to the executor
under the Pennsylvania administration.  The decree of final distribution was
duly made and entered pursuant to the foregoing findings and determinations.
From this decree the  executor under the Pennsylvania administration and the
heirs of Robert Gracey, deceased, or their representatives, prosecute this
appeal from that portion of the decree which orders distributed to the City of
Merced in trust for the use and benefit of the public library of said city the
sum of $ 10,918.27, to Westminster College the sum of $ 5,459.13 and to the
Boards of Home and Foreign Missions of the United Presbyterian Church the sum of
$ 5,459.13.  The appeal is presented on the judgment-roll alone.

   Two notices of appeal were filed, one on behalf of the executor under the
Pennsylvania administration and the other on behalf of the heirs at law of
Robert Gracey, deceased. By stipulation one record is presented and both appeals
may be determined by one order.   Rights of creditors are not here involved and
all taxes and expenses of administration have been paid or provided for.

   It is the contention of appellants that the court erred in holding that the
assets which were on hand under the California administration were in legal
effect real estate in the state of California at the time of the death of Robert
Gracey, deceased, and in holding that the law of California was applicable to
the distribution of the estate.  It is their claim that the proceeds
distributable under the California administration constituted personal property
at the time of the death of Robert Gracey, deceased, by reason of an alleged
equitable conversion of realty into personalty in both the wills of Sarah Jane
Thursby and Robert Gracey and that the law of Pennsylvania should be applied to
the distribution thereof.   The appellants alleged and proved the law of
Pennsylvania to the effect that any holographic will or codicil devising or
bequeathing property to charitable or public uses must be attested by at least
two witnesses.  The codicil here in question was not so attested and it is not
questioned that tested by the law of Pennsylvania the said codicil would be
invalid.  But when the same was offered for probate in California its
sufficiency as a valid codicil was governed by the law of this state (Civ. Code,
sec. 1376).  When so tested it was sufficiently proved, for in this state
witnesses to a holographic will or codicil are unnecessary.

     The primary question for determination is whether an equitable conversion
of the real estate in Merced County  to personal property took place upon the
death of either Sarah Jane Thursby or of Robert Gracey.  It is conceded by the
respondents that if it be held, contrary to the determination of the trial
court, that the California estate of which Robert Gracey died seised was, in
contemplation of law, personal property at the time of his death it would follow
that all of said California estate should be delivered to the Pennsylvania
executor to be distributed in accordance with the laws of Pennsylvania, with the
inevitable declaration there that the said codicil is void.  On the other hand,
if it be determined that there was no such equitable conversion in either estate
it would seem to follow that distribution should be made as ordered by the trial
court.   It is the claim of the appellants that the will of Sarah Jane Thursby
created an equitable conversion of all of her real property into personalty as
of the date of her death pursuant to the provisions of  section 1338 of the
Civil Code, which provides that "When a will directs the conversion of real
property into money, such property and all its proceeds must be deemed personal
property from the time of the testator's death." It is conceded by the
appellants that there is no express direction to the executor of the Thursby
will to convert the real property into money, but it is insisted that from the
whole scheme of the will it was the intention of the testatrix that the executor
should do so.  We do not so conclude.  As necessarily conceded there was no such
express direction, and we find nothing on the face of the will that imports an
intention on the part of the testatrix that such conversion took place.  It does
not appear therefrom that such conversion was necessary in order that the
intentions of the testatrix be carried out.   Section 1338 of the Civil Code is
simply declaratory of the common law ( Estep v. Armstrong, 91 Cal. 659 [27 Pac.
1091]) and the doctrine rests on the principle that equity considers that as
done which ought to have been done.  In Estate of Pforr, 144 Cal. 121 [77 Pac.
827], it was said at page 128: "Whether such conversion is effected depends upon
the intention of the testator as gathered from the entire provision of his will.
If it is apparent from its terms that it was his will that the estate be sold
and the proceeds given to his beneficiaries, an equitable conversion results,
even if the direction for the  sale is not imperative.  ( Dodge v. Pond, 23 N.
Y. 69.) 'The question of conversion is a question of intention, and the real
question is, Did the testator intend his land should be converted into money at
all events before distribution?' ( Wurtz v. Page, 19 N. J. Eq. 375.) Mr. Pomeroy
(Equity Jurisprudence, sec. 1161) says: 'In fact the whole result depends upon
the intention.  If by express language, or by a reasonable construction of all
its terms, the instrument shows an intention that the original form of the
property shall be changed, then a conversion necessarily takes place.'" The
doctrine of equitable conversion was invoked in the case of Janes v.
Throckmorton, 57 Cal. 368, 382, and it was there said: "But the doctrine of
equitable conversion is invoked by the defendant; and it is said, that as to the
beneficiaries, the land, under the agreement, became personal estate, and their
interest personal property. Dodge v. Pond, 23 N. Y. 69; Lynn v. Gephart, 27 Md.
547, and 2 Story's Eq. Jur., sec. 1214, are cited by defendant's counsel in
support of this position.  In Lynn v. Gephart, the Court cites the section from
Story which reads thus: 'The inclination of courts of equity upon this branch of
jurisprudence is not generally to change the quality of the property, unless
there is some clear intention or act by which a definite character, either as
money or as land, has been unequivocally fixed upon it throughout'; and, adds,
that 'if this intention do not clearly appear, the property retains its original
character.'" The citation of authorities to the same effect could be prolonged.
From their consideration it cannot be said that under the Thursby will such
conversion took place either by direction of the testatrix or by necessary or
fair implication from the language used. The mere discretionary power to sell
does not produce such result ( White v. Howard, 46 N. Y. 162).  The language of
the residuary  clause in the Thursby will unquestionably had the effect of
vesting the title to the real property in Robert Gracey at the moment of the
death of Mrs. Thursby (Civ. Code, sec. 1341; Estate of Patterson, 155 Cal. 626
[132 Am. St. Rep. 116, 18 Ann. Cas. 625, 26 L. R. A. (N. S.) 654, 102 Pac. 941];
Estate of Benvenuto, 183 Cal. 382 [191 Pac. 678]).

     When it became necessary to sell a portion of said real property to pay
specific bequests, and when the whole  of said real property was sold, the
surplus beyond the amount required for the purposes mentioned retained its
character as real estate for purposes of distribution (2 Woerner on
Administration, sec. 481; 24 C. J. 706).

     Nor do we think that any equitable conversion took place upon the death of
Robert Gracey.  As above indicated, the doctrine of equitable conversion is a
device employed in equity to bring about equitable results.  It is invoked to
accomplish the intention of the testator and for the benefit of beneficiaries (6
Cal. Jur. 525, 526).  There is no wording in the codicil appended to the Gracey
will expressly directing the executor to convert said real estate into money,
and we fail to discover from the language used by the testator any intent on his
part by necessary or reasonable implication from the language used to require
such conversion. Indeed, the plain intention is to the contrary, for if such
conversion were intended and should be effectuated the entire California estate
would be transmitted to the executor in the Pennsylvania administration and the
benefactions under the codicil would be entirely defeated.  We cannot ascribe
such an intention to the testator. He must be held to have known that Mrs.
Thursby had died before he executed the codicil and that the title to the real
estate in California, or at least so much thereof as was not necessary to pay
the funeral expenses and the bequests under the will of Mrs. Thursby, had vested
in him and that the only way in which the beneficiaries under the codicil could
receive their bounties would be by the probate of his will, including said
codicil, in California, without an equitable conversion thereof into personalty.
Otherwise his benefactions under the codicil would fail.  Nor do we agree, as
contended by appellants, that there was such a blending of personal and real
estate by the testator as to show that he intended to create a fund and to make
a testamentary disposition thereof in money.  We conclude that the trial court
did not err in refusing to apply the doctrine of equitable conversion to either
the Thursby will or to the codicil of the Gracey will.

     It is next insisted by the appellants that if there was no equitable
conversion under either will and if it be held, as we do hold, that the property
in California was and is real estate for purposes of distribution, then Robert
Gracey died intestate as to such real estate. The contention is predicated upon
the fact that in the codicil the word "devise" is not used and that the testator
used the words, "I bequeath" one-half "of all the net amount that may come to me
from said estate" to the "Public Library of the City of Merced," etc.  It is
argued that the use of the word "bequeath" was ineffectual to pass the title of
said property as real estate. The contention appears to be that in order to
effectuate the passing of title to real estate the word "devise" or other
appropriate term applicable to real estate must be used.   Section 1327 of the
Civil Code provides: "Technical words in a will are to be taken in their
technical sense, unless the context clearly indicates a contrary intention, or
unless it satisfactorily appears that the will was drawn solely by the testator,
and that he was unacquainted with such technical sense." In the application of
the foregoing section of the Civil Code this court had under consideration, in
Estate of Henderson, 161 Cal. 353 [119 Pac. 496], a question very similar to the
one now presented with reference to the effect of the use of the terms
"bequest," "legacies," "legatees," and "residuary legatees" in a holographic
will as bearing upon the disposition of real property of the estate and where it
appeared that the terms "devise" and "devisees" were not used.  In that case it
was said: "The primary purpose of all interpretation of wills is, of course, to
ascertain the testator's intent, as disclosed by the language he has used.
(Civ. Code, sec. 1317.) Of this class of questions it may be said, with more
truth, perhaps, than of any other, that each case depends upon its own peculiar
facts, and that precedents have comparatively small value.  'Except for the
establishment of general principles, very little aid can be procured from
adjudged cases in the construction of wills.  It seldom happens that two cases
can be found precisely alike, [citing cases] . . .  The appellant argues,
further, that, inasmuch as the estate (and the residue) included both real and
personal property, such real property as was contained in the residue could not
be covered by a gift over of 'legacies' given to 'legatees.'  But, while
technical words in a will are ordinarily to be taken in their technical sense,
they will not be so taken when it appears that they were used in another  sense
by a testator who drew his will without an acquaintance with the technical
sense.  (Civ. Code, sec. 1327; Estate of Peabody, 154 Cal. 172 [97 Pac. 184].)
The will before us was, as we have said, holographic, and it is perfectly clear
from its provisions that the testator was unfamiliar with the distinctions
between terms appropriate to testamentary gifts of personal and those of real
estate. Although the estate comprises realty, the will does not contain the
words 'devise' or 'devisee.' The testator makes gifts of his interest in real
estate, and then speaks of the residue, after paying all the 'bequests herein
provided for.' He makes provision for 'residuary legatees,' but says nothing of
'residuary devisees.' It is plain, therefore, that the testator used the terms
'bequests,' 'legacy,' 'legatees' and 'residuary  legatees' loosely, and without
regard to their exact technical meaning.  In order to give full effect to these
expressions they must be read as referring to gifts to takers of realty, as well
as of personal property." ( Estate of Henderson, supra, pp. 357, 358; Estate of
Budd, 166 Cal. 286 [135 Pac. 1131].)

     So in the case at bar it appears that the codicil was holographic in form.
As the appeal is on the judgment-roll alone the evidence is not before us.  All
intendments are in favor of the determinations of the trial court and in the
absence of a contrary showing on this appeal it must be assumed that it appeared
that the codicil was drawn solely by the testator and that he was unacquainted
with the technical meaning of the term "bequeath" and intended by its use that
it should apply to the takers of real property as well as personal property.  A
will should be so interpreted as to render it operative, if it be reasonably
susceptible of such interpretation, to the end that the intention of the
testator be given effect and that intestacy be avoided (Civ. Code, sec. 1317;
Estate of Phelps, 182 Cal. 752 [190 Pac. 17]; Estate of Wilson, 184 Cal. 63 [193
Pac. 581]; Estate of Franck, 190 Cal. 28 [210 Pac. 417]; Estate of McCurdy, 197
Cal. 276 [240 Pac. 498]; 26 Cal. Jur. 899).  On the record before us it must
therefore be concluded that the word "bequeath" was used by the testator not in
its technical sense but as applying to both real and personal property. Such
interpretation is reasonable and intestacy is thereby avoided.

     In determining the amount of the Gracey estate which it was competent for
the testator to leave to the respondents for charitable and benevolent uses
under section 1313 of the Civil Code the trial court fixed the net value of the
estate in California and elsewhere and apportioned one-third of the total to the
beneficiaries under the codicil. In this respect the appellants concede that the
court followed the rule laid down in Estate of Dwyer, 159 Cal. 687 [115 Pac.
242], where it was held that in fixing the amount of the one-third of the estate
which might be distributed to charitable uses under said section 1313 the
aggregate estate wherever situated is to be taken into consideration.  But it is
insisted that the court erred in so fixing the aggregate of such estate for the
reason that it appears that the administration of the estate of Gracey in
Pennsylvania had not been closed and that additional costs of administration in
that state may accrue.  Here again the evidence is not before us, and in the
absence of a showing to the contrary it must be assumed that sufficient
competent evidence was before the trial court upon which to base its implied
finding to the effect that the administration of the Pennsylvania estate had
progressed to a point where no further costs would accrue.  The burden was upon
the appellants to show the insufficiency of the evidence to support the finding
of the aggregate amount of said estate or to show some abuse of discretion on
the part of the trial court and such showing has not been made.

   We have examined the cases relied upon by the appellants and we find therein
nothing inconsistent with the conclusions herein expressed as applied to the
particular facts in this case.

   The decree is affirmed.


                              14 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In the Matter of the Estate of LELIA BONNER DWYER, Deceased

                                 L. A. No. 2569

                          Supreme Court of California

                 159 Cal. 664; 115 P. 235; 1911 Cal. LEXIS 367


                                 April 7, 1911

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a decree of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County distributing the estate of a deceased person.  James C. Rives, Judge.

COUNSEL: George J. Leovy, and Hunsaker & Britt, for Appellants.

Alexander H. Van Cott, Benjamin E. Page, and Edgar W. Camp, for Respondent.

Denis & Loewenthal, H. W. O'Melveny, and O'Melveny, Stevens & Millikin, for
Administrator.

JUDGES: In Bank. Lorigan, J.  Angellotti, J., Shaw, J., Melvin, J., and Henshaw,
J., concurred.

OPINION BY: LORIGAN

OPINION

     This is an appeal by the trustees of the J. M. Bonner Memorial Home from so
much of the decree of distribution in the above estate as awarded to Emma J.
Bonner and others, the heirs at law of deceased, the proceeds of the sale of a
certain lot in the city and county of Los Angeles known as the "Broadway"
property.

    Testatrix was a resident of and domiciled in the city of New Orleans,
Louisiana, where she died in June, 1905, leaving a last will and an estate
consisting of real and personal property in the states of Louisiana and
California and real property in other states.  Her will dated July 16, 1901, was
duly admitted to probate, and letters testamentary issued at New Orleans on
September 5, 1906.

   The will of the testatrix, in as far as its provisions are involved here,
after declaring that she had no descendants or ascendants, provided for the
payment of certain special pecuniary legacies, and then further provided: --

   "Third.  I desire all my real estate, except the residence and lots situated
in the square bounded by First, Second, Coliseum and Chestnut streets in the
city of New Orleans, to be sold by my executors to the best advantage and after
the payment of the aforegoing special pecuniary legacies, which are expressly
charged upon said real estate so to be sold, and are not to bear upon any other
portion of my estate, I will and bequeath all the rest and residue of the
proceeds of said real estate so to be sold (to certain persons named), as
trustees in trust to found and maintain in New Orleans a home for aged and
infirm men, to be called The John M. Bonner Memorial Home."

   By subsequent clause she named her husband, Alexander J. Dwyer, her universal
residuary legatee, bequeathing him all property of whatever nature she might die
possessed, other than that theretofore specially bequeathed, and expressly
including therein the residence and lots owned by her in the square bounded by
First, Second, Coliseum, and Chestnut streets in the city of New Orleans.

   The husband of testatrix predeceased her in April, 1904, but she made no
change in her will respecting the residuary bequest to him.

   The administration of the estate of deceased had in Louisiana was completed,
distribution made, and the estate closed there in 1906.  All special legacies
were paid; the J. M. Bonner Memorial Home was incorporated, and something over
the sum of one hundred and twenty-six thousand dollars was received by the
trustees thereof under the administration of the estate in Louisiana.

   In August, 1905, the will of testatrix was admitted to probate  here as a
foreign will and the only administration now pending is in this state.

   At the time of making her will the testatrix owned in California, in the
county of Los Angeles, certain parcels of real estate consisting of what was
called the Broadway property, property known as The Farm, and other real
property near the city of Pasadena and in the city of Los Angeles of large
value.  The only property, however, administered on in this state, were proceeds
of the sale of the Broadway property, the Farm property and some personal
effects.  The other property owned by testatrix in Los Angeles County at the
date her will was made was sold by her in her lifetime, she receiving full
payment of the Pasadena property herself.  Part of the purchase price of the
other real estate (not including the proceeds of the sale of the Broadway
property) had been received by testatrix in her lifetime, the balance was
collected by the testamentary dative executor of her will, under the
administration of her estate in Louisiana, and such proceeds from the sale of
the Pasadena property and the other Los Angeles lots were distributed to the
heirs at law of the deceased, under the administration of the estate in
Louisiana.

   At the time her will was made, as we have said, the testatrix was the owner
of the Broadway property.  In March, 1905, three months prior to her death Mrs.
Dwyer contracted in writing to sell this property to one J. E. Carr for one
hundred thousand dollars, she to make a conveyance thereof to Carr on or before
May 13, 1905, upon the latter making certain cash  payments and executing notes
and a mortgage for the balance of the purchase price. Prior to April 27, 1905,
Carr tendered her the money, notes, and mortgage and demanded a conveyance of
the property which Mrs. Dwyer refused to make, whereupon Carr immediately
brought an action against her for specific enforcement of the contract.  On June
25, 1905, while this action was pending, Mrs. Dwyer died. Carr then dismissed
the first action and brought a similar suit against the administrator with the
will annexed of her estate in which, on August 20, 1906, a judgment was rendered
in favor of Carr for specific performance of the contract, the court determining
the respective rights of the parties as of May 13, 1905, the date provided in
the contract for  the delivery of the deed by Mrs. Dwyer to Carr.  On appeal to
this court by the administrator with the will annexed the judgment was affirmed
( Carr v. Howell, 154 Cal. 372, [97 Pac. 885]), whereupon said administrator
made a deed to Carr, the latter making the cash payment and delivering the notes
and mortgage to the administrator as the contract provided and the decree of the
court required.

   In due course thereafter the administrator filed his final account, together
with his petition for the distribution of the estate, asking in the latter that
the court determine who were entitled thereto and to make a decree accordingly.

   Cross-petitions were filed by both the heirs at law of testatrix and the
trustees of the J. M. Bonner Memorial Home, and as addressed to the proceeds of
the sale of the Broadway property, consisting of cash and the notes and mortgage
securing the deferred purchase price thereof, each asked for distribution
thereof in their favor.  The court distributed the entire proceeds to the heirs
at law and the trustees of the J. M. Bonner Memorial Home (hereafter to be
referred to as the trustees of the Home) appeal.

   The view of the superior court was that under the will of testatrix the only
proceeds of her real property given to the trustees of the Home were proceeds of
such real property as she owned at her death and which her executor was
empowered to sell; that at her death she did not own the Broadway property,
having sold it in her lifetime to Carr; that the proceeds of such sale to which
she was entitled when she died were personal property which would have gone to
her husband as universal residuary legatee had he lived; that by his death prior
to testatrix, such residuary legacy to him lapsed, and no disposition over on
such event being provided for, and no change in her will having been
subsequently made by testatrix, the heirs at law of testatrix (and respondents
are conceded to be such) took all property which otherwise would have gone to
the husband as residuary legatee, including the proceeds of the sale of the
Broadway property.

   This conclusion of the trial court appellants insist was erroneous when the
intention of the testatrix as disclosed by her will and the circumstances
surrounding its execution are taken into consideration; that further the court
failed to correctly apply the general principles of law when a gift, such as is
made to the trustees of the Home, is to be considered, and ignored certain
provisions of the Civil Code of the state under which the trustees claim they
were entitled to have these proceeds distributed to them.

   Now as to these claims.  Starting with the cardinal rule for guidance in the
interpretation of wills -- that the intention of the testator must be sought for
and carried out -- it is insisted by the trustees of the Home that the will
under consideration and the circumstances surrounding its execution disclose an
intention on the part of Mrs. Dwyer that the proceeds of all of the real
property which she owned when her will was made (excepting, of course, the lots
in New Orleans), should be applied to the establishment and endowment of the J.
M. Bonner Memorial Home and that the sale of the Broadway property made by her
was made simply to facilitate in her lifetime the creation of the fund which she
intended at her death should be devoted to the creation of the Home.  It is
insisted in this regard that courts look with favor on endowments for charitable
or philanthropic purposes; that testatrix had a warm regard for her deceased
uncle J. M. Bonner, from whom she had derived the California property, and in
whose memory she desired to establish the Home; that it was only a natural and
reasonable desire on her part that the proceeds of this property which she had
derived from him should be devoted to that purpose; that her estate outside of
California amounted to almost five hundred thousand dollars, a large portion of
which was left to her husband as residuary legatee;  that by specific legacies
she had provided for these respondents who as her heirs at law are here
contesting the right of the trustees to these proceeds; and that it is evident
from the will that she did not intend they should have anything more than she
had specifically bequeathed to them, and certainly none of her real property.
Under these considerations it is insisted that an intention of the testatrix is
disclosed to devote the proceeds of all property owned by her when her will was
made to the establishment and endowment of the Memorial Home, and the appellants
cite Littig v. Hance, 81 Md. 46, [32 Atl. 343]; Kenady v. Sinnott, 179 U.S. 606,
[21 Sup. Ct. 233, 45 L. Ed. 339]; Conn. T. & T. Dep. Co. v. Chase, 75 Conn. 683,
[55 Atl. 171]; Miller v. Malone, 109 Ky. 133, [95 Am. St. Rep. 338, 58 S. W.
708],  and Nooe v. Vannoy, 6 Jones's Equity (59 N. C.) 185, in support of their
contention.

   Without just now discussing the cases cited, but giving consideration to the
other matters  suggested, we do not perceive how in any particular they support
the claim made by appellants.

   Every testator knows that his will only takes effect upon his death, and only
operates upon such property as he then owns, and that in the mean time his
freedom to deal with his property is not in any respect curtailed, and there is
nothing in the will of the testatrix here to indicate that she intended to limit
her right to deal, in her lifetime, with any of her property just as she
pleased, to transfer her real property into personalty or vice versa, and to
have the provisions of her will as to the disposition of her estate apply at her
death to the character of the property as she then owned it.  In fact, the
provisions of this will could bear no other construction.  There is no force in
the assertion that the paramount intention of the testatrix as to her real
estate was that the proceeds of all that she owned at the execution of her will,
particularly the California property which she derived from her uncle, should be
devoted to the establishment of the Memorial Home.  Certainly the will expressly
declares no such intent.  It says nothing about California real property, or
about any specific real property or its proceeds.  Besides, as to all her
property the paramount intention of the testatrix was that her husband should be
abundantly provided for; she was particularly solicitous that his comfort should
be assured by having in her estate at her death ample property of such a
character -- personal property -- as would fall into her residuary estate and go
to him as her residuary legatee. So solicitous was she in this respect that in
the clause bequeathing the proceeds of her real estate to the trustees she
expressly charges the real estate to be sold for that purpose, with the payment
of the special pecuniary legacies, and declares that they are not to bear upon
the residuary bequest to her husband.  If the claim of counsel for the trustees
could prevail, testatrix on making her will, no matter what the changed
condition of her estate might be thereafter, could not sell any real estate, the
proceeds of which could go into the residuary fund for the benefit of her
husband; no matter to what extent  the vicissitudes of fortune might deplete her
personal estate, all of which was to go to him, she could not replenish or
increase the residuary fund by selling any of her real property unless by making
a change in her will.  But it is unnecessary to proceed further with any general
discussion of the intention of testatrix as to these trustees of the Home
because her intention as to what portion of her estate they shall take is
plainly and clearly stated in the only clause of her will which gives them
anything.  There is nothing inartificial about the will of testatrix in any
respect.  It expresses with accuracy just what disposition of her estate is to
be made among her beneficiaries thereunder and when the clause in favor of the
trustees of the Home is examined and the language used there is given its
natural and ordinary import, the testatrix clearly declares what proceeds of her
real estate the trustees shall take and from the sale of what real estate itself
the proceeds for the benefit of the Memorial Home shall be derived.  The only
gift to the trustees is in clause 3 of the will, and the language used there
leaves no room for any question as to what proceeds and the proceeds of what
property owned by the testatrix should be devoted to establish the Memorial
Home.  Her declared intention is that all her real estate (except the lots in
New Orleans) is "to be sold by my executor to the best advantage" and after
payment of the specific pecuniary legacies which are expressly charged upon the
real estate "so to be sold" she gives the residue of the proceeds of said real
estate "so to be sold" to the trustees in trust to found the Memorial Home.
Under this clause and for the purposes declared in it, a general power of sale
is given by the testatrix to her executor to sell her real estate, pay the
special pecuniary legacies, and turn the remainder over to the trustees of the
Home.  By the very terms of the clause this power of sale, under the execution
of which alone her executor was to derive the funds for the Memorial Home, could
only be exercised after her death, and could only apply to real property which
she owned at the time of her death.  Certainly this language cannot by any
process of construction be held to mean anything other than that the proceeds of
the sale of real estate which were to go to the trustees of the Home were the
proceeds of such real estate as the testatrix owned at her death, and upon which
the power of sale given him  could operate, and clearly and expressly negatives
the claim of the trustees that it was the intention of the testatrix that the
proceeds of all real property which she owned at the time her will was made was
intended by her to go to the trustees of the Home, and that any sale made by her
thereafter was to facilitate that purpose.  She undoubtedly intended to leave
real estate at her death which, in her judgment, would be sufficient to
establish the Home.  This she did, and it is evident from the clause of her will
referred to that it was all she intended to do.

   It will be observed, too, that after making her will testatrix sold her
Pasadena and other real property in Los Angeles County, receiving for the former
at least sixty thousand dollars, and after her death her dative testamentary
executor collected some four thousand dollars as a balance due her from the sale
of the other real property here.  No claim was made by the trustees of the Home
on distribution in the Louisiana court that they were entitled to these funds as
proceeds of real estate which testatrix had intended, when she made her will,
should be devoted to the establishment of the Home,  and which real estate she
sold to facilitate in her lifetime the creation of a fund for that purpose.  On
the contrary, these proceeds were distributed to the heirs at law.  Obviously,
all the interested parties, and the Louisiana court, were of the opinion that
the bequest to the Memorial Home was only of the proceeds of real estate owned
by testator at her death, and which property the executor was expressly
empowered to sell, which were to go to found the Memorial Home -- a view, the
correctness of which we are satisfied there can be no doubt.

   As to the authorities relied on by counsel for appellants and referred to
above, they have no application under the bequest in question.  Those cases hold
that where a testator by his will directs the sale of specific property after
his death and payment of the proceeds to designated legatees, if the testator
makes a sale of the specific property in his lifetime and the proceeds are held
intact, they pass to the legatees; that a sale by the testator will be held to
have been made simply to facilitate the creation of the fund designed for the
legatees. In all these cases it will be noted, however, that the property
directed to be sold or disposed of was specifically designated  -- either
particular lots or tracts of land or personal property consisting of mortgages,
bonds, or other described securities -- the proceeds of which the legatees were
given.  There the clear intention of the testator was to make the legatees --
either the wife, children, or near relatives of the testator -- the recipients
of the proceeds of specific property after his death.  It was held that the sale
by the testator in his lifetime of the specific property devised or bequeathed,
and retention by him intact of the proceeds was for the purpose of facilitating
his intention that the legatees should have the avails of the specific property;
that an intention to benefit the legatees is presumed to continue even after the
changes in the form of the property made by the testator in his lifetime, and
where, particularly, as in the cases cited, any other construction would have
defeated the intention of the testator to provide for the legatees.

   Here, however, there was no devise of the proceeds of the Broadway-Street
property as such, or a devise of any specific real property, or the proceeds, to
the trustees of the Home.  The power of sale to the executor applied only to
such property as the testatrix owned at her death.

   The bequest of the proceeds of her real estate to the trustees, it is true,
was a specific bequest, but it was in no particular a bequest of the proceeds of
the Broadway or any other specific property. On the contrary there was a
declared intention that the trustees should take only the proceeds of the real
property she owned at her death and upon which the power of sale given her
executor could alone operate.  Hence, as there was no specific bequest to them
of the proceeds of the Broadway property which she had sold in her lifetime, the
cases relied on can have no application.

   Appellants, however, insist that if their position, just discussed, is
untenable, still they are entitled to the proceeds of the Broadway property by
virtue of sections 1301 and 1303 of the Civil Code, applied to the provisions of
the will and to the contract for the sale of the property to Carr by the
testatrix before her death.

   The first section relied on (1301) provides: "An agreement made by a
testator, for the sale or transfer of property disposed of by will previously
made, does not revoke such disposal; but the property passes by the will,
subject to the same remedies on the testator's agreement, for a specific
performance  or otherwise against the devisees or legatees, as might be had
against the testator's successors, if the same had passed by succession."

   The other (1303) declares that: "A conveyance, settlement, or other act of a
testator, by which his interest in a thing previously disposed of by his will is
altered, but not wholly divested, is not a revocation; but the will passes the
property which would otherwise devolve by succession."

   But appellants are in no position to invoke these provisions of the code.

   While at common law the general rule is that a sale, or an executory contract
of sale of property devised is a revocation of the devise, and our code
provisions have modified the common-law rule as to an executory contract of
sale, still there is no disposition of property to appellants which could bring
them within the benefit of the modification of the common law doctrine.  While
the sections apply to either real or personal property which a testator has
disposed of by his will and subsequently contracts to sell, we are only
concerned with them here as far as appellants claim they apply to the Broadway
property.  But here there was no devise, specific or general, of the Broadway
property, or of any real property whatever, either to the trustees of the Home
or to the executor for their benefit.  The latter was given simply a naked power
of sale, not directed to any specific real property, but in terms operating
solely upon such real property as the testatrix owned at her death, and the
bequest to the trustees was only of the proceeds of such real estate as the
power of sale could operate upon.  On no possible theory can it be said that
either the power of sale or the bequest to the trustees of the proceeds of real
property was a devise of any real property or could have any application to real
property which the testatrix contracted to sell in her lifetime, as the power to
be exercised by the executor and the benefits accruing to the trustees relate by
the precise terms of the will to real estate which is owned by the testatrix at
her death.  And as neither the power of sale nor the bequest could apply to any
real estate except that which the testatrix  owned at her death, there is no
room for the claim that there was in the will any disposition in favor of the
trustees of any specific real property relative to which, as the testatrix had
entered into an executory contract of sale of it  during her lifetime, brought
the appellants -- trustees -- within the benefit of the sections of the code
which they rely on as entitling them to the proceeds of such sale.

   Nor can these sections be invoked by appellants on the theory that the
contract between the testatrix and Carr with respect to the sale and purchase of
the Broadway property was simply executory at the time of her death; that the
ownership of the property was in testatrix when she died and hence, as a portion
of her real property owned by her at her death, the trustees of the Home were
entitled to its proceeds.

   The contract of sale between Carr and testatrix was not executory merely at
her death, but in equitable contemplation, as far as ownership of the land in
Carr and the right of Mrs. Dwyer to the purchase price only are concerned, the
contract had become an executed one some time before her death.

   When a contract for sale of real property binding on the parties is executed,
an equitable conversion is worked; the purchaser of the land is deemed the
equitable owner thereof and the seller is considered the owner of the purchase
price. The equitable conversion thus deemed to exist from the time a valid
contract of sale is entered into may or may not be absolute.  Whether it is, or
not, will depend upon whether the terms of the contract of sale are subsequently
complied with.  If there is no default in that respect, but, on the contrary
(and dealing now with the contract involved here) the purchaser performs all the
conditions precedent which under the contract entitle him to a conveyance on a
given day, he will be deemed on that day to be the owner of the land and the
seller to be the owner of the purchase money.  The fact that the contracting
owner of the land refuses to perform his part of the agreement and make the
conveyance to which the purchaser is entitled on compliance with the contract,
cannot affect the status or rights of the parties as to the property.  The
purchaser having performed or offered to perform his covenants at the date when
the contract called for a conveyance to him, equity considers the property as
belonging to him as of that date, and the owner as simply holding the legal
title in trust for him.  To make a concrete application of the principle.  Mrs.
Dwyer contracted to sell the Broadway property and make a deed to Carr, if by
May 13, 1905, the latter should pay a certain sum in cash and execute notes and
a  mortgage for the balance of the purchase price. On the deed day -- May 13,
1905 -- Carr tendered payment as the contract required, and Mrs. Dwyer refused
to accept it and make the deed, and, as the record shows, not because she did
not want to sell the property, but because she wanted to get more money for it.
On her refusal, Carr brought an action for specific performance. The superior
court decided he was entitled to such performance as of May 13, 1905, and to a
deed as of that date, and as that carried with it the right to possession as of
that date, awarded him the rents and profits of the property therefrom, and
charged against him the taxes imposed on the property from that date.  This
decision was on appeal affirmed in all respects by this court ( Carr v. Howell,
154 Cal. 372, [97 Pac. 885]), and the only theory on which the reciprocal rights
of the parties as fixed by the trial court could be sustained, was that those
rights were to be measured as of the date when Carr was entitled to the deed;
the contract was to be deemed performed on the deed day, the purchaser being
entitled to the property as owner at that time, acquiring all rights as such,
and subject to all obligations proceeding from such ownership; that although the
refusal on the part of Mrs. Dwyer to transfer the title by actual conveyance
necessitated an action for specific performance to accomplish it, still, when
the decree was entered, as far as the title was concerned, the transfer thereof
was by relation as to the thirteenth day of May, 1905; that what Mrs. Dwyer
should have done on that day, in legal contemplation, was done, and the legal
title passed as of that date.  This being true, it necessarily follows that Mrs.
Dwyer had sold all her interest in the Broadway property on the thirteenth day
of May, 1905, and her only right was to the balance of the purchase price in
cash and the notes and mortgages; she had no interest in the Broadway property
after that date; that interest had, by the performance of the contract on his
part and under the doctrine of relation, completely vested in Carr.  The only
right which Mrs. Dwyer had under the sale was a right to the proceeds thereof
which were at her death a portion of her personal estate and fell into the
residuary clause of her will, and to which the respondents as her heirs at law
were entitled.

    These sections of our Civil Code upon which appellants rely were adopted
from the New York Code and Revised Statutes.   Our section 1301 corresponds with
section 569 of the New York Code and section 45 of the New York Revised Statutes
and our section 1303 to section 571 and section 47 of the New York Code and
Revised Statutes respectively, and, under the general rule, are assumed to have
been adopted here with the construction placed on them by the courts of New
York.

   In Roome, Adm. etc. v. Phillips, 27 N. Y. 357, the original plaintiff in the
action there contracted with defendant for the sale of certain real property in
the city of New York, payment by defendant of the purchase price  to be made on
a date specified and delivery of a deed to him by plaintiff vendor on that date.
The vendor, at the date fixed for consummation of the contract, attended at the
place agreed on to receive the purchase price and deliver the deed, but
defendant did not appear.  The vendor commenced an action for specific
performance of the contract and shortly afterwards died, leaving a will made
before the contract for the sale of the property was entered into, whereby he
directed his executor to sell off all his real property and pay over the
proceeds to his mother and aunt in certain proportions.  The administrator with
the will annexed proceeded with the suit.  One of the questions arising in the
case was whether a naked power of sale given to an executor to sell real estate
was applicable to land, for the sale of which testator had made a contract and
tendered performance in his lifetime. It was held that it was not, the court
saying: --

   "But there is a further difficulty in this case.  The power of sale conferred
upon the executor by the will, had become inapplicable to this land, by the sale
of it which the testator had made in his lifetime. The will directs the executor
to sell and convey all the testator's real estate, either at public or private
sale, upon such terms as he may think proper and most beneficial to his estate.
But the manner of sale and the terms had all been conclusively determined by the
testator before the will took effect by his death, and a sale had actually been
made; and the power does not look to the conveyance of the naked title to lands,
of the beneficial interest in which the testator has divested himself in his
lifetime. The sale was not a revocation of that part of the will, express or
implied, so as to require an attested instrument to satisfy the statute, nor was
the case within the provision which declares  that a contract by the testator
for the sale of land devised shall not revoke the devise incidentally made (12
R. S., p. 64, sec. 45); for the land in this case was not devised, though the
proceeds of the sale were.  Simply, the duty which the executor was appointed to
perform respecting this land, could not be performed by him, because, at the
death of the testator, there was no such land to be sold."

   In Lewis v. Smith, 9 N. Y. 502, [51 Am. Dec. 706], an action was brought by
the widow of testator to recover dower in a tract of land which testator had
contracted to sell in his lifetime. The power of sale contained in the will
authorized the executor to sell all the testator's "fast estate." This excerpt
from the syllabi embraces the gist of the opinion of the court:

   "A power of sale contained in a will authorizing executors to sell all the
testator's 'fast estate' does not embrace lands which have been sold by contract
by the testator, the purchase money being unpaid, and the title still remaining
in him.  The interest remaining in the vendor in such a case is a right to the
money due on the contract, which is not real, but personal estate."

   (See, also, McNaughton v. McNaughton, 34 N. Y. 201, and Williams v. Haddock,
145 N. Y. 144, [39 N. E. 825].)

   While additional authorities from other states might be cited, we refer to
the New York cases only, on account of the similarity of our code provisions and
the construction placed on them prior to their adoption here by the New York
courts; particularly in the earlier decisions quoted from.

   There is nothing in Mott v. Ackerman, 92 N. Y. 539, cited by appellants,
which in any respect disturbs the rule announced in Roome v. Phillips and in
Lewis v. Smith.

   Nor do the several New York cases relied on by appellant support their
position.  These New York cases are Knight v. Weatherwax, 7 Paige, 182; McCarthy
v. Meyers, 5 Hun, 83; Hopkins v. Gourand, 23 N. Y. Supp. 189, 3 Misc. 619;
Wagstaff v. Marcy, 25 Misc. 121, 54 N. Y. Supp. 102; Nutzhorn v. Sittig, [70 N.
Y. Supp. 287, 34 Misc. 486]; Van Tassel v. Burger , 119 App. Div. 509, 104 N. Y.
Supp. 273.

   These cases all involve the application of these similar New York sections to
devises made by testators and the effect thereon of contracts for the sale of
the devised property subsisting  at their death.  In two essential and vital
particulars, however, these cases differ from the case at bar.  In each of them
-- save one where the testamentary disposition applied to the proceeds of a
specified mortgage -- there was a devise of specific real property, or the
testamentary disposition related to specific real property, and in each case the
contract for the sale of the property specifically devised was clearly executory
at the time of the death of the testator, because either the time fixed by the
contract for performance -- the deed day -- was subsequent to the death of
testator or had been postponed by mutual consent to a date which was subsequent
thereto.  Clearly, under such conditions and by virtue of the code provisions,
the property specifically devised passed to the specific beneficiaries, subject
to the rights of the vendee under the contract.  But neither of the conditions
which in the cases cited made the rule applicable,  exist in the case at bar.
Here there is no devise of any real property; only a naked power of sale is
given to the executor to sell such real property as the testatrix owned at her
death.

   The Broadway property could not fall under this general power of sale because
testatrix had become completely divested of her ownership therein under a
contract of sale which, in equitable contemplation, was fully executed a month
prior to her death.  The only right which Mrs. Dwyer then had relative to that
property was solely a right to the purchase price thereof which, as personal
property, fell into the residuum of her estate, and was properly distributed by
the superior court to the respondents, her heirs at law.

   We have examined other points made by appellants against the correctness of
the decree of distribution, but deem them neither tenable nor requiring
discussion.

   The portion of the decree of distribution appealed from is affirmed.


                              15 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           H. C. HAAS, Appellant, v. L. GREENWALD et al., Respondents

                                S. F. No. 10602

                          Supreme Court of California

          196 Cal. 236; 237 P. 38; 1925 Cal. LEXIS 308; 59 A.L.R. 1493


                                  May 29, 1925

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Rehearing denied.  All the Justices present concurred.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of the City and
County of San Francisco.  E. P. Shortall, Judge.

COUNSEL: Sullivan & Sullivan and Theo. J. Roche for Appellant.

William F. Humphrey, Lent & Humphrey and Robert Mack Light for Respondents.

JUDGES: In Bank. Richards, J.  Waste, J., Shenk, J., Seawell, J., Lawlor, J.,
Myers, C. J., and Lennon, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: RICHARDS

OPINION

     This appeal is by the plaintiff from a judgment entered upon an order
sustaining the defendants' demurrer to the plaintiff's amended complaint without
leave to amend.  The action was one commenced by the plaintiff on his own behalf
and also as the assignee of one A. M. Johnson, who prior thereto had assigned
and transferred to said plaintiff all of his right, title, and interest in the
claim and demand which formed the basis of said action.  The amended complaint,
after alleging the corporate character of The Santa Marina Company and its
ownership of the tract of land with reference to which the transaction occurred
out of which the claim and demand sued upon arose, and after also alleging the
corporate character of the  Hibernia Savings and Loan Society, connected with
said transaction, proceeds to allege that:

   "On and prior to the 14th day of November, 1921, the above-named defendant L.
Greenwald, was desirous of purchasing said real property hereinabove
particularly described, together with the improvements thereon, from said The
Santa Marina Company, a corporation, for the sum of $ 650,000.00 net to said The
Santa Marina Company, and in order to permit said purchase to be made by him to
negotiate a loan from said Hibernia Savings and Loan Society, a corporation, for
$ 450,000.00, the repayment of which loan should be secured by a first mortgage
upon said real property hereinabove described when so purchased by said
defendant L. Greenwald, $ 50,000.00 of which was to be repaid by said L.
Greenwald to said Hibernia Savings and Loan Society in sixty installments of $
833.33 per month, and the remaining $ 400,000.00 to be repaid on or before five
years from the date of such loan, said $ 450,000.00 to bear interest at the rate
of six per cent per annum until paid.  On or about the 14th day of November,
1921, the above named defendant L. Greenwald employed the above named plaintiff
H. C. Hass, A. M. Johnson and the defendant Walter W. Stevens, to negotiate on
his behalf with said The Santa Marina Company, a corporation, for and to effect
a sale by said The Santa Marina Company, a corporation, to said defendant L.
Greenwald, of said real property hereinabove described, together with the
improvements thereon for said sum of $ 650,000.00 net to said The Santa Marina
Company, a corporation, and to negotiate and procure from said Hibernia Savings
and Loan Society, a corporation, said loan of $ 450,000.00 bearing the interest
hereinabove set forth and payable in the manner hereinabove specified, the
repayment of which was to be secured by a first mortgage upon said real property
hereinabove described, and in  consideration of the services to be thereafter
rendered by said plaintiff and A. M. Johnson and said defendant Walter W.
Stevens in negotiating and effecting said sale of said real property to said
defendant L. Greenwald, for said sum aforesaid, and negotiating and procuring
said loan aforesaid, agreed that if said plaintiff and said A. M. Johnson and
said defendant Walter W. Stevens negotiated and effected said sale by said
corporation Santa Marina Company to said  defendant of said real property,
together with the improvements thereon, for said sum of $ 650,000.00 net to it
and negotiated and procured from said Hibernia Savings and Loan Society, a
corporation, said loan of $ 450,000.00 aforesaid, he would, when said services
were completed, and in consideration thereof, pay to said plaintiff and said A.
M. Johnson and said defendant Walter W. Stevens the sum of $ 20,000.00, or
execute and deliver to them his promissory note or notes for said sum of $
20,000.00.  Thereafter and prior to November 21, 1921, said plaintiff and said
A. M. Johnson and said defendant Walter W. Stevens, negotiated with said The
Santa Marina Company, a corporation, for the sale of said real property to said
L. Greenwald, and as a result of said negotiations prior to and on said November
21st, 1921, said The Santa Marina Company, a corporation, was willing and agreed
to sell said real property, together with said improvements, to said defendant
L. Greenwald for said sum of $ 650,000.00 net to it.  On said 21st day of
November, 1921, said The Santa Marina Company, a corporation, was able,  ready
and willing to sell to said defendant L. Greenwald said real property, together
with said improvements, for said sum of $ 650,000.00 net to it.  Prior to said
21st day of November, 1921, said plaintiff and said A. M. Johnson and said
defendant Walter W. Stevens negotiated with said Hibernia Savings and Loan
Society, a corporation, for said loan of said $ 450,000.00 upon said terms
aforesaid, and prior to said November 21, 1921, had arranged with said Hibernia
Savings and Loan Society for and had procured from it for said defendant L.
Greenwald said loan of $ 450,000.00, the repayment of which loan was to be
secured by a first mortgage upon said real property hereinabove described,
together with the improvements thereon, when so purchased by said defendant L.
Greenwald, $ 50,000.00 of which was to be repaid by said defendant L. Greenwald
to said Hibernia Savings and Loan Society in sixty installments of $ 833.33 per
month, and the remaining $ 400,000.00 to be repaid on or before five years from
the date of such loan, said $ 450,000.00 to bear interest at the rate of six per
cent per annum until paid.  Said loan so negotiated and procured by said
plaintiff and said A. M. Johnson and said defendant Walter W. Stevens and the
terms thereof were acceptable to and accepted by said  defendant L. Greenwald.
Thereafter and on said 21st day of November, 1921, said defendant L. Greenwald
repudiated said agreement so entered into by him with said plaintiff and said A.
M. Johnson and said defendant Walter W. Stevens as aforesaid, and refused to
proceed further with the purchase of said real property or to accept said loan,
and without any cause or justification therefor notified said plaintiff and said
A. M. Johnson and said defendant Walter W. Stevens that he would refuse to
further proceed with the purchase of or purchase said real property or any part
thereof, and would refuse to accept or consummate said loan aforesaid, and
repudiate his said agreement with said plaintiff and said A. M. Johnson and said
Walter W. Stevens.  Ever since said 21st day of November, 1921, said defendant
L. Greenwald has refused to purchase said real property and said improvements or
any part thereof and has refused to accept or consummate said loan aforesaid.
Said defendant L. Greenwald has refused and still refuses to pay to said
plaintiff and said A. M. Johnson and said defendant Walter W. Stevens, or any of
them, said sum of $ 20,000.00, or to make, execute or deliver to them, or any of
them, his said note or notes for the sum of $ 20,000.00 or any other sum.  The
said defendant Walter W. Stevens is made a defendant in this action for the
reason that he refuses to join in said action with said plaintiff.  On the 8th
day of December, 1921, said A. M. Johnson assigned, transferred and set over to
the above named plaintiff, H. C. Haas, all of his right, title and interest in
said claim against said defendant L. Greenwald, arising out of the rendition of
said services and the making of said agreement by said defendant L. Greenwald as
aforesaid, and all moneys due thereon, At all of the times herein mentioned the
above named plaintiff, H. C. Haas, and the above named defendant Walter W.
Stevens were and are real estate brokers, and each of them was and is a real
estate broker engaged in the business of buying and selling real property in the
City and County of San Francisco and elsewhere in the State of California, and
at all of the times herein mentioned were and are, and each of them was and is
duly and regularly licensed to engage in said business under the laws  of the
State of California.  At all of the times herein mentioned said A. M. Johnson
was, he ever since has been, and still is an attorney at law, duly licensed to
practice, and practicing his profession as such in the State of California, all
of which facts at all of said times were and still are known to defendants.
Said A. M. Johnson is not now, and never has been, engaged in business as a real
estate broker, and never has been and is not now a real estate broker or engaged
in the business of buying, selling, exchanging or handling real property, all of
which facts at all of said times were and still are known to defendants."

   We have set forth the averments of said amended complaint thus literally in
order that exact application may be made of the provisions of the statute under
the inhibitions of which it was successfully contended in the trial court that
said complaint failed to state a cause of action.  The gravamen of this
contention centers upon A. M. Johnson, who as the amended complaint alleges was
one of the three persons who jointly engaged in the negotiations upon which the
claim sued upon is predicated and who, it is contended, comes within the
inhibitions of said statute with regard to his participation in such
negotiations. The statute in question is known as the "Real Estate Brokers' Act"
(Stats. 1919, p. 1252).  By section 1 of said act it is provided:

    "Section 1: It shall be unlawful for any person, copartnership or
corporation to engage in the business, or act in the capacity of a real estate
broker, or a real estate salesman within this state without first obtaining a
license therefor."

   Section 2 of said act reads as follows:

   "A real estate broker within the meaning of this act is a person,
copartnership or corporation who, for a compensation, sells, or offers for sale,
buys, or offers to buy, or negotiates the purchase or sale or exchange of real
estate, or who for compensation, negotiates loans on real estate, leases, or
offers to lease, rents, or places for rent, or collects rent from real estate,
or improvements thereon, for others as a whole or partial vocation. A real
estate salesman within the meaning of this act is one who for a compensation is
employed by a licensed broker to sell, or offer for sale, or to buy, or to offer
to buy, or to negotiate  the purchase or sale or exchange of real estate,  or to
negotiate a loan on real estate, or to lease, or offer to lease, rent, or place
for rent, any real estate, or improvements thereon, as a whole or partial
vocation. The provisions of this act shall not apply to any person,
copartnership or corporation who shall perform any of the acts aforesaid with
reference to property owned by such person, copartnership or corporation; nor
shall the provisions of this act apply to persons holding a duly executed power
of attorney from the owner, nor shall this act be construed to include in any
way the services rendered by an attorney at law in performing his duties as such
attorney at law; nor shall it be held to include any receiver, trustee in
bankruptcy or any person acting under order of any court, nor to a trustee
selling under a deed of trust.  One act, for a compensation, of buying or
selling real estate of or for another, or offering for another to buy or sell or
exchange real estate, or negotiating a loan on or leasing or renting or placing
for rent real estate, or collecting rent therefrom shall constitute the person,
copartnership or corporation making such offer, sale or purchase, exchange or
lease, or negotiating said loan, or so renting or placing for rent or collecting
said rent a real estate broker within the meaning of this act."

   By section 20 of said act it is provided:

   "No person, copartnership or corporation engaged in the business of acting in
the capacity of a real estate broker or a real estate salesman within this
state, shall bring or maintain any action in the courts of this state for the
collection of compensation for the performance of any of the acts mentioned in
section two thereof without alleging and proving that such person, copartnership
or corporation was a duly licensed real estate broker or real estate salesman at
the time the alleged cause of action arose."

     Under the provisions of the section last above quoted it would seem to be
clear that if A. M. Johnson, as one of the three persons who are alleged in said
amended complaint to have been combined in conducting the negotiations for and
on behalf of the defendant Greenwald, out of which both the plaintiff's original
and assigned claim and demand arose, comes as to the acts done by him within the
definitions and inhibitions embraced in the earlier sections  of the act above
quoted, this action, in so far at least as it involved his assigned claim, must
fail.  The said A. M. Johnson is alleged in said amended complaint to be, and
during all of the time covered by said negotiations to have been, an attorney at
law.  By the terms of section 2 of said act the provisions thereof are not to
"be construed to include in any way the services rendered by an attorney at law
in performing his duties as such attorney at law." If the amended complaint
herein had alleged that any services rendered by said A. M. Johnson to the
defendant in the course of the negotiations which are fully detailed in said
complaint in his capacity as an attorney at law or in the performance of his
duties as such attorney at law, or had even alleged that said A. M. Johnson
during the course of said negotiations represented either said Greenwald or any
other person who was a party to such negotiations as or in the capacity of an
attorney at law, a different question would be presented.  But the amended
complaint herein is barren of any such allegation, and giving to such pleading
the most liberal construction permitted by section 452 of the Code of Civil
Procedure no intendment can be indulged in that the pleader has not stated his
case as strongly as it was possible so to do.  ( Nason v. Lingle, 143 Cal.
363-366 [77 Pac. 71]; California Nav. Co. v. Union etc. Co., 122 Cal. 641 [55
Pac. 591]; Glide v. Dwyer, 83 Cal. 477 [23 Pac. 706]; Hays v. Steiger, 76 Cal.
555 [18 Pac. 670].)

   The particular negotiations which the plaintiff and his two associates, A. M.
Johnson and Walter W. Stevens, are alleged to have conducted were twofold in
character.  First, a negotiation on behalf of the defendant Greenwald for the
purchase by the latter of certain real estate from The Santa Marina Company;
second, a negotiation on behalf of said Greenwald for a loan to him by the
Hibernia Savings and Loan Society of a sum of money as and for a large portion
of the purchase price of said property and to be secured by a mortgage thereon.
These twofold negotiations come expressly within the terms of the opening
clauses of section 2 of said act defining the doing of what acts shall
constitute a person, firm, or corporation "a real estate broker." It could not
be, and in fact is not, questioned, but, on the other hand, expressly affirmed,
that the plaintiff, Haas, was, as to his part in said negotiations,  acting as a
real estate  broker and by virtue of his license issued under the terms of said
act so to do.  The same is true as to his associate, W. W. Stevens, who held and
was acting under and by virtue of a similar license. If the part which these two
associates took in the conduct of such negotiations  was thus taken in the
capacity of real estate brokers, and not otherwise, it is difficult to perceive
why the precisely identical part which A. M. Johnson, united with his said two
associates in undertaking in relation to these negotiations, was not also
undertaken in the capacity of a real estate broker and not otherwise,
notwithstanding he was also an attorney at law, especially in view of the fact
that the amended complaint is barren of any averment that his said part therein
was undertaken or performed in his capacity as an attorney at law.  It would
seem to follow irresistibly that in the equal part which A. M. Johnson took with
his associates in the conduct of these negotiations he was acting in the
capacity of a real estate broker and not of an attorney at law.

     It is, however, contended by the appellant herein that conceding that A. M.
Johnson did act in the part he took in said negotiations in the capacity of a
real estate broker, his action in so doing was only in a single though twofold
transaction and not in a course of business as a real estate broker and hence
that the inhibitive provisions of said act do not apply to him.  This argument,
with the authorities which are cited in support of it, might have some cogency
but for the express and unmistakable terms of the statute to the contrary.  The
language of the concluding clause of section 2 of the act is as follows: "One
act, for a compensation, of buying or selling real estate of or for another, or
offering for another to buy or sell or exchange real estate, or negotiating a
loan on or leasing or renting or placing for rent real estate, or collecting
rent therefrom shall constitute the person, copartnership or corporation making
such offer, sale or purchase, exchange or lease, or negotiating said loan, or so
renting or placing for rent or collecting said rent a real estate broker within
the meaning of this act." The particularity with which this clause in said act
is phrased leaves no room for any other interpretation than that which its plain
terms import and which are not rendered uncertain by any other phrase or clause
which said section of said act or which act as a whole contains.  The
authorities cited in support of the appellant's position in this regard do not
sustain it, for the reason, as is well illustrated by the case of Miller v.
Stevens, 224 Mich. 626 [195 N. W. 481], mainly relied upon by appellant, that
the statute under review in said decision omitted this very provision which our
statute contains, rendering a single act of the character defined, for a
compensation, sufficient to constitute the person performing it a real estate
broker.   The appellant discusses this phase of the case chiefly under his next
contention, which is that the act in so far as it seeks to prohibit one
individual from employing another to purchase, sell, or negotiate the sale of
property or to secure a loan thereon or to handle any single transaction in
regard to such property is an unconstitutional exercise of power on the part of
the legislature.  In making this contention the appellant concedes that this
court in the case of Riley v. Chambers, 181 Cal. 591 [8 A. L. R. 418, 185 Pac.
855], upheld the general features of the Real Estate Brokers Act in so far as
said act undertakes to regulate the business or vocation of handling real estate
transactions and to that extent determined the constitutionality of the act.  An
examination of that case, however, shows that this court went much further than
the appellant's concession, since in its statement of the contents of said act
this court took note of the language therein providing "that a single act of
selling, etc., shall make a person a real estate broker." It must be concluded,
therefore, that in its discussion of the purposes and policy of said act and in
sustaining its constitutionality as a whole this court had in mind this
particular feature thereof and approved it in approving the act as a whole.
But, aside from this reasoning as to what has already been decided, we are of
the opinion that the act in designating the several particular acts mentioned in
the concluding clause of section 2 of said act as within its inhibitions,
violated no constitutional right of the parties to the transactions involved
herein or any of them in so far as the principle of freedom of contract is
concerned.  It is to be noted that in the preceding clauses of section 2 of said
act the right of two or more persons to engage in doing any of the acts
enumerated in said section as constituting one or more of said persons "a real
estate broker" is perfectly  preserved by the provision therein that: "The
provisions of this act shall not apply to any person, copartnership or
corporation who shall perform any of the acts aforesaid with reference to
property owned by such person, copartnership or corporation; nor shall the
provisions of this act apply to persons holding a duly executed power of
attorney from the owner." It is only when persons, firms, or corporations are
acting in a purely representative capacity in undertaking to conduct
negotiations of the kind specified in said act and when such persons or entities
have not come into that particular relationship to the owner of the property
involved in such negotiations as finds expression in a power of attorney that
the safeguards of the statute are sought to be thrown around the principals to
the transaction in question through the requirement that the agent or agents
undertaking to conduct or consummate the same shall have that approved character
which the possession of the required license assures.  No particular or
convincing reason can be urged why the participants in a single negotiation  of
the sort defined in said act should not be subjected to the same supervision as
those engaging in a series of similar transactions, since at the last analysis
every transaction of the kind coming within the purview of the statute is an
isolated transaction, whether conducted singly or as a series of transactions
carried on in the course of a business or vocation, and since the lawmakers have
seen fit to embrace the participants in each single transaction within the
purview, requirements, and inhibitions of the act in question, we can see no
adequate reason for holding that in so doing they have violated the
constitutional right of freedom to contract any more than they would have done
by confining the scope of the statute to those carrying on such transactions in
the course of a business or vocation. The cases upon which the appellant relies
are as applicable to the one as to the other situation and are sufficiently
answered, we think, by the comprehensive treatment of the subject in the case of
Riley v. Chambers, supra.

     The only remaining question involved in this case is that for the first
time suggested upon this appeal, viz., that conceding the contract for the
services in question to have been unenforceable on behalf of A. M. Johnson for
the foregoing reasons it was valid as to the plaintiff and  his associate
Stevens, since each of the two persons held a real estate broker's license. The
difficulty with this contention is that the plaintiff herein has in the single
count in his amended complaint set forth the contract for services upon which he
seeks to recover both on his own behalf and on that of his assignor, A. M.
Johnson, as one in the execution of which he and his said associates were
jointly enlisted and in which the services of all made possible the recovery of
each.  This constituted the consideration for the agreement.  If any part
thereof was unlawful the entire contract was void ( Civ. Code, sec. 1608).  The
portion of said agreement which related to the employment and service of A. M.
Johnson was, as we have seen, unlawful because in violation of an express
provision of law ( Civ. Code, sec. 1667).  In commenting upon these sections of
the Civil Code this court, in the case of Teachout v. Bogy, 175 Cal. 481, 486
[166 Pac. 319, 321], aptly quoted from the Encyclopedia of Law and Procedure the
following words: "If any part of a single consideration for one or more promises
be illegal, or if there are several considerations for one promise some of which
are legal and others illegal the promise is wholly void as it is impossible to
say which part or which one of the considerations induced the promise." (9 Cyc.
566.) We conclude from the foregoing considerations that the agreement for the
joint and equal services of Haas, Johnson, and Stevens in the capacity of real
estate brokers being unenforceable as to Johnson under the terms of the Real
Estate Brokers Act, the entire agreement was void, and hence that the trial
court was not in error in sustaining the demurrer to the amended complaint and
in its judgment in favor of the defendant Greenwald based upon said order.

   The judgment is affirmed.


                              16 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          F. J. BUCKLEY, Appellant, v. WYNNE A. SAVAGE, as Real Estate
                         Commissioner, etc., Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 24278

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division One

          184 Cal. App. 2d 18; 7 Cal. Rptr. 328; 1960 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      1846


                                August 22, 1960

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied September 12,
1960, and Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court was Denied
October 19, 1960.  White, J., did not Participate Therein.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  Ellsworth Meyer, Judge.

   Proceeding in mandamus to compel the Real Estate Commissioner to desist from
any action on a decision and order revoking the license of a real estate broker,
to revoke the order of revocation and to reinstate petitioner as a real estate
broker.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Brokers--Licenses--Suspension or Revocation.  --The misconduct referred to
in Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10176, enumerating the grounds for suspension or
revocation of a real estate broker's license, must arise in connection with the
licensee's performance or attempt to perform any of the acts within the scope of
chapter 3 of the Real Estate Act; the misconduct of the person involved must be
connected with his activity as a broker.

(2) Id.--Licenses--Suspension or Revocation.  --Actions of a real estate broker
in deciding to buy property for himself while acting as broker for the seller,
using a third party as a nominee to take title, having such third party deed the
property to the broker's wife (using her maiden name), having such wife deed it
to a corporation wholly owned by the broker and his wife, and failing to
disclose to the seller what he was doing constituted misconduct for which it was
proper to revoke the broker's license.

(3) Id.--Duties--Good Faith.  --The law imposes on a real estate agent the same
obligation of undivided service and loyalty that it imposes on a trustee in
favor of his beneficiary, and violation of this trust subjects the agent to the
same punitory consequences provided for a disloyal or recreant trustee.

(4) Id.--Licenses--Suspension or Revocation.  --Failure to disclose that a real
estate agent is purchasing property is ground for suspension or revocation of
the agent's license.

(5) Id. -- Licenses -- Suspension or Revocation.  -- A real estate broker guilty
of misconduct in his dealings with the seller of real property could not escape
revocation of his license on the ground that the agreement between him and the
seller was oral and he thus had no enforceable right to a commission, since the
oral agreement was not invalid because it was oral, but cast on the broker the
duties owed by an agent to his principal and those owed by a real estate
licensee, violation of which subjected the broker to discipline by the Real
Estate Commissioner.

(6) Administrative Law--Hearing--Presumption.  --Administrative proceedings are
to be liberally construed and the fact that certain action was taken or
recommendation made raises the presumption that the existence of the necessary
facts have been ascertained and found.

(7) Brokers--Duties--Good Faith.  --The mere fact that a person has two or more
agents on the sale of a parcel of property does not absolve any one agent of his
fiduciary duties.

(8) Id.--Licenses--Suspension or Revocation.  --Under Bus. & Prof. Code, §
10177, subd. (f), authorizing suspension or revocation of a real estate license
for acts or conduct that would have warranted denial of an application for a
license, the Real Estate Commissioner, after finding on substantial evidence
that a licensee was not truthful or honest, had jurisdiction to revoke his
license.

(9) Id.--Licenses--Suspension or Revocation.  --The fact that the seller of real
property suffered no detriment from the misconduct of a real estate broker
engaged to sell property did not operate to protect the broker from revocation
of his license for such misconduct.

(10) Administrative Law -- Procedure--Time Matters.  --Adoption by the Real
Estate Commissioner as his own of a proposed decision revoking a real estate
license on the same day on which the proposed decision was rendered was not
improper where there was no showing that the commissioner did not read the
transcript of the proceedings. In any event, an agency need not have read or
familiarized itself with the record when the proposed decision is adopted in its
entirety or in whole except for a reduction in penalty.

(11) Appeal--Objections--Necessity.  --The appellate court could not consider a
real estate broker's claim that amendment of the accusation against him on the
first day of a hearing to revoke his license and refusal to grant a continuance
deprived him of a fair hearing when such claim was not made in the trial court,
but was raised for the first time on appeal.

(12) Id.--Objections--Necessity.  --Issues not raised in the trial court will
not ordinarily be considered on appeal.

(13) Administrative Law--Procedure--Time Matters.  --Where an amendment to an
accusation against a real estate broker, made on the first day of a hearing to
revoke his license, introduced no facts that were not already alleged in the
accusation, denial of a continuance was proper.

COUNSEL: Wolver & Wolver, David H. Cannon and J. Marion Wright for Appellant.

Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, and Arthur C. DeGoede, Deputy Attorney General,
for Respondent.

JUDGES: Fourt, Acting P. J.  Lillie, J., and Scott (Robert H.), J. pro tem., *
concurred.

*   Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: FOURT

OPINION

     This is an appeal from a judgment denying the appellant's petition for a
writ of mandate.

   Appellant was a real estate broker. His license as such was revoked by the
respondent, and appellant thereafter filed his petition for a writ of mandate to
compel the respondent to desist from any action upon the decision and order
revoking the license of appellant as a real estate broker and to revoke the
order of revocation and to reinstate the appellant as a real estate broker. From
the judgment denying the petition, the appellant has appealed.

   In an accusation filed by respondent the appellant was charged with violating
the provisions of certain sections of the Business and Professions Code.  1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Section
10176, Business and Professions Code, provides in part:

   "The commissioner may, upon his own motion, and shall upon the verified
complaint in writing of any person, investigate the actions of any person
engaged in the business or acting in the capacity of a real estate licensee
within this State, and he may temporarily suspend or permanently revoke a real
estate license at any time where the licensee while a real estate licensee, in
performing or attempting to perform any of the acts within the scope of this
chapter has been guilty of any of the following:

   "(a) Making any substantial misrepresentation.

   "(b) Making any false promises of a character likely to influence, persuade
or induce.

   "(c) . . . .

   "(d) Acting for more than one party in a transaction without the knowledge or
consent of all parties thereto.

   "(e) . . . .

   "(f) . . . .

   "(g) The claiming or taking by a licensee of any secret or undisclosed amount
of compensation, commission or profit or the failure of a licensee to reveal to
the employer of such licensee the full amount of such licensee's compensation,
commission or profit under any agreement authorizing or employing such licensee
to do any acts for which a license is required under this chapter for
compensation or commission prior to or coincident with the signing of an
agreement evidencing the meeting of the minds of the contracting parties,
regardless of the form of such agreement, whether evidenced by documents in an
escrow or by any other or different procedure.

   "(h) . . . .

   "(i) Any other conduct, whether of the same or a different character than
specified in this section, which constitutes fraud or dishonest dealing."

    Section 10177 of the Business and Professions Code provides in part:

   "The commissioner may suspend or revoke the license of any real estate
licensee, or may deny the issuance of a license to an applicant, who has done
any of the following:

   "(a) . . . .

   "(b) . . . .

   "(c) . . . .

   "(d) Willfully disregarded or violated any of the provisions of the Real
Estate Law or of Chapter 1 of Part 2 or of the Rules and Regulations of the
commissioner for the administration and enforcement of the Real Estate Law and
Chapter 1 of Part 2.

   "(e) . . . .

   "(f) Acted or conducted himself in a manner which would have warranted the
denial of his application for a real estate license.

   "(g) Demonstrated negligence or incompetence in performing any act for which
he is required to hold a license.

   ". . . ."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    (1) 10176, subdivision (a) -- Making substantial misrepresentations;  (2)
10176, subdivision (d) -- Acting for more than one party in a transaction
without the knowledge or consent of all parties thereto; (3)  10176, subdivision
(g) -- Taking of a secret or undisclosed amount of compensation, commission or
profit; (4) 10176, subdivision (i) -- Conducting himself in a manner which
constitutes fraud or dishonest dealings; (5) 10177, subdivision (d) -- Willfully
disregarding provisions of the Real Estate Law and rules and regulations of the
Real Estate Commissioner; (6) 10177, subdivision (f) -- Conducting himself in a
manner which would have warranted the denial of an application for a real estate
license; and (7) 10177, subdivision (g) -- Demonstrating negligence, or
incompetence in performing an act for which he is required to hold a license.

   The accusation came about from a transaction whereby Buckley used a "dummy,"
Germaine S. Chambreau, to purchase certain property from Margaret F. Slusher.

   A resume of some of the facts as developed in the administrative hearing is
as follows:

   In March, 1955, Buckley observed that the Slusher property, which was located
around the corner from his real estate office, was vacant.  He contacted Mrs.
Slusher and obtained a listing to sell the place.  He represented that he had
been a realtor on Wilshire Boulevard for many years and that he had many
inquiries about the property.  He further stated that he had one client who was
interested because the property was large and had six bedrooms.  Mrs. Slusher
stated that she had not  thought particularly of selling the property but that
she would and that she had been offered $ 35,000 for it some five years ago and
that she would sell it for that figure, including a 5 per cent commission.
Buckley stated that he could secure $ 35,000 to $ 37,500 for it and that the
commission would be five per cent.  Mrs. Slusher would not give a written
exclusive listing but she did give an oral exclusive listing for 60 days while
certain painting and renovating work was being done in and on the property.
Buckley stated that he would ask $ 37,500 in an attempt to get $ 35,000 and he
received a key to the property from Mrs. Slusher at that time.

   In a letter on his stationery under date of March 17, 1955, to Mrs. Slusher,
Buckley stated in part:

   "May I not also thank you for letting us have the exclusive agency on your
property at 674 South Crenshaw for $ 35,000 with $ 10,000, or more, down
payment, and the balance, if any, payable 1% per month including interest at 6%,
until paid.

   ". . .  I am confident we will be successful in selling it for you.  In order
to obtain $ 35,000, including our commission, I have quoted it at $ 37,500
because frequently they offer less than the amount of the asking price.  If
perchance, we received more than $ 35,000 you are assured our commission would
be only 5% and you would receive the benefit of the excess, if any.

   ". . . .

   "I did want you to know that I have been doing some work on your properties,
although I took some time out today, St. Patrick's Day, to meet the Irish
Ambassador, and expect to see him again at the California Club tonight."

   Buckley told his office employees that he was trying to sell the place and he
showed the premises to several prospective buyers. When the painters were about
to finish their work at which time about 60 days had elapsed from the date of
the exclusive listing, Buckley and Mrs. Slusher met at her home and Buckley
stated that he knew he could sell the place but that it had been difficult to
show it while the workmen were present and working.  Buckley asked for and
received an indefinite extension of  time in which to sell the property.  He
continued his efforts to sell the place after the workmen had left.  Buckley
then went East for two or three weeks in May, 1955 and after his return to
California in June he showed the place to some prospective buyers and also began
to think of buying the property for himself.

   About July 1, 1955, Buckley decided to buy the property  for himself and
contacted a widow named Germaine S. Chambreau, whom he had known for some years.
Mrs. Chambreau signed a letter to Buckley which reads as follows:

   "In offering to purchase the property at 674 S. Crenshaw, Los Angeles, or any
other property, it is not for my account but for the account of E. Haiss, whom
(sic) is advancing all of the money required.

   "I have no present or future interest in the property and if I should acquire
title I will convey it to any person designated by E. Haiss.

   "Of course it is understood that I am to be held free and harmless from all
expense and liability in connection with the transaction.

   Very truly yours,

    /S/ G. S. Chambreau

   G. S. Chambrau [sic]

   "I agree to hold you free and

   harmless from all expense and

   liability in connection with the

   transaction.

   /S/ F. J. Buckley

F. J. Buckley"

   About August 1, 1955, Mrs. Slusher went to Buckley's office to get the key to
her property as she had forgotten to bring her own key.  A lady and a salesman
at the office of Buckley told her that the Slusher property was not listed with
them.  The key to the property could not be found at that time.  However, later
the lady came by the Slusher property and brought the key with her, stating that
Buckley had several keys and that Mrs. Slusher might keep the one which was then
given to her.  Later that same day Mrs. Slusher called Buckley on the telephone
and told him the property was not listed at his office, that the house had been
broken into and that if the property was not sold within the next week she would
have to rent it.  Buckley told her that the property would be sold in a week or
two and that a man who was out of the city just then was trying to raise money
with which to buy the property.

   Buckley told Mrs. Chambreau that he had come to the end of the time for the
sale of the property and that he should produce an offer with which to get an
extension.  On August 9, 1955, Mrs. Chambreau signed what she was told was an
offer to buy the property.  In fact what Mrs. Chambreau signed on August 9 was a
"Deposit Receipt" which showed that $ 1,000 had been received from her as a
deposit on the purchase price of $ 33,000 for the property, the balance to be
paid as follows: $ 9,000 in cash in escrow upon demand when title was ready to
pass and $ 23,000 by the execution of a note secured by a deed of trust on the
property payable at the rate of $ 200 per month.  On August 9, the day before an
escrow was opened, Buckley told Mrs. Slusher that he had an offer of $ 33,000
cash on her property from a gentleman whom he did not name and read to her a
check in the amount of $ 1,000 payable to F. J. Buckley and Company, as a
deposit. Buckley answered Mrs. Slusher's inquiry about why the check was made in
favor of Buckley and Company by saying that such was frequently done.  Mrs.
Slusher agreed to take $ 33,000 instead of the $ 35,000 or $ 37,500 theretofore
spoken of.  At Buckley's request the escrow was to be at the Wilshire Escrow
Company rather than with the Title Insurance and Trust Company which Mrs.
Slusher preferred.

   On the same day Buckley dictated certain escrow instructions to an escrow
officer at the Wilshire Escrow Company.  These instructions called for a sales
price of $ 31,350, payable $ 8,350 cash and $ 23,000 by a note payable $ 200 per
month and secured by a deed of trust on the property.  At Buckley's request Mrs.
Chambreau signed  the escrow instructions without knowing that they were
instruments for the purchase of property by her.  She had no intention of
purchasing anything.  She also signed a note and deed of trust in the
transaction without any intent to perform any of the obligations and she never
gave any money to Buckley nor did she place any money in the escrow for the
purchase of the property.  Buckley told Mrs. Chambreau that all of the last
mentioned documents referred to the offer.  She asked to read the instruments
but was told by Buckley that she would not understand them and to trust him.

   On August 10, 1955, Mrs. Slusher and Buckley met at the escrow office and
signed the instruments.  Certain changes were then made.  The instruments in
effect provided that Buckley was to be compensated by the purchaser for services
rendered and that Buckley was not acting as the agent for the seller. Mrs.
Slusher did not receive a copy of the instruments.  She read them but did not
remember the contents as above set forth and she expressed surprise at the
absence of the buyer, Chambreau.  Mrs. Chambreau executed amendments  to the
escrow instruments at the request of Buckley wherein she authorized the escrow
company to accept instruments on behalf of G. S. Chambreau from F. J. Buckley.

   The deposit receipt and offer which recited on its face that the price of the
property was $ 33,000 and the acceptance thereof by Mrs. Slusher of "less $
1,650.00" was not deposited in the escrow. The receipt was prepared under the
direction of Buckley and the provision therein for a $ 1,650.00 commission to be
paid to Buckley was crossed out.  When the "less $ 1,650.00" was typed in does
not appear from the evidence.

   Mrs. Slusher executed a deed at the escrow office which did not contain the
phrase "a window" after the name G. S. Chambreau.

   After the escrow instructions were signed Buckley had Mrs. Chambreau sign a
deed conveying the property to "E. Haiss." Mrs. Chambreau did not know that by
such document she was deeding the property nor did she know E. Haiss.  E. Haiss
was the maiden name of Mrs. Buckley.  The escrow closed on September 1, 1955.
The Chambreau-Haiss deed was recorded on December 12, 1955, at which time the
property was then deeded to a corporation wholly owned by Mr. and Mrs. Buckley.

   At no time did Buckley advise Mrs. Slusher that he was no longer acting as
her agent.  At no time prior to the closing of the escrow did Buckley tell Mrs.
Slusher that he was buying the property for himself or for himself and his wife.
At no time did he tell Mrs. Slusher who "E. Haiss" was nor did he disclose to
her who G. S. Chambreau was, other than to refer repeatedly to the person as G.
S. Chambreau and saying that "he" was a gentleman in business.

   Further and additional facts with reference to the transaction may be found
in the report of the decision in the case of Slusher v. Buckley, 174 Cal.App.2d
324, 330 [344 P.2d 905], decided by this court.

   The Real Estate Commissioner, respondent, revoked the license of appellant,
jointly and severally, upon the grounds that he had made substantial
misrepresentations by failing to disclose that Mrs. Chambreau was not in fact a
bona fide purchaser but was a "dummy" or nominee of Buckley; by failing to
disclose that the $ 1,000 deposit was not from Mrs. Chambreau; or that the title
was to be taken in his wife's maiden name. Further, that he had acted for more
than one party in the transaction without the knowledge and consent  of all
parties thereto and that he acted by Mrs. Chambreau and Mrs. Buckley, under the
name of E. Haiss, without the knowledge and consent of Mrs. Slusher; that the
acts of Buckley constituted fraud or dishonest dealing; that he had conducted
himself in a manner which would have warranted the denial of a real estate
broker's license; that he was not truthful and therefore would have warranted
the denial of a license.

   In the trial court Buckley asserted that the commissioner was without
jurisdiction as he, Buckley, was acting as an individual  and not as a real
estate broker; that the findings of the commissioner were not supported by the
evidence and were not in conformity with the allegations in the accusation, and
that the commissioner did not find upon all of the material issues; that as he
was not acting as a broker, his conduct was not such as would have warranted the
denial of an application for a license; that the decision did not comply with
the requirements of section 11518 of the Government Code and that the
commissioner abused his discretion by making his decision on the same day as the
proposed decision of the hearing officer was made.

   The trial court held against the appellant.  Appellant asserts to this court
substantially the same contentions as heretofore mentioned.

     It seems clear that under section 10176 the misconduct referred to therein
must arise in connection with the licensee's "performing or attempting to
perform any of the acts within the scope of . . ." chapter 3 of the Real Estate
Act. In other words, the misconduct of the person involved must be connected
with his activity as a broker. ( Rattray v. Scudder, 28 Cal.2d 214, 225-226 [169
P.2d 371, 164 A.L.R. 1356].) A real estate broker was defined in sections 10131
and 10134 of the Business and Professions Code.  2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Section
10131:

   "A real estate broker within the meaning of this part is a person who, for a
compensation, sells or offers for sale, buys, or offers to buy, lists, or
solicits for prospective purchasers, or negotiates the purchase or sale or
exchange of real estate, or who, for compensation, negotiates loans on real
estate, leases, or offers to lease, or negotiates the sale, purchase, or
exchange of leases, rents, or places for rent, or collects rent from real estate
, or improvements thereon, for another or others."

   Section 10134:

   "One act, for a compensation of buying or selling real estate of or for
another, or offering for another to buy or sell or exchange real estate, or
negotiating the purchase or sale or exchange of, or listing or soliciting
prospective purchasers of real estate, or negotiating a loan on or leasing or
renting or placing for rent real estate, or collecting rent therefrom
constitutes the person making such offer, sale or purchase, exchange or lease,
or negotiating the loan, or so renting or placing for rent or collecting the
rent or listing or soliciting, a real estate broker or real estate salesman
within the meaning of this part."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     In this case Buckley offered the property for sale, listed, solicited for
prospective buyers and negotiated the sale of the property and he did these
things for a compensation, for he negotiated the "less $ 1,650.00" in the
transaction which just happens to equal 5 per cent of the sales price.  The
evidence shows that Buckley put up all of the money which was paid and there is
no difference in the end so far as the seller is concerned, from paying a 5 per
cent commission or in taking 5 per cent less for the property.  As the trial
court stated, "It would be novel for the law, because of the use of 'less'
instead of commission, to hold that petitioner [Buckley] was (1) not enriched to
that extent and (2) ceased to act as a broker and therefore was not amenable to
disciplinary action."

     Buckley decided to buy the property for himself while still acting as a
broker for Mrs. Slusher.  To do this he used Mrs. Chambreau, as a nominee, to
take title and thereafter had Mrs. Chambreau deed the property to his
(Buckley's) wife (using her maiden name) and then had the latter deed it to a
corporation wholly owned by Buckley and his wife.  Buckley did not disclose to
Mrs. Slusher what he was doing under the circumstances and the failure to advise
Mrs. Slusher constitutes misconduct because of which it was proper to revoke his
license.  As stated in Rattray v. Scudder, supra, 28 Cal.2d 214, 222-223:

   "'The law of California [imposes] on . . . the real estate agent the same
obligation of undivided service and loyalty that it imposes on a trustee in
favor of his beneficiary.  Violation of his trust is subject to the same
punitory consequences that  are provided for a disloyal or recreant trustee.  (
King v. Wise, 43 Cal. 628.)' ( Langford v. Thomas, 200 Cal. 192, 196 [252 P.
602].) Such an agent is charged with the duty of fullest disclosure of all
material facts concerning the transaction that might affect the principal's
decision.  [Citations.]"

     A failure to disclose that a real estate agent is purchasing property is
grounds for suspension or revocation of the real estate license of the agent.  (
Abell v. Watson, 155 Cal.App.2d 158 [317 P.2d 159]; Estrin v. Watson, 150
Cal.App.2d 107 [309 P.2d 506].)

     Buckley asserts that he was not acting as a broker  because he had no
enforceable right to a commission and therefore the Real Estate Commissioner
could not discipline him.  The trial judge in his memorandum of decision stated:

   "Petitioner appears to overlook the fact that although Civil Code section
1624 states that 'the following contracts are invalid, unless the same or some
note or memorandum thereof, is in writing and subscribed by the party to be
charged . . . ,' it is the rule that this statute of frauds applies to the
remedy only and not to the validity of the contract; that the contract is not
void but merely unenforceable ( Offeman v. Robertson-Cole Studios, 80 Cal.App. 1
[251 P. 830]; Warder v. Hutchinson, 69 Cal.App. 291 [231 P. 563]; Durbin v.
Hillman, 50 Cal.App. 377 [195 P. 274]; O'Brien v. O'Brien, 197 Cal. 577 [241 P.
861]). The same has been held as to a real estate broker's contract.  It was
held in Coulter v. Howard, 203 Cal. 17, 21 [262 P. 751]: 'We agree fully with
the language of Muir v. Kane, 55 Wash. 131 [104 P. 153, 26 L.R.A. N.S. 519, 19
Ann.Cas. 1180] as follows: "The moral obligation to pay for services rendered as
a broker in selling real estate under an oral contract, where the statute
requires such contract to be in writing, is just as binding as is the moral
obligation to pay a debt that has been barred by the statute of limitations . .
.  There is no moral delinquency that attaches to an oral contract to sell real
property as a broker. This service cannot be recovered for because the statute
says the promise must be in writing, not because it is illegal in itself.  It
was not intended by the statute to impute moral turpitude to such contracts.
The statute was intended to prevent frauds and perjuries . . ."' The foregoing
was again quoted with approval in Estate of Rule, 25 Cal.2d 1 [152 P.2d 1003,
155 A.L.R. 1319] and five other California appellate decisions were cited as
supporting it.

   "In other words, the oral agreement between Mrs. Slusher and petitioner was
not invalid.  It created the relationship of principal and agent and cast upon
petitioner the duties owed by an agent and those owed by a real estate licensee.
Petitioner, to subsequently collect a commission, did not have to obtain a
contract setting out all the terms of the agreement, but merely 'a note or
memorandum' ( Brewer v. Horst & Lachmund Co., 127 Cal. 643 [60 P. 418, 50 L.R.A.
240]; Calhoun v. Downs, 211 Cal. 766 [297 P. 548]; Moore v. Borgfeldt, 96
Cal.App. 306 [273 P. 1114]). Even a notation for his commission in subsequent
escrow instructions would be sufficient to enable him to collect ( Coulter v.
Howard,  supra) or a subsequent writing ( Estate of Rule, supra); for the
performance of obtaining a buyer would be sufficient consideration for the
agreement to pay.  Even '$ 22,000 net.  Brokers pay escrow fee' was held
sufficient for a reformation to provide for the broker's commission ( Hillman v.
Koch, 92 Cal.App.2d 163 [206 P.2d 434]). Hence, the absence of Mrs. Slusher's
signature bears on the enforceability of the portion of the agreement providing
for the payment of a commission.

   "Petitioner's argument also overlooks a keystone in the application of the
statute of frauds namely, that the subscription required is that 'by the party
to be charged' (Civ. Code, § 1624).  The foregoing term as used in Civil Code,
sections 1624, 1741 and the analogous language in sections 1971 and 1973 was
exhaustively discussed in Harper v. Goldschmidt, 156 Cal. 245 [104 P. 451, 134
Am.St.Rep. 124, 28 L.R.A.  N.S. 689],  wherein it was held (p. 249): 'Before the
statute of frauds, an oral agreement could be proved against either party.  The
statute of frauds in no way interfered or attempted to interfere with the
antecedent oral agreement, but, in effect, declared a rule of evidence that such
agreement could not be proved unless the essentials of it had been reduced to
writing and signed by the party to be charged.' As said in Steel v. Duntley, 115
Cal.App. 451 [1 P.2d 999]: 'The party to be charged is the only one who must
sign . . .  The statute of frauds does not require the signature of any party
other than the one to be charged.'

   "In the disciplinary proceeding respondent, petitioner herein, was the only
one of the two parties to the oral agreement to be charged therewith and he was
the one who set out and subscribed the terms of the oral agreement.

   "As so often declared, the statute of frauds is designed to prevent fraud,
not to shield it, whereas petitioner raises it in an endeavor to escape the
consequences of his acts.

   "Petitioner contends that under the holdings in Schomig v. Keiser, 189 Cal.
596 [209 P. 550], the commissioner cannot discipline him under section 10176 for
his dealings with Mrs. Slusher.  Whether the rule there announced under Statutes
1919, page 1256, section 12, the forerunner of section 10176, would be followed
today, after certain other decisions, is speculative, but petitioner does not
come within the rule there declared.  In that case it was held that the Real
Estate Commissioner could not revoke Schomig's license because the latter had
retained $ 114 which a person had overpaid  in monthly installments on a
contract.  The brief opinion stated the reason thus: 'there is no evidence that
Schomig was employed for a compensation to do the acts complained of or that the
acts themselves constituted a part of a contract for the sale of real estate.
The evidence shows that they were to be performed by Schomig without
compensation, and that in doing so he was not fulfilling a contract for the sale
of real estate but was merely collecting the proceeds of a contract already
made.'

   "The evidence herein is directly opposite to the statement of the record just
quoted.  The letter from petitioner to Mrs. Slusher and her testimony before the
hearing officer show conclusively that petitioner was performing his services
for the standard five per cent commission.  The record herein shows that even
though petitioner or his wife was the undisclosed buyer of the realty, a sum
equal to the five per cent commission was deducted.  The written offer over the
signature of his 'dummy' which petitioner submitted to Mrs. Slusher expressly
provided for a 'purchase price of Thirty three thousand Dollars ($ 33,000.00)'
made up of '$ 1,000.00 cash deposit herewith, . . . 9,000.00 additional cash
into Escrow upon demand . . . 23,000.00 by the execution of a note secured by a
first Trust Deed on this property . . . $ 33,000.00 TOTAL.'"

   Appellant also asserts in effect that the relationship of Buckley and Mrs.
Slusher must be determined solely from the instruments since there was no
ambiguity in the documents and no extrinsic evidence was offered thereon.  There
is no merit to such a contention.  The trial court very properly considered all
of the other evidence which clearly establishes Buckley's misconduct.

   Appellant also asserts that there was no finding by the trial court that he
was acting as a licensee.   Administrative proceedings are to be liberally
construed.  The fact that certain action was taken or a recommendation made
raises the presumption that the existence of the necessary facts have been
ascertained and found.  ( Bailey v. County of Los Angeles, 46 Cal.2d 132, 136
[293 P.2d 449]; Swars v. Council of the City of Vallejo, 33 Cal.2d 867, 872-873
[206 P.2d 355]; Rudolph v. Athletic Commission, 177 Cal.App.2d 1, 16, 17 [1
Cal.Rptr. 898].) Both the findings of respondent and the findings of the trial
court contain findings of the underlying facts which lead unmistakably to the
conclusion that Buckley was working for compensation.

     The trial court also concluded that the respondent did not abuse his
discretion thereby determining that the decision of the respondent was fully
supported by the findings and that the findings were supported by the weight of
the evidence.  (Code. Civ. Proc., § 1094.5.)

   Appellant claims that Mrs. Slusher listed the property with another broker
and therefore he must not have been her agent.  Mrs. Slusher denied having so
listed the property with another broker but even had she so listed the property
it would not necessarily benefit Buckley.   The mere fact that a person has two
or more agents on the sale of a parcel of property does not absolve any one
agent of his fiduciary duties.

     In any event, it is clear that the commissioner was acting within his
jurisdiction under the provisions of section 10177, subdivision (f), Business
and Professions Code.  Buckley was a licensee. All the commissioner had to
determine was whether Buckley had conducted himself in a manner which would have
warranted the denial of his application for a license. The respondent found on
substantial evidence that Buckley was not truthful or honest which in and of
itself is enough to deny an application for a license. As stated in the
respondent's trial brief:

   ". . .  From petitioner's conduct, it is also readily seen that petitioner
does not understand the obligations between principal and agent, the principles
of real estate practice and the canons of business ethics pertaining thereto,
another ground for the denial of an application for a license. (See Bus. & Prof.
Code, § 10153, subd. (c).) Or does not care to follow such obligations,
principles and canons.  Petitioner's emphasis on his theory that he was acting
as an individual and not as a broker has little bearing on the question of
jurisdiction to impose discipline under section 10177, subdivision (f).  For it
is well settled that this section allows disciplinary action against real estate
brokers for their conduct in other fields of endeavor.

   "See Karrell v. Watson, 116 Cal.App.2d 769, 775-776 [254 P.2d 651, 255 P.2d
464] (conviction of knowingly causing false certificates to be made to secure
veteran benefits);

   " Bohn v. Watson, 130 Cal.App.2d 24, 40 [278 P.2d 454]."

     Appellant also asserts that Mrs. Slusher suffered no detriment and
therefore he should not be disciplined.  One of the purposes of the Real Estate
Act is to insure, as far as possible, that real estate brokers and salesmen will
be honest,  truthful and of good reputation.  ( Riley v. Chambers, 181 Cal. 589,
593 [185 P. 855, 8 A.L.R. 418]. Bus. & Prof. Code, §§ 10150, 10152.) It was
appropriately stated in 11 Opinions Attorney General 108, 110:

   "A licensee who utters a substantial falsehood in connection with a real
estate transaction is not to be insulated from the consequences of his
dishonesty simply because the other party to the transaction suffers no
pecuniary loss.  Regardless of the lack of pecuniary damage occasioned by the
falsehood, the licensee has demonstrated a lack of integrity.  . . .

   "It is of no significance that conduct justifying disciplinary action against
the licensee might not justify an action for damages or rescission on the part
of the aggrieved person.  . . ." ( Marks v. Watson, 112 Cal.App.2d 196, 200 [245
P.2d 1121]; see also Slusher v. Buckley, supra, 174 Cal.App.2d 324, 330.)

     The next contention of appellant is that the commissioner acted improperly
in adopting the proposed decision as his own on the same day on which the former
was rendered.  There is nothing before us to indicate that the commissioner did
not read the transcript of the proceedings, even if such were required.  But, in
any event, when the proposed decision is adopted in its entirety or in whole
except for a reduction in penalty, the agency need not have read or familiarized
itself with the record.  ( Hohreiter v. Garrison, 81 Cal.App.2d 384, 393-399
[184 P.2d 323]; Cooper v.  State Board of Medical Examiners, 35 Cal.2d 242, 246
[217 P.2d 630, 18 A.L.R.2d 593]; National Automobile & Casualty Insurance Co. v.
Industrial Accident Commission, 34 Cal.2d 20, 30 [206 P.2d 841].)

   There is no evidence before this Court to the effect that the commissioner
"rubber stamped" the hearing officer's proposed decision. It is also apparent
that the trial court exercised an independent judgment upon the whole matter.

     Appellant's last contention is that the amendment of the accusation on the
first day of the hearing and the refusal to grant a continuance in the matter
deprived the appellant of a fair hearing.  This contention was not made to the
trial court.   Issues not raised in the trial court will not ordinarily be
considered on appeal.  ( Damiani v. Albert, 48 Cal.2d 15, 18 [306 P.2d 780];
Estate of Cunningham, 148 Cal.App.2d 8, 13 [305 P.2d 920]; King v. Tilden Park
Estates, 156 Cal.App.2d 824, 832 [320 P.2d 109].)

     The amendment in no way added new facts to the  existing ones, rather it
simply set forth that by his conduct Buckley violated section 10176, subdivision
(i) of the Business and Professions Code.  No facts were introduced which were
not already alleged in the accusation. Appellant had over two years within which
to prepare for the hearing and the denial of the continuance was reasonable and
proper.

   We entertain no doubt that the respondent's decision and the judgment of the
trial court should be upheld.  ( Mast v. State Board of Optometry, 139
Cal.App.2d 78, 91-93 [293 P.2d 148]; Genser v. State Personnel Board, 112
Cal.App.2d 77, 88-89 [245 P.2d 1090]; Nelson v. Department Alcoholic Beverage
Control, 166 Cal.App.2d 783, 788 [333 P.2d 771]; Rudolph v. Athletic Commission,
supra, 177 Cal.App.2d 1, 11, 12.)

   The judgment is affirmed.


                              17 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          ARCHIE BOOTH et al., Plaintiffs and Respondents, v. MILDRED
                 B. ROBINSON et al., Defendants and Appellants

                                  No. AO19473

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                 Division Five

            147 Cal. App. 3d 371; 195 Cal. Rptr. 130; 1983 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2198


                               September 26, 1983

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Santa Clara County, No. 417074, Homer B.
Thompson, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1) Appellate Review § 135--Review--Presumptions.  --A judgment or order of a
trial court is presumed correct on appeal. All intendments and presumptions are
indulged to support it on matters as to which the record is silent and error
must be affirmatively shown.

(2) Appellate Review § 140--Review--Presumptions--Findings.  --When findings are
waived or otherwise not specifically made it is presumed on appeal that the
trial court made such implied findings as will support the judgment.

(3a) (3b) Appellate Review § 152--Review--Questions of Law and Fact--Sufficiency
of Evidence--Consideration of Evidence.  --An appellate court must consider the
evidence in the light most favorable to the prevailing party, giving him every
reasonable inference and resolving conflicts in support of the judgment. The
appellate court looks only at the evidence to support the judgment and
disregards the contrary showing. The question is whether there is any
substantial evidence which will support the conclusion reached by the court
below.

(4) Appellate Review § 155--Review--Question of Law and Fact--Sufficiency of
Evidence--Consideration of Evidence--Inferences.  --Even when there is no
conflict in the evidence in support of a judgment, if the evidence is subject to
opposing inferences, it must, upon a review thereof, be regarded in the light
most favorable to the support of the judgment. When two or more inferences can
be reasonably deduced from the facts the reviewing court is without power to
substitute its deductions for those of the trial court.

(5) Brokers § 25--Duties and Liabilities of Brokers--Reimbursement From Real
Estate Fund--Construction of Statute.  --Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10471, permitting
a person who has recovered a final judgment against a real estate licensee on
the grounds of fraud, misrepresentation, deceit or conversion of trust funds
arising directly out of a transaction for which a license is required to secure
satisfaction of the judgment out of the Real Estate Fund, is a remedial statute.
It is intended to protect the public against loss resulting from
misrepresentation and a breach of fiduciary duty by real estate brokers who are
unable to respond to damage awards. It is to be given a liberal construction.

(6) Statutes § 27--Construction--Liberality--Remedial Statutes.  --Remedial
statutes are to be construed to promote their purposes and to protect persons
within their purview. Relief will be granted unless clearly forbidden by
statute. The statute will be construed when its meaning is doubtful so as to
suppress the mischief at which it is directed, to advance or extend the remedy
provided, and to bring within the scope of the law every case which comes
clearly within its spirit and policy.

(7) Brokers § 25--Duties and Liabilities of Brokers--Reimbursement From Real
Estate Fund--When Broker Assumes to Act as Broker.  --When a licensed real
estate broker defrauds a person in a transaction during the course of assuming
to act as a broker, the aggrieved person may, upon obtaining an unsatisfied
final judgment, recover from the Real Estate Fund (Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10471).
Accordingly, in a proceeding to recover from the Real Estate Fund after
plaintiffs obtained a final, unsatisfied judgment against a broker in a fraud
action, the trial court's implied finding that the broker "performed acts for
which a license was required" was supported by substantial evidence, where the
broker fraudulently induced plaintiffs to give her money on two separate
occasions for the alleged purpose of investing it in unspecified real estate
transactions. Although the first transaction could have been characterized as a
loan and the second transaction as a partnership, the trial court rejected any
such inferences. Reasonable inferences could be drawn from the evidence that the
broker assumed to act as a real estate broker in both transactions and was
therefore required to be licensed to engage in such activities pursuant to Bus.
& Prof. Code, §§ 10130 and 10131.

COUNSEL: John K. Van de Kamp, Attorney General, and Julian O. Standen, Deputy
Attorney General, for Defendants and Appellants.

Richard G. Maul and Varty & Maul for Plaintiffs and Respondents.

JUDGES: Opinion by Low, P. J., with King and Haning, JJ., concurring.

OPINION BY: LOW

OPINION

     We hold that when a licensed real estate broker defrauds a person in a
transaction during the course of assuming to act as a broker,  the aggrieved
person may, upon obtaining an unsatisfied final judgment, recover from the Real
Estate Fund.

   Mildred B. Robinson (Robinson), a then licensed real estate broker,
fraudulently solicited a total of $ 18,500 from Archie and Dorothea Booth in two
transactions.  The Commissioner of Real Estate (Commissioner) appeals from an
order directing payment out of the Real Estate Fund (Fund) pursuant to Business
and Professions Code section 10470 et seq. 1 We affirm.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   All
statutory references hereafter are to the Business and Professions Code.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Section 10471 provided: "When any aggrieved person obtains a final judgment
in any court of competent jurisdiction against any person or persons licensed
under this part, under grounds of fraud, misrepresentation, deceit, or
conversion of trust funds arising directly out of any transaction when the
judgment debtor was licensed and performed acts for which a license is required
under this part, and which cause of action occurred on or after July 1, 1964,
the aggrieved person may, upon the judgment becoming final, file a verified
application in the court in which the judgment was entered for an order
directing payment out of the separate account in the Real Estate Fund for
education, research, and recovery purposes.  . . ." 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   This
section was subsequently amended to designate the portion containing the above
language subdivision (a) and to add a subdivision (b), which is not relevant to
this appeal.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In January 1979 plaintiffs commenced a fraud action against Robinson seeking
damages in connection with the two transactions in question.  Robinson defaulted
in the action and on March 8, 1979, plaintiffs obtained a default judgment
against her for $ 17,780 plus interest and costs ($ 14,280 for a February 1978
transaction and $ 3,500 for a July 1978 transaction).  Having failed to obtain
satisfaction of any part of the judgment, plaintiffs filed an application on
December 7, 1979, under section 10471, for an order directing payment of their
losses out of the Fund.

   The Commissioner opposed the application pursuant to section 10473.  The
parties stipulated that plaintiffs met all requirements for recovery from the
Fund except the requirement of section 10471, that the application be based upon
a judgment which arose "directly out of any transaction when the judgment debtor
was licensed and performed acts for which a license is required under this part
[part I, Licensing of Persons, §§ 10000-10602]."

   At the hearing on the application, Mr. Booth was the only witness.  He
testified that he was 67 years old with a sixth grade education, and that his
wife was 69 and had finished high school.  They had known Robinson for several
years and knew that she was a licensed real estate broker. Shehad   sold a
duplex for them in 1974 and helped them find the next house they bought.  They
later listed that house for sale with her, but it did not sell during the
listing.  Subsequently, it was sold by another real estate company.

   Robinson's license was revoked effective March 19, 1980, by a decision of the
Department of Real Estate. The conduct giving rise to the revocation order
involved the same property as the July 1978 transaction with the Booths, but
involved different victims.  The court below took judicial notice of the
revocation decision.

   Robinson approached the Booths and told them that she would show them how to
save money by putting their money in real estate. Mr. Booth stated that "she was
going to put it in real estate for us," in "Allstate Real Estate," and that she
"told us what the percentage was, that you put $ 15,000.00 in and get a hundred
and fifty dollars every month." When asked if Robinson had said anything else
before she presented him with any documents and before he gave her any money,
Mr. Booth replied, "Well, this is what she said: If we let her handle the money
we wouldn't have to pay no taxes, it wouldn't cost us no taxes, we would get
this money clear, a hundred and fifty dollars per month, and at the end of three
years we could get this money down; if we wanted to we could let it go on
further."

   Thereafter, the Booths gave Robinson a cashier's check for $ 15,000 and they
and Robinson executed a document which provided as follows:

   "We, Archie L. Booth and Dorothea W. Booth, husband and wife, enter this
agreement with Mildred B. Robinson of M. B. Robinson & Co., a real estate
company for $ 15,000, fifteen thousand dollars, effective 14 February 1978, for
the period of three years ending 14 February 1981, at the rate of 1% per month
interest.

   "Said proceeds are to be invested in real estate properties, and Mildred B.
Robinson will be the responsible party in controlling the funds, paying the
monthly interest, and returning the proceeds upon due date.

   "Said monthly interest will become due on the first day of each month and
shall be considered delinquent after the fifteenth day of each month, at with [
sic] time a .1% (one-tenth percent) late charge of $ 15.00 will be due."

   A copy of the document and check were admitted into evidence and then the
following testimony took place:

   "Q: Did Mrs. Robinson tell you at all how these Allstate properties operated?

    A: Well, she did explain, said, 'If you put money in real estate for three
years you could draw like a hundred and fifty a month clear money with no
taxes,' if she -- if we let her handle it.

   "Q: All right.  Did she say what she was going to do with the money?

   "A: That is all she said, she was going to put it in the real estate
property.

   "Q: Did she say she was going to give it to Allstate?

   "A: Well, she did that.  That's where she was going to put it in real estate,
with Allstate."

   Mr. Booth also testified that Robinson did not describe to him the manner in
which the money was going to be placed in the real properties, and that he had
no independent understanding of how the money might be dealt with.  He received
only a few payments from Robinson, totalling $ 720.

   In July 1978 Robinson again approached the Booths and solicited $ 3,500 from
them.  Mr. Booth described this transaction as follows:

   "Q: What was the $ 3,500.00 to be used for?

   "A: It was used -- this is what she told me, that she had a house on Jackson
Street that she needed $ 4,000.00 to take it over into her name, and if I had $
4,000.00to give her that I could double my money when the house was sold.

   "Q: Did she say that she actually owned the house at that time?

   "A: Well, at that time she needed this money to get possession of it.

   "Q: Did you know the person that owned the house?

   "A: No, I didn't."

   A note handwritten by Robinson at the time of this transaction was admitted
into evidence and provided as follows: "[para. ] July 26, 1978.  [para. ]
Received from Archie and Dorothea Booth $ 3,500.00 on the $ 4,000.00 applied to
the reinstatement and selling of the property at 716 So. Jackson.  The estimated
return will be $ 8,000.00 on the investment.  [para. ] Mildred B. Robinson."

   The Booths never saw Robinson again, although they tried to locate her.  Mr.
Booth went by the Jackson Street house and found it locked and empty  with a
sign on it saying, "For Sale, Mildred B. Robinson." None of the $ 3,500 was
returned to the Booths.  The total of $ 18,500 which they had given to Robinson
constituted their entire life savings.

   Mr. Booth also testified that he believed Robinson was going to make the
investments that she told him she was going to make, that he trusted her and
that he had relied upon what she said in giving her the money.

   On cross-examination Mr. Booth testified that as to the $ 15,000, Robinson
had not said how she was going to get anything out of that, and as to the $
3,500, he believed that she was going to make something, but she hadn't told him
how much.  With respect to the few payments he received from Robinson, "she said
it was coming from the real estate where she put it for the investment."

   On September 16, 1982, the trial court granted plaintiffs' application and
awarded them $ 10,000 as to the first transaction (the limit of recovery for one
transaction) and $ 3,500 plus interest as to the second transaction, and their
costs.  No findings were requested or made.

     A judgment or order of the superior court is presumed correct.  All
intendments and presumptions are indulged to support it on matters as to which
the record is silent and error must be affirmatively shown.  ( Walling v.
Kimball (1941) 17 Cal.2d 364, 373 [110 P.2d 58].)   Where findings are waived or
otherwise not specifically made it is presumed that the court made such implied
findings as will support the judgment.  (  Hall v. Municipal Court (1974) 10
Cal.3d641, 643 [111 Cal.Rptr. 721, 517 P.2d 1185]; Stewart v. Langer (1935) 9
Cal.App.2d 60, 61 [48 P.2d 758].)   This court must consider the evidence in the
light most favorable to the prevailing party giving him every reasonable
inference and resolving conflicts in support of the judgment.  We look only at
the evidence to support the judgment and disregard the contrary showing.

     Even where there is no conflict in the evidence, if the evidence is subject
to opposing inferences, it must upon a review thereof be regarded in the light
most favorable to the support of the judgment.  ( McKinney v. Kull (1981) 118
Cal.App.3d 951, 955 [173 Cal.Rptr. 696].) When two or more inferences can be
reasonably deduced from the facts, the reviewing court is without power to
substitute its deductions for those of the trial court.  ( Estate of Bristol
(1943) 23 Cal.2d 221, 223 [143 P.2d 689].)   The question is whether there is
any substantial evidence which will support the conclusion reached by the court
below.  (Ibid .) We determine that the conclusion of the trial court, that
Robinson performed acts for which a real estate license was required, is
supported by substantial evidence.

    The Commissioner contends that the judgment is not protected by the
substantial evidence rule because construction of the two documents executed in
connection with the transactions is a question of law since there was no
conflict between the documents and the evidence presented by Mr. Booth, citing
Parsons v. Bristol Development Co. (1965) 62 Cal.2d 861 [44 Cal.Rptr. 767, 402
P.2d 839] and Estate of Platt (1942) 21 Cal.2d 343 [131 P.2d 825]. In those
cases, the issues were the interpretation of the rights of parties under a
contract and a testamentary trust, respectively, so that the purposes of the
instruments could be given effect.  Here, the issue is not the rights of parties
under the documents.  Robinson procured the documents by fraud and obviously had
no intention of performing in conformance with the expectations of the Booths.
The issue here involves acts Robinson performed in the course of the
transactions, not the interpretation of the fraudulently procured documents.

     Section 10471 is a remedial statute. It is intended to protect the public
against loss resulting from misrepresentation and a breach of fiduciary duty by
real estate brokers who are unable to respond to damage awards.  It is to be
given a liberal  construction. ( Nordahl v. Department of Real Estate (1975) 48
Cal.App.3d 657, 663 [121 Cal.Rptr.  794]; accord Antonio v. Hempel (1977) 71
Cal.App.3d 128, 130 [139 Cal.Rptr. 309].)   Remedial statutes are to be
construed to promote their purposes and protect persons within their purview.
Relief will be granted unless clearly forbidden by statute.  (See Nordahl v.
Department of Real Estate, supra, 48 Cal.App.3d at p. 663, citing Viles v. State
of California (1967) 66 Cal.2d 24, 32-33 [56 Cal.Rptr. 666, 423 P.2d 818].) The
statute will be construed when its meaning is doubtful so as to suppress the
mischief at which it is directed, to advance or extend the remedy provided, and
to bring within the scope of the law every case which comes clearly within its
spirit and policy.  ( Montessori Schoolhouse of Orange County, Inc. v.
Department of Social Services (1981) 120 Cal.App.3d 248, 256 [17 Cal.Rptr. 1431]
, quoting from Lande v. Jurisich (143) 59 Cal.App.2d 613, 616-617 [139 P.2d 657]
.)

     The Commissioner attempts to characterize the February 1978transaction as a
loan from the Booths to Robinson, arguing that the February 14, 1978 agreement
"is most fairly read as a layman's attempt at drafting a promissory note," and
correctly states that Robinson would not need a real estate license to be the
recipient of a loan.  He seeks to characterize the second transaction as a
partnership between Robinson and the Booths in which Robinson acted only on her
own behalf. 3 The trial court rejected any  inferences that the Booths had
loaned money to Robinson and entered into a partnership with her, and instead
found that Robinson had acted within the license provisions of the Real Estate
Law.  (§§ 10000-10602.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Section
10133, subdivision (a) excludes from the definition of a real estate broker one
who performs acts which would otherwise require a license with reference to her
own property.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The basic prohibition against acting without a license is set forth in
pertinent part in section 10130: "It is unlawful for any person to engage in the
business, actin the capacity of, advertise or assume to act as a real estate
broker or a real estate salesman within this state without first obtaining a
real estate license from the department." A real estate broker is defined in
relevant part in section 10131 as ". . . a person who, for a compensation or in
expectation of a compensation, does or negotiates to do one or more of the
following acts for another or others: [para. ] (a) Sells or offers to sell, buys
or offers to buy, solicits prospective sellers or purchasers of, solicits or
obtains listings of, or negotiates the purchase, sale or exchange of real
property . . . .  [para. ] . . .  (d) Solicits borrowers or lenders for or
negotiates loans or collects payments or performs services for borrowers or
lenders or note owners in connection with loans secured directly or collaterally
by liens on real property . . . .  [para. ] (e) Sells or offers to sell, buys or
offers to buy, or exchanges or offers to exchange a real property sales
contract, or a promissory note secured directly or collaterally by a lien on
real property . . . , and performs services for the holders thereof."

   Thus, pursuant to section 10130, a license is required not only to act as a
real estate broker, but also to assume to act as a broker, i.e., to assume to
perform acts set forth in section 10131.  Common sense dictates that a licensee
engaged in fraud generally will not carry through with the acts that she
pretends or deceitfully leads another to believe she will perform.  Here the
trial court could infer that in the first transaction Robinson assumed to "put"
the Booths' money in real estate by, on their behalf, lending funds on the
security of real property, acquiring an interest in real property or acquiring
an interest in a note or notes secured by real property or secured by mortgages
or deeds of trust.  Those possibilities constitute reasonable interpretations of
"putting" money in real estate, the term used by Mr. Booth to describe the acts
Robinson assumed to perform.  In the second transaction, the evidence supports
an inference that Robinson assumed to, on behalf of the Booths, acquire some
interest in or lend funds on the security of the Jackson Street property.  In
either transaction it would not have mattered if Robinson took  such actions in
her name rather than in the names of the Booths as she would have held the
interests in trust for them as their fiduciary.  Additionally, in the second
transaction it could be inferred that Robinson was acting as a broker on behalf
of the then owner of the Jackson Street house.  That Robinson never in fact made
the investments for the Booths does not preclude recovery for she had assumed to
do so.

    Robinson obviously acted in the expectation of compensation.  If she had
carried through with her promises to invest the funds of the Booths, she would
have received a fee on the placement of loans or a commission on the sale of
property or notes, or, in the second transaction, upon resale of the property.
As it was, she was compensated handsomely through absconding with the Booths'
money.  That Mr. Booth, a man of limited education, did not know whether or how
she might make money in connection with the transactions is not significant.
Were that to operate to deny recovery, persons unsophisticated in business
transactions and least able to protect themselves from the artifice and fraud of
unscrupulous licensees would be at a disadvantage in seeking to recover under
section 10471 due to their inability to understand the nuances of transactions
in which they were defrauded.  Certainly, that was not the intention of the
Legislature in enacting this remedial statute. 4 To the contrary, the Booths
appear to fall precisely within the class of persons for whom the Legislature
sought to provide benefits, i.e., victims unable to protect themselves against
the fraud and scheming of licensees in real estate transactions.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   The
Commissioner relies upon Nordahl v. Department of Real Estate, supra, 48
Cal.App.3d 657, 661, for the proposition that "the Legislature intended minimum
and limited rather than maximum benefits to those otherwise qualifying."
However, Nordahl and the other cases which have employed such language were all
referring to limitations on the amount of recovery available under section 10471
, not to any limitations on eligibility for recovery.  (See Froid v. Fox (1982)
132 Cal.App.3d 832 [183 Cal.Rptr. 461]; Dombalian v. Fox (1979) 88 Cal.App.3d
763 [152 Cal.Rptr. 86]; Fox v. Prime Ventures, Ltd. (1978) 86 Cal.App.3d 333
[150 Cal.Rptr. 202]; Shirai v. Karpe (1976) 57 Cal.App.3d 276 [127 Cal.Rptr.
549]; Wolff v. Hoaglund (1970) 11 Cal.App.3d 227 [89 Cal.Rptr. 778].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Robinson explicitly led the Booths to believe that she was going to invest
in real estate for them rather than putting their money in some other type of
investment even though the details of the transactions were not clear to the
Booths.  It is hard to imagine that the Booths would have turned over their life
savings to Robinson for investment in something other than real estate as they
were relying upon her expertise and knowledge as a real estate broker. Robinson,
who had previously handled real estate transactions for the Booths, outwardly
seemed beyond her promises to invest their funds in real estate to be acting as
a broker. In the first transaction the document executed by the parties
described her as "Mildred B. Robinson of M. B. Robinson & Co., a real estate
company." In the second transaction Robinson had placed her "For Sale" sign on
the property which was owned by some other person or persons.

   Reasonable inferences may be drawn from the evidence that Robinson assumed to
act as a real estate broker in both transactions with the Booths and was
therefore required to be licensed to engage in such activities pursuant to
sections 10130 and 10131.  Even if it could also be inferred that the  Booths
made a loan to Robinson in the first transaction and entered into a partnership
with her in which she did not assume to act on their behalf in the second
transaction, the trial court rejected such inferences.  The court's
determination is supported by substantial evidence and is not to be disturbed on
appeal.

   A review of the decisions which have denied recovery from the Fund on the
basis that the licensee had not performed acts requiring a license discloses
nothing to affect the decision in this case.  All of those cases are
distinguishable from this case in two respects.  First, none of them considered
the provisions of section 10130 requiring that one who assumes to act as a real
estate broker be licensed. Secondly,  each case is factually distinguishable
from the present case.

   In Froid v. Fox (1982) 132 Cal.App.3d 832 [183 Cal.Rptr. 461] the trial
court's denial of recovery was upheld on the ground that the broker had acted as
a principal.  The broker had solicited purchasers of interests in a limited
partnership that had not yet been formed.  The court held that the broker could
not act on behalf of entities which were not in existence.  Here, Robinson acted
on behalf of the Booths and the owner of the Jackson Street property, and there
is no question of her acting on behalf of an entity yet to be formed.

    Bucella v. Mayo (1980) 102 Cal.App.3d 315 [162 Cal.Rptr. 369] reversed a
grant of recovery because no competent evidence had been presented regarding the
transactions, only conclusory declarations.  The court also noted, however, that
the allegations in the pleadings contained nothing suggesting that the licensee
had acted other than as a principal.  In one transaction, he allegedly executed
a note and deed of trust in favor of third parties who the same day assigned the
note and deed of trust to the plaintiff.  The plaintiff paid money to a savings
and loan which received it on the licensee's behalf.  The licensee characterized
the transaction as a loan.  In the second transaction there was no indication
that the licensee had anything to do with a note and deed of trust which had
been assigned to the plaintiff.  Thus, the court found there was no evidence to
support a finding that the acts of the defendant required a license. ( Id., at
p. 326.) In this case, however, competent evidence was presented.

   In Robinson v. Murphy (1979) 96 Cal.App.3d 763 [158 Cal.Rptr. 246] the broker
sold his own home to the plaintiff.  Although he had originally represented that
he was the broker, he disclosed to the plaintiff that he was the seller prior to
her execution of the purchase agreement.  Thus, he acted on his own behalf and
indicated to the plaintiff that he was doing so.  Here,  Robinson never
indicated to the Booths that she was not acting on their behalf.

   The court in Powers v. Fox (1979) 96 Cal.App.3d 440 [158 Cal.Rptr.  92] held
that recovery based upon the actions of Powers was barred because in one
transaction the victim had been Powers' wife (see § 10472, subd.  (a)), and at
the time of the other transaction Powers had not been licensed. A second holding
was that both transactions had been joint enterprises in which Powers had acted
only for himself.  The facts in Powers were somewhat unique.  The victim of the
fraud was the purported licensee's girlfriend and then wife during the
transactions in question.  In one, she borrowed money to be used for the
purchase price and operating capital for a restaurant the parties were to
operate together.  The operating capital was placed in a joint checking account.
In the other transaction the parties borrowed $ 15,000 from a bank on a joint
note, some of which was used to purchase a condominium which Powers had
represented would be taken in joint names and was actually taken in his name
alone.  In both transactions the parties specifically agreed to act together.
In this case, the parties did not so agree.  Rather, the Booths relied upon
Robinson to act for them.

   Finally, in McGaughey v. Fox (1979) 94 Cal.App.3d 645 [156 Cal.Rptr.  593]
the trial court impliedly found that the corporate broker had acquired in its
own right the investment units which it subsequently sold to the plaintiff.  The
appellate court held that the implied finding that the broker acted on its own
behalf was supported by the evidence.  Here, the trial court's implied finding
that Robinson assumed to act on behalf of others is also supported by the
evidence.

   The above cases are so factually dissimilar from the present case that they
are not instructive with respect to the facts involved here.  None of the
holdings compel any conclusion that the trial court's decision in this case was
not supported by substantial evidence.

   The Booths also contend that Robinson was required to be licensed as a real
property securities dealer pursuant to sections  10237, subdivision (a) and
10237.3, which require that one who engages in the business of selling real
property securities to the public obtain a real estate broker's license and have
attached thereto an endorsement as prescribed by the Commissioner.  At the time
of the transactions in question here, section 10237.1, subdivisions (a) and (c)
defined a real property security as an investment contract or real property
sales contract having certain characteristics, or one of a series of promotional
notes secured by liens on separate parcels of real property in one subdivision
or in contiguous subdivisions.  Since there was  no evidence that Robinson sold
any contract or promotional note, she performed no acts requiring licensing as a
real property securities dealer.

   The judgment is affirmed.


                              18 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             JOHN HENRY TOWNSEND, an Infant, by Samuel J. Hensley,
                   Guardian ad litem v. GEORGE GORDON et als.

                            [NO NUMBER IN ORIGINAL]

                          SUPREME COURT OF CALIFORNIA

                        19 Cal. 188; 1861 Cal. LEXIS 324


                                  October 1861

PRIOR-HISTORY:      Appeal from the Twelfth District.

   The facts sufficiently appear in the opinion of the Court. Plaintiff had
judgment below; defendants appeal.

COUNSEL: John H. Saunders and William H. Patterson, for Appellants.

I. Jurisdiction of the estate of Townsend was acquired by the Probate Court of
Santa Clara county, by the death of T. in the county, and the presentation of
the petition for letters of administration.

II. The return of the inventory informed the Court, judicially, of the fact that
lot No. 106 was the property of the estate.

III. The proceeding to sell real estate by the Probate Courts of California is a
proceeding in rem. (2 How. 310; 2 Pet. 157; 3 Ohio, 494; 4 Tex.; 8 English, 507;
2 Mich. 226; Ludlow v. Wade, 4 Ham. 504; 6 Port. 219; 11 Vt. 643; 11 Serg. & R.
6; 11 Mass. 229; 4 Phil. Ev. 62, note 42; Haynes v. Weeks, 10 Cal. 120.)

IV. The petition for the sale of real estate in this case set forth all the
facts required by the statute and necessary to give the Court jurisdiction. It
stated the amount of personal property undisposed of at five hundred dollars,
and referred to the inventory for a description thereof, as in Stuart v. Allen
(16 Cal. 476). It showed the amount of assets or personal estate that came to
the administrator's hands. * * * It enumerated debts outstanding and unpaid. * *
* It attempts to set out the real estate, but fails to enumerate or specify lot
No. 106. It shows the sole heir to be plaintiff, three years of age.

It complies with section one hundred and fifty-five, (Statute of 1851, 467)
except that it does not contain a description of all the estate of which the
intestate died seized. And this omission plaintiff does not claim was willful or
fraudulent. Judged by the principles laid down in Stuart v. Allen, (16 Cal. 501)
it must be upheld. Besides, by the inventory on file, the Court judicially knew
that lot No. 106 was part of the estate. No sale could have been made without
the order of the Court. (Stat. of 1851, 467, sec. 148.) The Court being presumed
to know the law, was aware that the fact having existed at the time of filing
the inventory, it continued to exist.

Hepburn & Dwinelle, also for Appellants.

I. As to the point that the petition does not state the evidence of Townsend, at
the time of his death, to have been in Santa Claracounty, we say: 1st, that
"Monterey" as used designates the city or town where Schallenberger resided, and
the only county mentioned is Santa Clara; 2d, even if "Monterey" be held to mean
"Monterey county," and the words "county aforesaid" to refer strictly to that
county, still the context shows that these words must, in this instance, in
order to carry out the intention of the party, be understood in some "other
special and peculiar sense," which sense here is "county of Santa Clara
aforesaid," because Schallenberger of Monterey was trying to get administration
in the right county. (1 Phil. Ev. 275.)

II. It is contended that the probate proceedings are defective, because the
petition of the administrator, for the sale of the real estate of decedent, does
not set out the description of "all the real estate whereof the intestate died
seized." (Probate Act, Laws of 1851, ch. 124, p. 467, sec. 155.) We reply:

1. In cases where the proceedings of Courts of inferior jurisdiction are
concerned, jurisdiction will not be presumed. (Mills v. Martin, 19 Johns, 33;
Peacock v. Bell, 1 Saunders, 73, 74, passim; Yates v. Lansing, 9 Johns, 437;
Bridge v. Ford, 4 Mass. 641; Hall v. Howd, 10 Conn. 514; Rex v. Oakley, 4 Barn.
& Adolph. 307.) But even in Courts of inferior jurisdiction, after jurisdiction
is shown to have once attached, it will be presumed that all subsequent
proceedings were conducted rightly, omnia recte acta proesumuntur esse. (
Schuylkill Falls Road, 2 Binn. 250; Voorhees v. Bank of the U. S., 10 Pet. 449;
Van Steenberg v. Bigelow, 3 Wend. 42.) Or even if there be irregularities
committed after jurisdiction has once attached, the proceedings shall not be
avoided, nor attacked collaterally. (McCormick v. Sullivant, 10 Wheat. 192; S.
C., 6 Cond. 71; Gwinne v. Pool, 2 Lutw. 1561-2; Cunningham v. Bucklin, 8 Cow.
178; Allen v. Huntington, 2 Aik. 249; Jackson v. Robinson, 4 Wend. 436, passim;
Stuart v. Allen, 16 Cal. 504.) This rule, that, after showing jurisdiction, we
may rely upon "talitur processum fuit," is thus shown to be a canon both of
pleading and of evidence. (1 Saunders, 92, note.)

2. But in Courts of general jurisdiction, every intendment is made, not only in
favor of the regularity of the proceedings,  but also in favor of the Court
having regularly taken jurisdiction originallyof the particular matter or cause.
(Peacock v. Bell, 1 Saunders, 73, 74; Mills v. Martin, 19 Johns, 33; Thomas v.
Robinson, 3 Wend. 267.) The proceedings of Courts of Probate, within the
jurisdiction conferred on them by the laws, are to be construed in the same
manner, and with the like legal intendments, as the proceedings of Courts of
general jurisdiction. Every presumption, therefore, is in favor of the original
jurisdiction of the Court of Probate of Santa Clara county, and of the
regularity of the subsequent proceedings in the case. The Probate Court in this
State is a constitutional Court of general jurisdiction. The decisions in New
York and Massachusetts holding such Courts there to be of inferior and limited
jurisdiction, go upon the ground that they are entirely the creatures of
statute. (Dahin v. Hudson, 6 Cow. 225; 2 Mass. 124.) But here, this Court is a
constitutional Court; and that makes it a Court of general jurisdiction within
its sphere, unless the Constitution itself declares the Court to be an inferior
one, as is the case in Texas. (Const. of Cal. art. VI,  sec. 8; Pond v. Pond, 10
Cal. 500, near top of page; Ex parte Watkins, 3 Pet. 205; Kemp's Lessee v.
Kennedy, 5 Cranch, 173; Williams v. Amroyd, 7 Id. 423; Williams' Ex'rs v. May's
Ex'rs, 6 Id. 267; Kennedy v. Georgia State Bank, 8 How. U. S. 586; Doe v. Smith,
1 Carter, 451; 1 Smith, Ind. 381; 6 Texas, 185; Obert v. Hammel, 3 Harrison, 73;
Wyatts v. Rambo, 29 Ala. 510; Irwin v. Scriber, 18 Cal.) The decisions in this
State in 6 Cal. 652; 7 Id. 240; 10 Id. 117; 13 Id. 562, do not decide but assume
our Probate Court to be of inferior jurisdiction. The point was not discussed.
In Stuart v. Allen (16 Cal. 473) the point was made that this Court was of
general, although of limited jurisdiction, but was not decided. The Act of 1858,
95, shows that in the opinion of the Legislature the Probate Court ought to be
considered of general jurisdiction over probate matters. At all events, the
proceedings of this Court cannot, under the decision in Irwin v. Scriber, (18
Cal.) be collaterally attacked.

3. If it be said that this record of the Probate Court, even considering it a
record of a Court of general jurisdiction, can be contradicted by evidence
showing such want of jurisdiction in the commencement as absolutely to avoid the
proceedings, we admit there is authority for the proposition. (5 Wend. 148; 4
Conn. 380; 7 Cal. 54.) But no such evidence has been adduced here. Defendant
below introduced in evidence certain probate proceedings to show that the
Probate Court had acquired jurisdiction over the estate, and had sold the real
estate. The certificate of the Clerk of the Probate Court does not purport that
the papers certified are copies of all the proceedings, or of all the papers
filed in the Probate Court, but merely that they are copies of "original papers"
and "original orders." All that was requisite for the defendant below to show
was so much of the record as was necessary to evidence the sale; that is to say,
so much of the record as showed that the Court acquired jurisdiction over the
real estate, and afterwards actually sold the land. (Thompson v. Chauveau, 6
Martin, La. N. S. 458, 462; Packard v. Hill, 7 Cow. 434; S. C., 5 Wend. 385, 393
.) If the certificate, as produced, be prima facie sufficient to sustain the
proceedings, and the other party wishes to rebut the prima facies, by showing
that it could not be sustained by a perfect record, he should himself obtain a
suppletory transcript ofthe same authority, and from the same source as the
original, and containing the rebutting matters.

4. Besides, the proceedings as certified do, on their face, show regularity and
sufficiency. The petition on its face does not mention lot No. 106 in San
Francisco, but it refers to an inventory. Now this inventory is either one which
will, if necessary, under the principles already discussed, be presumed to have
been annexed to the petition, or it is the inventory already on file. In either
case, an inventory was referred to for the purpose of furnishing a statement of
the personal estate; and that inventory being thus before the Court as a part of
the petition, not only corrected all the misstatements of the petition, but also
supplied every information which the face of the petition did not supply. That
this was so, appears not merely as matter of law, but as matter of fact; for the
decree of sale orders the sale of one hundred vera lot No. 106, and this decree
was agreed upon "after an examination of the condition and value of the several
parcels of real estate referred to in said petition."

The sole purpose of having a perfect inventory of the personal and real estateis
to ascertain: first, whether the personal estate is insufficient to pay the
debts; second, to decide which of the real estate can be sold with most
advantage to the estate. * Now, both of these objects were accomplished in this
case. It is not "essential that there should be in the petition itself, and
without reference to any other paper or thing, a statement of these facts. The
main fact required is the averment of the insufficiency of personal assets, and
mere formal defects in the mode of statement would not affect the jurisdiction."
(Stuart v. Allen, 16 Cal. 501.)

*   In view of the fact, that the only object of requiring the petition to set
forth all the real estate is to enable the Court to determine what part of it
can be sold with the greatest advantage, it is submitted that this requirement
of the statute is merely directory, and not jurisdictional; for otherwise, an
omission of any item, however small, would vitiate sales, not only of the
property omitted, but also of the property set forth, for the reason that the
property set forth would not comprise, any more than the property omitted, "a
description of all the real estate of which the testator or intestate died
seized."

 5. Moreover, "it is immaterial, so far as this question of jurisdiction is
concerned, whether the statements of the petition are true or not, the
jurisdiction resting upon the averments of the petition, not upon proof of
them." (Stuart v. Allen, 16 Cal. 501, foot of page.) This seems to dispose of
the point most decisively.

Eugene Casserly and D. Lake, for Respondent.

I. The Probate Courts of this State are Courts of inferior, limited and
statutory jurisdiction. (Smith v. Andrews, 6 Cal. 652, 654; Beckett v. Selover,
7 Id. 215, 240; Haynes v. Meeks, 10 Id. 110, 116; Clark v. Perry, 5 Id. 60; Head
v. Sandford, 5 Id. 268.) This is the general law as to such Courts in other
States. (Dakin v. Hudson, 6 Cow. 223; Bloom v. Burdick, 1 Hill, 139; Corwin v.
Merritt, 3 Barb. 343 and cases cited, 344, 346; People v. Barnes, 12 Wend. 494;
People v. Corlies, 1 Sandf. S. C. R. 247; Smith v. Rice, 11 Mass. 507, 510, 512,
etc.; Planters' Bank v. Johnson, 7 Sm. & M. 449, 454, and cases cited; Ventress
v. Smith, 10 Pet. 161; Bright v. Boyd, 1 Sumn. 478; Brown  v. Campbell, 6 How.
[Miss.] 230; Currie v. Stewart, 5 Cushman, [27 Miss.] 55.)

A party relying on a right derived under the proceedings of such a Court, is
bound to show that it had jurisdiction to act. The jurisdiction will not be
presumed. This is the universal rule, whether the question arises upon the
pleadings or the proofs. If his proof is the record of the Court, that must show
jurisdiction affirmatively, both over the parties and subject matter, and hence
all the acts necessary to give such jurisdiction. Otherwise the proceedings are
void ab initio, and the judgments and decrees are nuilities, which are not
merely bad on error, but may be assailed collaterally whenever they are brought
in question. (Schneider v. McFarland, 2 Comst. 459, 461, 464; Corwin v. Merritt,
3 Barb. S. C. R. 341, 343, 346; Bloom v. Burdick, 1 Hill, 134, 139, 143; People
v. Barnes, 12 Wend. 494; People v. Corlies, 1 Sandf. S. C. R. 247; Smith v. Rice
, 11 Mass. 507, 510, 512; Planters' Bank v. Johnson, 7 S. & M. 449, 454; Wiley
v. White, 2 Stew. & Porter, 355; Ventress v. Smith, 10 Pet. 161, and the other
cases last above cited.)

This rule respecting Probate Courts is merely the application to a
particularclass of cases of the general principle, that he who relies on a right
derived under any Court or officer of limited power, is held strictly to show
jurisdiction in it or him affirmatively, and this whenever and however the
question arises, directly or collaterally. (Thatcher v. Powell, 6 Wheat. 119,
127; Burckle v. Eckart, 3 Denio, 279, 281-282, question on Vice Chancellor's
decree offered in evidence; Broadhead v. McConnell, 3 Barb. S. C. R. 175, 182,
183-6, 186, 189, discussing all the cases.)

The main proof of appellants on the trial consisted exclusively of the record of
the proceedings in the Probate Court of the county of Santa Clara from the
commencement of the administration. Their counsel, assuming the Probate Court to
be a Court of general jurisdiction, argues, as the Clerk's certificate does not
show expressly that the transcript is a copy of the entire record, that the onus
was on the respondent (plaintiff below) to produce the perfect record, because
non constat that it would not show jurisdiction. The fault of this argument is
in the premises, which are unfounded. The Probate Court is not a Court of
general, but of special jurisdiction. Hencethe onus was on the other side, the
rule being, that though in all cases the power to act must have existed, yet for
a general jurisdiction you must presume it, but for a special jurisdiction you
must show it.

II. Schallenberger's petition for letters of administration does not show that
John Townsend was at the time of his death a resident of the county of Santa
Clara. The allegation is "that Dr. John Townsend, late a resident of the county
aforesaid, died in said county," etc. This must be held to refer to the county
of "Monterey," mentioned immediately before in the first clause of the petition,
and not to the county of Santa Clara, which is no where mentioned, except by way
of recital, in the address to the "Honorable the Judge of the Probate Court in
and for the county of Santa Clara," etc., which is properly no part of the
petition. (Probate Act, secs. 2, 58, Laws of 1850, 377, 381; Beckett v. Selover,
7 Cal. 233; Holyoke v. Haskins, 5 Pick. 20; Harvard v. Gore, Id. 369; 1
Williams' Executors, 492; and see Kohler v. Knapp , 1 Bradf. 243.)

III. The petition unites improperly several distinct and independent matters. It
prays for letters of administrationon the estate of John Townsend; also for
probate of the will of Elizabeth L. Townsend, and for letters of administration
on the rest of her estate not disposed of by her will; and lastly, for the
appointment as guardian of the infant John Henry Townsend. He might as well have
united in the same petition similar prayers with respect to the estate and
person of any other three individuals, entire strangers to each other.

IV. The petition for a sale of the real estate is fatally defective.

This application, though it is in the general course of administration of an
estate, is a distinct, independent proceeding in the nature of a suit to enforce
the lien of the claims (as well those of creditors as others) charged upon the
estate, and is commenced by petition and citation (thus acquiring jurisdiction
of the subject and the parties) according to the usual practice in Probate.
(Probate Act, secs. 155, 156, 157; Schneider v. McFarland, 2 Comst. 462, 463;
Beckett v. Selover, 7 Cal. 228, 236, 238, 239.)

It is subject to all the rules applicable to such proceedings in limited
jurisdictions, and the more rigidly that it is a proceeding to divest third
parties as heirs, who are often minors, of their inheritance in the soil. For
more abundant security, the statute expressly provides that the petition in all
cases "shall set forth the facts showing the sale to be necessary;" (sec. 149)
that the personal estate shall first be liable for the debts and other charges
upon the estate; (secs. 115, 150, 154) that the real estate shall be sold only
in case of the insufficiency of the personalty (Id.) and in case of an
application for a sale of the real estate it specifies minutely what the
petition shall contain. (Sec. 155.) And all these particulars must appear from
the petition to the Probate Judge before he (not the Clerk) can issue his order
to show cause which is the summons or citation in the proceeding, (sec. 156) and
he must be satisfied of their truth after "a full hearing and examination of the
proofs and allegations of the parties" before he can make the order of sale.
(Sec. 162.)

The suggestion that section one hundred and fifty-four--which provides that the
real estate may be sold to pay the debts,  etc., whenever the personalty is
insufficient--gives the jurisdiction, is inadmissible, even though favored by a
quere in Stuart v.  Allen (16 Cal. 503). That section gives to the administrator
the right to obtain the order under a given state of facts, which is a very
different thing from the jurisdiction of the Court to grant it. It must be read
with the following sections, one hundred and fifty-four, one hundred and
fifty-six, etc.

Before a Court of the most general jurisdiction can render a valid judgment, it
must have jurisdiction both of the subject and of the parties in the mode
prescribed by law. There is no warrant either in authority or reason for the
idea that the provisions of law regulating the mode of acquiring this
jurisdiction by the Court are "directions to the Court in the exercise of its
jurisdiction, and not conditions to the exercise of its jurisdiction."

The jurisdiction of every Court may be inquired into in every other Court before
which its proceedings are brought; and any judgment is void when the record
discloses a want of jurisdiction. (Elliott v. Piersol, 1 Pet. 340-1; Wilcox v.
Jackson, 13 Pet. 511; Hickey v.  Stewart, 3 How. 750, 756, 758, 761, 763, a
strong case, quoting and approving Elliott v. Piersol and Wilcox v. Jackson;
Bloom v. Burdick, 1 Hill, 139, 141; Downs v. Fuller, 2 Met. 135, 137-9.)

Upon the general rules applicable to these proceedings in probate for the sale
of land, even when brought in question collaterally, and the strictness with
which they should be viewed, the authorities are overwhelming in support of the
principles above stated. (Sibley v. Waffle, 2 Smith, [16 N. Y.] 180, 183-5,
185-7, 187-190; Schneider v. McFarland, 2 Comst. 459, 461, 466; Ventress v.
Smith, 10 Pet. 161, 174-5; Mathewson v. Sprague, 1 Curtis, 456, 461-3; Bright v.
Boyd, 1 Story, 478, 486; Bloom v. Burdick, 1 Hill, 130, 139, 153; Corwin v.
Merritt, 3 Barb. 341, 342, 346, and cases cited; Van Nostrand v. Wright, Lalor,
260, 262; Small v. Cromwell, Id. 154, 155; Messenger v. Kintner, 4 Binn. 97,
103, 104, 106-7-8; Campbell v. Knights, 26 Me. 224, 227; Smith v. Rice, 11 Mass.
507, 510, 511, 512, 514, and cases cited; Proctor v. Newhall, 17 Id. 81, 90, 92,
quoting and approving Smith v. Rice; Adams v. Jeffries, 12 Ohio, 253, [as to
probate sales in that State since 1824] 271-4, and cases cited; Parker v.
Nichols, 7 Pick. 111, 115-16; Doe v. Anderson, 5 Ind. 33, 35, 37; Doe v. Bowen,
8 Id. 197-9; Platt v. Dawes, 10 Id. 60, 62; Reynolds v. Wilson, 15 Ill. 394-6;
Emos v. James, 4 Mumf. 194, quoted 10 Pet. 174; Planters' Bank v. Johnson, 7 Sm.
& M. 449, 454, and cases cited; Brown v. Campbell, 6 How. 230, 234, 245; Crisman
v. Beasley, 1 Sm. & M. ch. 561-2; Wiley, adm'r. v. White, 2 Stew. & P. 355;
Wyatt's adm'r v. Rambo, 29 Ala. 510, 519-21, 523-4, and case cited; Whitmore v.
Johnson, 10 Humph. 610; Wattles v. Hyde, 9 Conn. 9, 18-14; Griffin v. Pratt, 3
Id. 513; Watson v. Watson, 10 Id. 87; Beckett v. Selover, 7 Cal. 215, 233-4;
Stuart v. Allen, 16 Id. 504.)

To give jurisdiction of the subject matter, a proper petition must be presented.
That petition must allege: 1st, the amount of personal estate that has come to
the administrator's hands; and how much remains undisposed of (sec. 156);  2d,
the debts outstanding against the deceased (secs. 155, 157); the allowance to
the family and expenses of administration (secs. 155, 157); 3d, the description
of all the real estate of which the deceased died seized, and the condition and
value of the respective portions and lots (sec. 156). The first two of these
allegations are jurisdictional in every case; for unless there are debts, and
charges and expenses of administration, and also a deficiency of personal
property to pay them, there is no power in the Court to order a sale. The third
is also, or may become so, with respect to parties who do not, by appearing,
waive the defect, and against whom the order goes by default.

The reference to "the inventory" in this petition is not a "setting forth of the
personal property" within the statute. It is not so referred to as to be made a
part of the petition as was the case in Stuart v. Allen (16 Cal. 476).

The opposite argument is that our probate proceeding for a sale of real esate is
a proceeding in rem. If by this, counsel mean to liken it to an action or
proceeding for the enforcement of a lien or charge upon land, (as for the
foreclosure of a mortgage)  we shall not dispute it.

But if the argument is, that being a proceeding in rem, it is enough if the
Court has jurisdiction of the rem or subject matter, and that jurisdiction over
the parties is unnecessary, it is untenable. Ordinarily, (sec. 156) it is the
administrator who petitionsfor a sale, though in case of his neglect, any other
interested party may. (Sec. 165.) If by the filing of his petition, the Court
has jurisdiction of the rem, and jurisdiction of the parties be unnecessary, why
the provisions in sections one hundred and fifty-seven, one hundred and
fifty-eight, one hundred and fifty-nine and one hundred and sixty, for the
citation, service and appearance of all parties in interest, heirs, legatees,
distributees and creditors, whether adults or minors, and for a full hearing of
parties, trial and examination of witnesses? (Secs. 159, 161, 163.) See what is
said on this point in Matthewson v. Sprague (2 Curtis 462).

The cases cited by counsel to sustain their view are not in point under our
statute, however they may be under the statutes of other States construed in
those cases. (Schneider v. McFarland, 2 Comst. 460-3; Beckett  v. Selover, 7
Cal. 234, 236.)

It may be remarked that the Judge (Baldwin) who delivered the opinion of the
Court in Grignon's Lessee v. Astor, (2 How. 319) was from Pennsylvania, and may
unconsciously have had his views more or less modified by the local probate laws
of that State, which, asobserved by the New York Court of Appeals in Schneider
v. McFarland, (2 Comst. 461) contemplate the administrator as the sole party
representing the estate. There may be other States which, like Pennsylvania to
some extent, Texas to a greater extent, and Louisiana fully, have adopted, or
formerly adopted, into their probate systems the principle of the civil law by
which the estate or succession takes the place of the decedent, and is
represented, together with the parties entitled, by the administrator, so that
the heirs, as such, are not parties to proceedings for the sale of real estate.
(2 Domat, 30, secs. 2463, 2470-3, etc.; Old Code La. art. 74, p. 163; Poultney
v. Cecil, 8 La. 337, 411-13.)

No such theory has found its way into our probate system, which throughout
proceeds upon the common law principle that all necessary parties must be
brought before the Court and jurisdiction of them obtained by service of
process, actual or constructive, or by appearance. (Probate Act, secs. 13, 14,
15, 17, 18 as to probate of wills; 60, 61, 62, 67, 68, 69 as to intestate
administrations; 149, 150, 152, 153, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 162, 164, 170
as to proceedings for thesale of the personal and real property, etc.)

In its provisions as to service, actual or constructive, of the preliminary
order or citation in proceedings for the sale of real estate, our statute does
not differ substantially from that of New York. (Compare 2 R. S. [N. Y.] 285,
secs. 1, 3; 286, secs. 8, 9, 11; 285, sec. 4; 286, sec. 12; 288, sec. 23; 287,
sec. 17; 288, sec. 24; with our Probate Act, secs. 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159,
160, 161, 163; Comp. Laws, 399, 400.) In that State it is settled that the
proceeding to sell real estate is not a proceeding in rem, so as to dispense
with jurisdiction of the parties. (Sibley v. Waffle, 2 Smith, 185; Schneider v.
McFarland, 2 Comst. 465; Corwin v. Merritt, 3 Barb. 345; and the other New York
cases above.)

A list of the real estate is given, from which however, one hundred vara lot No.
106, including the premises in question, is omitted. This omission is fatal to
the validity of the order of sale so far as that lot is concerned, though as to
the other lots set forth in the petition, it may be well enough. What we contend
for is, not that the failure to set forth all the property is fatal to the sale
of anyof it, but that it is fatal to the sale of that which is omitted. This
defect is not cured, as appellants' counsel argue, by the reference in the
petition to "the inventory," for that reference has respect only to the
personalty.

The object of requiring the petition to set forth "a description of all the real
estate of which the intestate died seized," (sec. 155) is two-fold: 1st, to
enable the Court to act intelligently for the interests concerned in ordering
the sale, whether of the whole or a part of the realty (secs. 161, 162); and 2d,
to apprise parties interested of the parcels of land which the administrator
proposes to have sold. This second object is the more important that, in these
probate proceedings for the sale of real estate, the order is generally by
default on a constructive service, frequently of minors. Non constat they would
have acquiesced in the sale of the particular parcel omitted, and they might
have offered such reasons against its sale as to induce the Probate Judge to
except it from the order.

To make this point perfectly plain, section one hundred and sixty-two allows the
Probate Judge to make an order of sale "of the whole, or so much andsuch parts
of the real estate described in the petition." This is a clear limitation of
power, which no words of exclusion could have made any stronger. Expressio
unius, exclusio alterius, applies with peculiar force to proceedings prescribed
by statute. (1 Kent's Com. 467, and note d.)

JUDGES: Baldwin, J. delivered the opinion of the Court. Field, C. J. and Cope,
J. concurring.

OPINION BY: BALDWIN

OPINION

    Ejectment for a lot in San Francisco. This case involves several important
questions, affecting the validity and effect of sales of an infant, through
proceedings of the Probate Court. The case has been fully and ably argued by the
respective counsel. John Townsend, the father of the infant plaintiff, died in
Santa Clara county on the eighth of December, 1850, possessed of considerable
real and personal estate. Two days afterwards, Elizabeth, widow of John,  died,
possessed of a large estate, and leaving a will, in which she disposed of a
portion of her estate, and nominated one Moses Schallenberger her sole executor,
and also guardian at law of her infant son, the plaintiff here, the only child
of John and Elizabeth--then being two or three years of age. Schallenberger, on
the seventeenth of December, 1850, filed his petition, addressed as follows: "To
the Honorable the Judge of the Probate Court of the county of Santa Clara, State
of California. The petition of Moses Schallenberger, of Monterey, etc. That Dr.
John Townsend, late a resident of the county aforesaid, died in said county,"
etc. The petition recites the facts as stated before, and prays that the will of
Mrs. Townsend may be admitted to probate, and letters testamentary thereon be
issued to the petitioner; that he be appointed guardian in law and in fact of
said infant, and that letters of administration be issued to him on all the
estate of Mrs. Townsend left undisposed of by her will, which, as your
petitioner is informed and believes, is of large amount; and also that letters
of administration be issued to him on the estate of John Townsend. The County
Judge, in vacation,  on the same day--seventeenth of December, 1850--made an
order that petitioner be appointed guardian at law  and in fact of said infant;
also that he be appointed Curator of the estate of said John Townsend, and of
the estate of said Elizabeth; and also that public notice be given according to
law, of his application for letters testamentary and of administration as above
specified. On the eighteenth of December, 1850, the Clerk of the Probate Court
gave notice that at the next general term of the Court, to be held, etc., on the
first Monday of January next after, the application of the petitioner would be
heard for letters of administration upon the estate of John Townsend, etc. On
the eleventh of January, 1851, an entry appears in the books of the Court,
reciting that Moses Schallenberger came, and it appearing to the satisfaction of
the Court that public notice of his application having been given as required by
law, and he having filed his affidavit and his bond, etc., whereupon the Court
ordered letters of administration to issue to said Schallenberger on said
estate, and appraisers were appointed. Bond was given and approved; and
inventory and appraisement filed February 18th, 1851. On the twenty-fifth of
August, 1851, an order appears appointing certain persons guardian for the
absent and minor heirs of the estate. On the twenty-fifth of November, 1857,
Schallenberger, administrator, etc., filed his petition as follows: "Estate of
John Townsend, deceased. Probate Court, county of Santa Clara. The petition of
Moses Schallenberger, administrator, shows to this Court that the above estate
is largely indebted for various claims outstanding against the deceased, charges
and incumbrances upon real estate, and that the personal property is
insufficient to pay the same. That the personal property consists of rents
arising from a portion of the real estate in San Francisco, which have become
greatly reduced in consequence of the destruction of the buildings by the fire
of May last, and the furniture and other goods and chattels mentioned in the
inventory. That the amount of said rents which has been collected is about $
12,000, which has been applied to the payment of various municipal charges,
necessary expenses for the preservation of the property, the support and
maintenance of the infant heir, funeral and administration expenses, leaving
still undisposed of the goods and chattels above mentioned, amounting in value
to about five hundred dollars. * * And your petitioner further shows  that the
only heir to said estate is John Henry Townsend, infant son of deceased and
Elizabeth L. Townsend, also deceased, who is about three years of age.

   "In conclusion, petitioner prays that an order be granted directing all
persons interested in said estate to appear before the Probate Judge, at the
next term of this Court, to be held on the fourth Monday of December next, at
the Court House in the city of San Jose, to show cause why an order should not
be granted to your petitioner as administrator, to sell so much of the real
estate of the deceased as shall be necessary to pay such debts." In this
petition the property sued for was omitted; other real estate inserted.

   On the twenty-sixth of November, 1851, the following order was made: --

   "In the matter of the estate of John Townsend, deceased.

   "Wednesday, November 26th, 1851.

   "Now comes M. Schallenberger, administrator, by his attorney, and files his
petition praying for the sale of a portion of the following described real
estate, to wit: One half of lot nineteen, (19) homestead lot fifty, (50)
unimproved lot fifty-three, (53) doubtful lots six, seven, eight, nine and ten,
block fifty of Millner's and White's survey, south-west half of lot two, (2)
block three, (3) range two (2) south, lot eight, (8) block three, (3) range
three, (3) south, tract of land on Sacramento river, lease of lot corner of
Washington and Kearny streets, San Francisco, one-third interest improved, a
portion of South San Francisco, worthless lot in Monterey, to pay the debts of
said estate. It is therefore ordered by the Court, that public notice be given
in the San Jose Weekly Visitor, in pursuance of law, to all persons interested
in said estate, to appear at the next term of this Court, to show cause, if any
they can, why said order should not be made." Also the following order:

   "Probate Court of Santa Clara county, State of California: In the matter of
the estate of John Townsend, deceased. Whereas, Moses Schallenberger,
administrator of said estate, has filed a petition in said Court, praying for an
order of sale of all or so much of the real estate of said deceased as may be
necessary to pay the debts thereof, and costs and charges of administration,
etc.; notice is hereby given that the hearing of said petition will be had at
the  December term of said Court, to be held at the Court House in the city of
San Jose, on the fourth Monday of December, A. D. 1851, when and where all
persons interested in said estate may appear and show cause why the order prayed
for in said petition should not be made.

   "Witness: Hon. J. W. Redman, Probate--of Santa Clara county, with my private
seal (there being no seal yet provided) at office, this twenty-sixth day of
November, A. D. 1851.

   "By order of the Court.

   [L. S.]

   "H. C. Melone, County Clerk."

   The following affidavits are appended to a copy of the last order:

   "County of Santa Clara, ss. A. Jones, printer of the San Jose Visitor, being
duly sworn, says that the annexed notice in the estate of John Townsend,
deceased, was published three weeks successively, commencing with November 26th,
1851, and discontinued because said newspaper stopped its issue.

   "A. Jones, Jr.

   "Sworn before me, December 16th, 1851.

   "D. P. Belknap, Notary Public.

   "Filed December 23d, 1851.

   "H. C. Melone, Clerk."

   "County of San Francisco, ss. C. O. Gerberding, printer and agent of the
California Courier newspaper, being duly sworn, says that the foregoing notice
was duly published in said newspaper, in its regular daily edition, on the
eighteenth day of December, 1851, in the city of San Francisco.

   "C. O. Gerberding.

   "Sworn before me, December 20th, 1851.

   "A. G. Randall, Notary Public.

   "Filed December 23d, 1851.

   "H. C. Melone, Clerk."

   On the twenty-third of December, 1851, the following order was made: "In the
matter of the estate of John Townsend, deceased, Probate Court, Santa Clara
county, December 23d, 1851.

    "At a general term of the Probate Court in and for the county of Santa
Clara, held at the Court House, in the city of San Jose. Present--J. W. Redman,
Probate Judge.

   "On reading the petition of Moses Schallenberger, administrator of the above
estate, said petition having been heretofore filed in the office of the Clerk of
this Court, on the twenty-sixth day of November, 1851, setting forth in
substance that the above estate is largely indebted for various claims and
incumbrances upon the real estate, and that the personal property is
insufficient to pay said debts, together with the just and necessary expenses of
said administration, and the support of the infant heir; and on reading and
filing the statement and consent of the attorney for the infant and absent heirs
of said estate heretofore appointed by this Court, and on giving proof of due
publication of notice of this application as required by law, and on filing of
said proof:

   "It is hereby ordered, adjudged and decreed, that Moses Schallenberger, said
administrator of said estate, have leave and authority to sell and convey,
according to law, the following described real estate belonging to the said
estate of John Townsend, deceased, and situate in the counties of Santa Clara,
San Francisco, Sutter and Butte, in this State. In the county of Santa Clara,
all the following real estate and property, to wit:" Here follows the property,
including that sued for.

   The consent and representation of the attorney of the infant and absent heirs
appear in the record. The administrator, on the twenty-fourth of February, 1852,
made his report of sales of real estate in San Francisco. In February, 1852,
sales and report confirmed. The defendant claims title through the sale made
under the proceedings set out; and the plaintiff contends that they vest no
title, the ground being that the Probate Court had no jurisdiction to make the
orders on which the administrator's sale is based.

   It is too late to dispute the first general proposition of respondent's
counsel, that the Courts of Probate, in the construction of their proceedings
had before the passage of the Act of 1858, are to be regarded as Courts of
limited and inferior jurisdiction. Such has been the construction given by this
Court in many cases. (See Smith v. Andrews, 6 Cal. 652; 7 Id. 215; 10 Id. 110; 5
Id. 60;  and many other cases, have affirmed or recognized the same doctrine.)
The argument of the appellant is that this is not the true rule, for the reason
that Courts of Probate are constitutional Courts of general exclusive
jurisdiction in matters testamentary and of probate, and therefore as much
Courts of general jurisdiction in respect to such matters as the District Courts
in respect to matters of common law litigation; both Courts looking to the same
constitutional grant for their powers, and both limited and restrained by that
instrument. The Supreme Court of Georgia (13 Ga. R.) in a very able opinion,
takes this view, and one or more of the other States, having the same
constitutional provisions in this respect, sanction it; but however forcible the
argument, we think we are precluded by this long recognition of a principle
having such intimate relation to titles to real estate from disturbing these
cases.

   The Act of 1858, changing the rule of construction of the proceedings of
these Courts, has no application to proceedings taken before its passage. So the
act expressly provides in the first section. (Statutes of 1858, 95.)

   1. The first objection to the record of proceedings already set out is, that
the petition does not show that John Townsend was, at the time of his death, a
resident of Santa Clara county. But this point is not sustained by the record.
The petition in the address or direction mentions the county of Santa Clara.
This is a part of the petition; the word "Monterey" occurs in connection with
the name of Schallenberger--but this name, though that of a county, is also that
of a town, and the "aforesaid," following "county," was designed to denote the
county, and the only county mentioned before--which was Santa Clara.

   2. That the petition embraces matters pertaining to another estate than that
of John Townsend. This, though irregular, does not affect the jurisdiction. It
is sufficient if the petition contains the requisite averments to justify the
action of the Court had in pursuance of the prayer or of the matter set out. If
it goes beyond, and includes irrelevant and redundant matter, this furnishes a
good objection for the rejection of this irrelevant matter, or probably
constitutes a good exception for want of form or for defective pleading; but it
does not affect the jurisdiction of the Court. (See Stuart v. Allen, 16 Cal.)

    3. The more serious objection is, that this petition fails to specify the
one hundred vara lot in question as a part of the real estate of the deceased.
The one hundred and fifty-fourth and one hundred and fifty-fifth sections of the
Act concerning the estates of decedents, are as follows: "Section 154. When the
personal estate in the hands of the executor or administrator shall be
insufficient to pay the allowance to the family, and all debts and charges of
the administration, the executor or administrator may sell the real estate for
that purpose, upon the order of the County Judge."

   "Section 155. To obtain such order, he shall present a petition to the
Probate Court, setting forth the amount of personal estate that has come to his
hands, and how much thereof, if any, remains undisposed of; the debts
outstanding against the deceased, so far as can be ascertained; a description of
all the real estate of which the testator or intestate died seized, and the
condition and value of the respective portions and lots; the names and ages of
the devisees, if any, and of the heirs of the deceased; which petition shall be
verified by the oath of the party presenting the same."

   It is said, that the petition in this case refers to the inventory, and that
the inventory sets forth this lot as a part of the real estate of the deceased.
It is required by the one hundred and fifty-fifth section, that the petition
shall set forth "all the real estate;" but we held in Stuart v. Allen that if
reference were made to the inventory in such way as "to make the inventory a
part of the petition, the inventory and petition might be read together as one
paper, and the defects or omissions of the petition could in this way be
corrected by means of this reference." But the difficulty here is in the fact
that no reference is made to the inventory for any such purpose. The only notice
of the inventory is in this sentence: "That the personal property consists of
rents arising from a portion of the real estate in San Francisco, which have
become greatly reduced in consequence of the destruction of the buildings by the
fire of May last, and the furniture and other goods mentioned in the inventory."
This may be considered, under the somewhat liberal view we took in Stuart v.
Allen, as justifying the omission to include in the petition a more particular
statement of the personal effects than that made in it; but this statement does
not make the  inventory a part of the petition for any other purpose. No one
would have thought of looking into the inventory to ascertain the real estate
which the deceased left, "and the condition and value of the respective portions
and lots." It may be that an omission of a portion of the real estate would not
affect the proceedings ordering the sale of another portion described; but we
are unable to see how the heir could be divested of his title by a sale of
property, for which sale there was no petition. This petition is unquestionably
the foundation of the jurisdiction. All the other proceedings rest on this. Not
only is a petition made necessary to obtain this order, but the kind of petition
is given. A petition substantially different from that required would not do. It
is essential that this petition should show the facts required, since not only
the judgment of the Court is invoked to determine whether there shall be any
sale, but also, if any, what property it is best for the interests of the heir
should be sold. The guardian appearing for the heir is not supposed to know that
the petitioner will seek to sell other property than that in the petition. The
infant is not able to protect himself, as ordinary litigants are. Unless it be
held that this requirement is a jurisdictional fact, we must maintain that the
whole of the other required averments of the petition, as given by the one
hundred and fifty-fifth section, are directory--that indeed, no petition need be
filed at all; for it is difficult to see the difference, as was suggested in
Gregory v. McPherson (13 Cal. 562) by one of the Judges, between a petition
lacking the substantial averments of the statute, and no petition at all. We
would feel bound, then,  to hold that the one hundred and fifty-fourth section
conferred the jurisdiction, and the other sections following were merely
directory provisions for carrying it out. This point was made by counsel for
appellant in Stuart v. Allen, and noticed by the Court; we did not intimate any
opinion on the subject, but distinctly left the point open for further
discussion.

   The authorities cited by the counsel for the respondent upon statutes not
dissimilar maintain the proposition, that the facts required must appear in the
petition, or else that the action of the Court is void. ( Bloom v. Burdick, 1
Hill, 130; Bronson's opinion, 4 Hill, 86; 7 Id. 29.)

    The general reasoning of the principal opinion in Gregory v. McPherson need
not be here repeated. It is believed to be correct, and is supported by many
authorities. It is true, that this opinion, not having been concurred in by the
other Justices, is not itself authority; and when the same point came up in
Stuart v. Allen, the question was referred to as open--for it was not necessary
in that case to pass upon it. Now it is distinctly presented, and has been fully
argued. The authorities are collected in Wyatts, Administrator, v. Rambo (29
Ala. 510); and in Corwin v. Merritt (3 Barb. S. C. 341); and the principle is
supported in most of the numerous cases which the industry of the learned
counsel of the respondent has collected in his brief. In the case in Alabama, it
is conceded that the Probate Court, under the system prevailing in that State,
is a Court of general jurisdiction of testamentary matters, being a Court
provided for by the Constitution; but it is held that, as to the proceedings for
sales of decedent estates, such Courts exercise a peculiar statutory authority,
and therefore, as to such proceedings, are within the rule which prescribes a
strict construction to their acts. This principle, if correct, would seem to be
peculiarly applicable to sales of real estate by administrators; such sales
being not in the course of the jurisdiction of the English Courts of Ordinary,
but in derogation of the rules of the common law. But it is not necessary to
express any opinion as to the correctness of this distinction, inasmuch as we
have already intimated our unwillingness to disturb the early decisions of this
Court holding the rule that these Courts, under the legislation previous to
1858, are to be regarded as Courts of limited and special jurisdiction.

   Nothing in this opinion conflicts with the case of Irwin v. Scriber, recently
decided; for that case came under the Act of 1858.

   It is unnecessary to consider other points, for this is decisive.

   Judgment affirmed.


                              19 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           HASKELL CARO et al., Plaintiffs and Respondents, v. W. A.
            SAVAGE, as State Real Estate Commissioner, Defendant and
                                   Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 19660

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                  Division One

            201 Cal. App. 2d 530; 20 Cal. Rptr. 286; 1962 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2625


                                 March 19, 1962

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied April 4, 1962, and
Respondents' Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court was Denied May 16,
1962.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of the City and
County of San Francisco.  Orla St. Clair, Judge.

   Proceeding in mandamus to compel the State Real Estate Commissioner to vacate
his decision revoking plaintiffs' real estate licenses.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Brokers -- Licenses -- Disciplinary Proceedings -- Judicial Review.  --On
appeal to the superior court from an administrative ruling of the Real Estate
Commissioner revoking licenses of brokers, the court is authorized to exercise
its independent judgment on the evidence of the administrative hearing without
being bound by the findings made at the hearing. (Code Civ. Proc., § 1094.5.)

(2a) (2b) Id. -- Licenses -- Suspension or Revocation -- Grounds.  --Where a
real estate agent opens an escrow to complete the sale of property and arranges
with the holder of a trust deed on the property to accept a sum less than the
unpaid balance without the knowledge or consent of the seller, and the escrow
agent, at the direction of the real estate agent, charges the seller's funds
with the full amount of the loan on the property and pays to the real estate
agent the sum in excess of the amount actually required to retire the loan on
the property, the real estate agent's conduct violates Bus. & Prof. Code, §
10176, specifying the grounds for suspending or revoking a real estate license.
The agent violates subd. (a) of the section by sending a false statement to the
seller stating that the full amount for the trust deed has been paid to the
holder thereof. The agent violates subd. (g) by taking a secret and undisclosed
compensation or profit and also by failing to disclose to the seller the full
amount of the compensation taken. And the agent's conduct constitutes fraud
under subd. (i) of the section.

(3) Id. -- Duties and Liabilities -- Good Faith.  --The relationship existing
between a seller of property and the real estate agent who lists the property
for sale is of a fiduciary nature. The law imposes upon the agent the same
obligation of undivided service and loyalty that it imposes on a trustee in
favor of his beneficiary. The agent is not only bound to act in the highest good
faith but is precluded from obtaining any advantage over the seller by virtue of
his agency.

(4) Id.--Licenses -- Disciplinary Proceedings -- Judicial Review.  --Where the
findings of the Real Estate Commissioner in disciplinary proceedings against
brokers are supported by uncontradicted evidence, it is error for the trial
court to make a finding that such administrative findings are not supported by
the weight of the evidence.

(5) Id.--Licenses -- Disciplinary Proceedings -- Judicial Review.  --Where the
Real Estate Commissioner revokes the license of a real estate corporation, but
makes no findings that such corporation violated any section of the Bus. & Prof.
Code, and the appellate court is unable to ascertain upon what specific basis
the trial court set aside the revocation of the corporation's license, the
appellate court will conclude that the commissioner's decision was not supported
by any findings whatsoever.

COUNSEL: Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, Carl W. Wynkoop and Gerald F. Carreras,
Deputy Attorneys General, for Defendant and Appellant.

James E. Fredricks and Fredricks & Sullivan for Plaintiffs and Respondents.

JUDGES: Sullivan, J.  Bray, P. J., and Tobriner, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: SULLIVAN

OPINION

     This is an appeal by W. A. Savage, Real Estate Commissioner of the State of
California, from a judgment granting respondents' petition for a writ of mandate
and commanding said commissioner to vacate, annul and set aside his decision
revoking the real estate licenses of the respondents Haskell Caro, Clay Henry
Buschman and Buschman Realty Co., a corporation.

    All three respondents were licensed by the Division of Real Estate of the
Department of Investment of the State of California.  Prior to July 31, 1958,
Caro had been licensed as a real estate salesman; on and after that date as a
real estate broker. Buschman was licensed as a real estate broker and a business
opportunity broker under the firm name and style of Buschman Realty.  Commencing
on January 8, 1959, Buschman Realty, a California corporation, to which we will
hereafter  refer as the corporation, was licensed as a real estate broker by and
through Caro, as its secretary-treasurer.  Although incorporated on June 4,
1958, such corporation was not licensed as a real estate broker during the
period from June 4, 1958, to January 8, 1959.

   On March 26, 1959, an accusation was filed before the commissioner against
respondents charging them in two separately stated causes of action with
violations of the Business and Professions Code arising out of a certain real
estate transaction.

   In the first cause of action, it was alleged that the corporation, through
Caro, listed certain improved real property for sale; that Buschman and Caro,
individually and as officers of the corporation, presented to the sellers an
offer from one Lilly Schwenger to purchase the property; that Lilly Schwenger
was not a bona fide purchaser but was actually the wife of Buschman who was
buying the property for his own account; that Buschman and Caro, individually
and as officers of the corporation wilfully and fraudulently concealed from the
sellers the fact that Lilly Schwenger was the wife of Buschman and that he was
buying the property for the purpose of reselling it at a secret profit; and that
such facts were concealed for the further purpose of enabling Buschman and Caro
to collect a real estate commission on the sale.  The accusation charged that
such conduct constituted violations by Caro of section 10176, subdivisions (a),
(g) and (i), and section 10177, subdivision (f); by Buschman of the same
sections and in addition of section 10302, subdivision (e); and by the
corporation of sections 10130 and 10177, subdivisions (d) and (f).

   In the second cause of action it was alleged that Buschman and Caro,
individually and as officers of the corporation, after having opened an escrow
at a title company  for the purpose of completing the above sale, without the
sellers' knowledge, obtained the consent of the beneficiary and owner of the
second deed of trust on the property to accept the sum of $ 1,800 in full
settlement of the indebtedness secured by such deed of trust which then amounted
to $ 1,985; that although only $ 1,800 was paid from funds in escrow in payment
of such indebtedness, the sellers were charged with $ 1,985 and the difference
of $ 185 was paid to Buschman Realty; that Caro, individually and as an officer
of the corporation, caused a statement to be delivered to the sellers falsely
showing such payment of $ 1,985; and that both Caro and Buschman, individually
and as officers of the corporation, concealed the true facts of the above
payment from the sellers. The accusation charged that such conduct set forth in
the second cause of action constituted violations by Caro and Buschman of the
same sections of the Business and Professions Code with which they were
respectively charged in the first cause of action; and by the corporation of
section 10177 only.

   The record of the administrative hearing discloses the following facts: By an
agreement entered into on May 28, 1958, Buschman agreed to sell to Caro and one
Daniel F. Sullivan his real estate business known as Buschman Realty, together
with furniture, fixtures, membership in the Multiple Listing Service of San
Francisco and good will.  1 In order to effect a transfer of the multiple
listing service membership according to the rules of that association and
because both Caro and Sullivan were licensed as salesmen and not as brokers, it
was agreed that the real estate business would be transferred to a corporation.
Such corporation would manage and control the real estate business. It would be
entitled to use the name Buschman Realty for the period of a year.  It was also
agreed that Buschman would be one of the first directors.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   By the
same agreement, Buschman agreed to sell his insurance business to one O'Shea.
This aspect of the agreement is not involved here.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In accordance with the above agreement, Buschman Realty, a California
corporation, was incorporated on June 2, 1958.  Buschman, James E. Fredricks and
Frank Kudelka were its incorporators, first directors and subsequently were
elected president, vice-president and secretary-treasurer respectively.  By
corporate resolution Caro and Sullivan were appointed co-managers of the
corporation.  The last two persons also owned all of the stock.  According to
the testimony of Caro, Buschman became an officer and director only to secure
the multiple listing membership, it being the declared intention of the parties
in their agreement above mentioned to transfer such membership and change the
name of the corporation at the end of the year.  Caro testified that Kudelka
"was listed as the employing broker as the Secretary-Treasurer of the
corporation." No one connected with the firm was licensed under Buschman
himself, although he retained his own broker's license. Apparently some
confusion resulted from the fact that such license was carried under Buschman's
former designation as an individual doing business as Buschman Realty.  After
Caro became licensed as a real estate  broker on July 31, 1958, Kudelka resigned
as officer and director and Caro took his place.

   The real estate business of Buschman Realty, owned by Caro and Sullivan, was
conducted by them at the same address at which Buschman, as an individual, had
conducted it before the sale.  These premises were held under a three-year lease
from Clay and Lilly Buschman to Buschman Realty Company, a California
corporation.  The corporation, by lease of identical date and term, sublet to
Buschman "Desk Space to be used as Loan Business, phone calls, and receiving
mail . . . ."

   Despite the formation of the above corporation, the issuance of its stock to
Caro and Sullivan and the above lease and sublease, Caro testified that Sullivan
and he never operated the real estate business through the corporation but
conducted the same as a partnership, the corporation being  used merely to hold
the multiple listing service membership. They had no written partnership
agreement; nor did they ever file a certificate of doing business under the name
of Buschman Realty.  No real estate license was ever issued to such partnership.
Caro considered the Buschman Realty to be the Caro-Sullivan partnership. They
maintained two checking accounts: a trust account in the name of Buschman Realty
Co. and a personal account in their own names.  Buschman made no sales for the
Buschman Realty and received no commissions from it.  Buschman testified that
after he sold his real estate business to Caro and Sullivan on June 1, 1958, he
did not thereafter remain active "in the brokerage end" of the real estate
business but was engaged in buying and selling properties.  He had no authority
to sign checks for Buschman Realty and had no managerial responsibilities
concerning the operation of the real estate business.

   On July 28, 1958, Jim Wheelis and Macy Wheelis, his wife, hereinafter
referred to as the sellers, owned certain improved real property in San
Francisco.  By a written authorization bearing that date, they granted to
Buschman Realty, a California corporation, the exclusive right for a period of
three months to sell their property for the price of $ 13,500.  This
authorization expired on October 28, 1958, and at that time was extended until
March 1, 1959.  Such written authorization was under the corporate name of the
realty company and was accepted in such name by Caro, such corporate name being
impressed in both places on the document by a stamp.  Caro explained this by
stating that "what someone in the office did  do was to take our pad and go
through the whole batch and stamp them.  .  . .  I have since thrown all those
away." He claimed that the corporate name was used inadvertently.

   Some time later, Buschman became interested in the property and decided to
make an offer to purchase it for $ 10,500 using the name of his wife, Lilly
Schwenger.  He testified that he made this offer to Caro but had no contact
whatsoever with Mr. and Mrs. Wheelis, the sellers. Caro prepared the deposit
receipt for such an offer, Buschman signed his wife's name, and Caro had Daniel
F. Sullivan sign the document for Buschman Realty Co. as agent for the sellers.
Caro then mailed the deposit receipt to the sellers who were in Guam.  Caro did
not, either in his letter of transmittal, or at any other time, disclose to the
sellers the identity of Lilly Schwenger or the fact that Buschman, himself, was
purchasing the property.  The sellers accepted the offer and agreed to pay
Buschman Realty Co. a 5 per cent commission on the sale, amounting to $ 525.
The sellers then conveyed the property to Lilly Schwenger, Buschman himself
paying the purchase price.  Caro attended to the closing of the sale at the
title company.

   As we have heretofore mentioned, the sellers' property was encumbered by a
second deed of trust securing a promissory note held by one May McInerney.  Caro
contacted Mrs. McInerney and offered her $ 1,750 in full payment of her note, of
which the unpaid balance was $ 1,985.  She later agreed to take $ 1,800.  He
signed sellers' instructions authorizing the disbursement, not of $ 1,800 but of
$ 1,985 to pay off the second deed of trust. Such amount was charged against the
sellers. Caro testified that he did this because the sellers had forced him to
reduce his real estate commission from 6 per cent to 5 per cent.  He also
testified that he did not inform Buschman of these arrangements.  The full
amount of the indebtedness was charged in the sellers' instructions, according
to his testimony, because of advice he received at the title company: "I was
told that that would be the proper way to do it; . . ." Caro of course did not
disclose to the sellers that the second deed of trust was being paid off for a
reduced amount.

   Upon the closing of the transaction, the title company paid to Buschman
Realty, according to Caro's instructions, the sum of $ 681.06, representing the
real estate commission  of $ 525 plus the $ 185 discount from the McInerney
second deed of trust, less the sum of $ 28.94 chargeable for proration of taxes.
This check was endorsed "Buschman Realty, Daniel F. Sullivan, Haskell Caro" and
deposited it in the personal account of Sullivan and Caro.

   Thereafter Buschman sold the property to one Orbelina H. Castro for $ 14,500
and had his wife, under the name of Lilly Schwenger, convey the property to Mrs.
Castro on January 20, 1959.  Buschman testified that he never received a
commission on the sale of the property to him or on his resale to Mrs. Castro.

   The accusation filed before the commissioner was based on the premise that
Buschman Realty, a corporation, was "under the supervision, dominance, and
control of respondents, Caro and Buschman" and that both of said respondents
"individually and as officers of said corporation" presented the offer of Lilly
Schwenger to the sellers, concealed from them the true facts of the transaction
and in addition obtained a reduction of the McInerney indebtedness. At the
administrative hearing the respondents filed a stipulation executed by them in
which they admitted in general the occurrence of the transaction set forth in
the accusation. In such stipulation,  however, Caro denied that the acts
complained of were done by him as an officer of the corporation and Buschman
denied that he personally participated either as an officer of the corporation
or individually in presenting the offer to the sellers or in arranging for the
reduction of the McInerney indebtedness. In essence, the theory of the
accusation was to connect both Buschman and Caro with the corporation and thus
with each other so that Buschman would be implicated in the transaction carried
on by Caro.  The theory of the respondents in defense was that Caro did not act
for the corporation, but for the Caro-Sullivan "partnership" with which Buschman
had no connection.

   The hearing officer found that Caro, Sullivan and Buschman were engaged in
the real estate business in the name of Buschman Realty, a corporation (thus
establishing the connection between Buschman and Caro), and that in so doing,
pursuant to the agreement of May 28, 1958, they were engaging in the real estate
business without having first obtained a real estate broker's license. He made
the additional findings, of significance here, that Buschman acting through Caro
in the name of the corporation presented the offer on behalf of Lilly Schwenger,
that Buschman and Caro concealed the true facts of the transaction from the
sellers, that Buschman participated  in the commission paid on the sale, that
Buschman and Caro obtained the discount from Mrs. McInerney and concealed the
same from the sellers, and that in the accomplishment of the purchase of the
real property, the procurement of the commission and the securing of the
discount, Buschman and Caro were acting for the individual benefit of each but
to accomplish their purpose they acted as officers of Buschman Realty, a
California corporation and in the name of said corporation.

   Upon such findings the hearing officer determined that respondents Buschman
and Caro had violated the following sections of the Business and Professions
code: On the first cause of action: section 10176, subdivisions (a) and (i) and
section 10177, subdivision (f); on the second cause of action: section 10176,
subdivisions (a), (g) and (i) and section 10177, subdivision (f).  2 It was also
determined that by reason  of the facts found with respect to both causes of
action and by reason of section 10302, the business opportunity license of   the
respondent Buschman was subject to disciplinary action.  As a result, the real
estate broker's licenses of Buschman, Caro and Buschman Realty, a corporation,
as well as the business opportunity broker's license of Buschman, were revoked.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2    Section
10176 of the Business and Professions Code provides in part: "The commissioner .
. . may temporarily suspend or permanently revoke a real estate license at any
time where the licensee, while a real estate licensee, in performing or
attempting to perform any of the acts within the scope of this chapter has been
guilty of any of the following:

   "(a) Making any substantial misrepresentation.

   ". . . .

   "(g) The claiming or taking by a licensee of any secret or undisclosed amount
of compensation, commission or profit or the failure of a licensee to reveal to
the employer of such licensee the full amount of such licensee's compensation,
commission or profit under any agreement authorizing or employing such licensee
to do any acts for which a license is required under this chapter for
compensation or commission prior to or coincident with the signing of an
agreement evidencing the meeting of the minds of the contracting parties,
regardless of the form of such agreement, whether evidenced by documents in an
escrow or by any other or different procedure.

   ". . . .

   "(i) Any other conduct, whether of the same or a different character than
specified in this section, which constitutes fraud or dishonest dealing."

   Section 10177 provides in part: "The commissioner may suspend or revoke the
license of any real estate licensee, or may deny the issuance of a license to an
applicant, who has done any of the following:

   ". . . .

   "(f) Acted or conducted himself in a manner which would have warranted the
denial of his application for a real estate license."

   Section 10302 provides in part: "The commissioner may suspend or revoke the
license of any business opportunity licensee, or may deny the issuance of a
license to an applicant, who has done any of the following:

   ". . . .

   "(e) Acted or conducted himself in a manner which would have warranted the
denial of his application for a business opportunity license."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Respondents thereupon filed a petition for a writ of mandate in the superior
court contending that: 1) respondents did not have a fair trial; 2) respondents
suffered a prejudicial abuse of discretion in that: (a) the commissioner did not
proceed in the manner required by law; (b) the commissioner's decision was not
supported by the findings and the findings were not supported by the evidence;
and (c) the decision was excessive and contrary to law.  The transcript of the
administrative proceedings and the exhibits received in evidence in such
proceedings were received in evidence in the trial court and the case thereupon
submitted to such court on the same evidence.  Respondents' first contention was
rejected, the trial court finding that respondents had a fair trial in the
administrative proceedings.  The court found, however, that respondents suffered
a prejudicial abuse of discretion by the commissioner in that the commissioner's
decision was not supported by the findings and the findings were not supported
by the evidence that the weight of the evidence did not support the findings and
that "the Commissioner did proceed without or in excess of his jurisdiction; . .
." Upon such trial court findings, the writ of mandate was granted and the
commissioner's decision ordered set aside and annulled.

     The trial court in this case was authorized to exercise its independent
judgment on the evidence of the administrative hearing without being bound by
the findings made at the conclusion of such hearing.  ( Code Civ. Proc., §
1094.5, subd. (c); Moran v. Board of Medical Examiners (1948) 32 Cal.2d 301, 308
[196 P.2d 20]; McPherson v. Real Estate Comr. (1958) 162 Cal.App.2d 751, 752
[329 P.2d 12]; Manning v. Watson (1952) 108 Cal.App.2d 705, 712 [239 P.2d 688].)
We are presented on this appeal, therefore, with the sole question whether,
viewed according to the familiar principles, there is any substantial evidence
contradicted or uncontradicted which will support the trial court's findings.  (
McPherson v. Real Estate Comr., supra; Manning v. Watson, supra.)

   The trial court found in effect that the administrative findings were not
true.  The court did not itself substitute specific findings in their place.
Although the trial court's findings are therefore broad, it is  apparent that it
impliedly found that, in respect to the real estate transaction involved, there
was no  connection or concert of action among Buschman, Caro and the
corporation.  There is ample evidence in the record to support this conclusion
of the trial court.  Caro testified that he and Sullivan had purchased the real
estate business from Buschman; that they never operated such business through
the corporation but considered that they were in partnership together.  Both
Caro and Buschman testified that the corporation was being used merely to hold
the multiple listing service membership. Although Buschman was an officer of the
corporation, nevertheless both Caro and Buschman testified that Buschman took no
active part in the real estate business. Both testified that Buschman did not
share either in the $ 525 commission paid on the sale from Mr. and Mrs. Wheelis
to Buschman (through Lilly Schwenger) or in the $ 185 realized from the
McInerney discount. The evidence shows that such funds were deposited in a
personal bank account of Caro and Sullivan, in which Buschman had no interest
and over which he had no control.

   While the evidence in the record may have supported the administrative
finding that Buschman and Caro were acting in concert and were using the
corporation to accomplish their purpose, it also supports the finding of the
trial court that such was not true and that Buschman and the corporation had no
connection with Caro as the representative of the sellers. The trial court, in
effect hearing this matter de novo, was entitled to exercise its independent
judgment on the effect and weight of the evidence.  ( McPherson v. Real Estate
Comr., 162 Cal.App.2d at page 754.)

   As a result the court below determined that, in the real estate transaction
at hand, there was no connection between Buschman or the corporation with Caro
and that it was Caro and Sullivan, using the name Buschman Realty, but not the
corporate entity, who were the agents for the sellers and as such owed to the
sellers the usual duties derived from such relationship.  On this determination,
neither Buschman nor the corporation was the sellers' agent or owed them any
duties of such a fiduciary.

   Appellant has referred us to a number of cases emphasizing the fiduciary
relationship existing between a real estate broker and his client including the
case of Buckley v. Savage (1960) 184 Cal.App.2d 18 [7 Cal.Rptr.  328] (cert.
den.  366 U.S. 910 [81 S.Ct. 1086, 6 L.Ed.2d 235]), which, appellant feels,
bears a great resemblance to the facts of this action.  Buckley  held that a
failure by a real estate broker to disclose to the seller, who was his
principal, that the broker was the buyer of the property constituted sufficient
grounds to justify revocation of his license, since, as an agent charged with
the same obligation of undivided service and loyalty as a trustee, he was bound
to disclose all material facts about the transaction which might affect his
principal's decision.  We do not question the legal principles so stated.  They
simply do not apply to respondents Buschman and the corporation, because the
trial court determined that those two respondents were not the agents of the
sellers.

   Appellant contends that the conduct and acts of both Buschman and Caro were
illegal.  In support of this proposition he points out that the corporation was
never licensed during any of the time in question; that all of Caro's acts were
as a real estate salesman through such unlicensed corporation; that, assuming
Caro and Sullivan operated as a partnership, such partnership did not have such
a license; and that, although Caro himself was issued a broker's license on July
31, 1958, at no time was he licensed by or through any partnership with Sullivan
or by or through the corporation.  3 These arguments, however, do not establish
a connection between Buschman and Caro.   Conceding that the activities of Caro
and Sullivan as real estate partners were illegal, it does not of necessity
follow that they were acting through the corporation.  There was evidence to
support the trial court's finding that they were not acting through the
corporation.  Caro was issued a real estate broker's license on July 31, 1958.
At the time the exclusive authorization to sell was returned to him by the
sellers from Guam (which Caro stated was some time in August), at the time of
its renewal and at the time of the Wheelis-Schwenger transaction, Caro was
licensed, although the Sullivan-Caro partnership was not.  This circumstance was
consistent with the trial court's apparent conclusion that Caro was not acting
through the corporation.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Appellant
cites Bus. & Prof. Code, §§ 10158, 10159, 10211, and 10212.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    We hold therefore that there was sufficient evidence to support the trial
court's finding that Buschman and the corporation had no connection with Caro in
the listing and sale of the sellers' property, that there was no fiduciary
relationship between Buschman and the sellers, and that therefore he had
breached no obligations owing to the sellers for which he could be disciplined.

    We next consider the sufficiency of the evidence insofar as it pertains to
the respondent Haskell Caro.  In his closing brief, the appellant commissioner
contends that the facts relating to the conduct of respondent Caro charged under
the second stated cause of action are uncontroverted, that the determination of
their effect is therefore a matter of law upon which the findings of the trial
court are not controlling and that, as a matter of law, such conduct constituted
violations of the Business and Professions Code, for which discipline was
properly imposed by the commissioner.  These contentions have merit.

     The record discloses no conflict in the evidence relating to Caro's conduct
covered by the second stated cause of action, except possibly in minor details.
Without any contradictory evidence the following facts are clearly established
by the oral and documentary evidence including the formal admissions of fact
contained in Caro's signed stipulation which was also made a part of the record:
He opened an escrow with the title company for the purpose of completing the
sale from Mr. and Mrs. Wheelis to Lilly Schwenger.  Without the sellers'
knowledge or consent he made arrangements with Mrs. McInerney, the holder of the
second deed of trust, to accept $ 1,800 instead of the then unpaid balance of $
1,985.  Upon his directions, and without the sellers' knowledge or consent, the
$ 1,800 was paid from the sellers' funds in the escrow, and the difference of $
185 was paid to Buschman Realty, that is to Caro and Sullivan.  He caused a
statement, which he knew to be false, to be delivered to the sellers showing
that $ 1,985 had been paid to Mrs. McInerney.  During all of this time Caro was
the agent of the sellers, occupying a fiduciary relationship as to them.

   Such conduct violates the provisions of subdivisions (a), (g) and (i) of
section 10176 of the Business and Professions Code.

   Subdivision (a) of such section proscribes "any substantial
misrepresentation." It is beyond question that Caro made such a
misrepresentation when he caused a false statement to be sent to the sellers
stating that $ 1,985 had been paid to Mrs. McInerney when only $ 1,800 had been
paid.

   Caro's subsequent conduct contravenes subdivision (g) in two respects: he not
only took a secret and undisclosed compensation or profit but he also failed to
disclose to the sellers the full amount thereof.   The relationship existing
between  him and the sellers was of a fiduciary nature.  In such a relationship,
the law imposed upon him "the same obligation of undivided service and loyalty
that it imposes on a trustee in favor of his beneficiary." ( Langford v. Thomas
(1926) 200 Cal. 192, 196 [252 P. 602].) He was not only bound to act towards
them in the highest good faith but was precluded from obtaining any advantage
over them by virtue of his agency.  ( Calmon v. Sarraille  (1904) 142 Cal. 638,
641 [76 P. 486].) The McInerney obligation was an obligation of the sellers. If
Caro could arrange for its payment at a reduced amount, such benefit belonged to
his principals, not to him.  His conduct resulted in his obtaining an advantage
over his principals, accomplished by misrepresentation, falsification and
concealment.   Such conduct not only violated subdivision (g) above mentioned
but constituted fraud and dishonest dealing in contravention of subdivision (i)
of the same section.

     It appears that the findings of the hearing officer on the second cause of
action were as to Caro supported by uncontradicted evidence.  The finding of the
trial court, therefore, that such administrative findings were not supported by
the weight of the evidence is clearly erroneous and itself devoid of evidentiary
support.  It is therefore clear that on this phase of the charge the
commissioner did not proceed without or in excess of his jurisdiction.

   Respondent Caro suggests, rather obliquely we think, that he was an agent for
Mrs. McInerney as well as the sellers. This suggestion finds no support in the
record.  It is followed by the suggestion that Mrs. McInerney paid respondent
the $ 185 for performing a service for her.  We are not told by respondent what
the service was or where in the record there is support for such an arrangement
between him and Mrs. McInerney.  Respondent's argument falls before the fact
that Mrs. McInerney did not pay anyone anything.  The money in the escrow from
which the $ 185 was paid to respondent belonged to the sellers. They made the
payment.

   Finally respondent argues that the trial court found the allegations of the
second cause of action to be insufficient to show a violation of the Business
and Professions Code.  Respondent fails to point out to us by reference to the
record either in what respect such allegations are insufficient or how the trial
court found them to be so.

   The foregoing contentions of appellant which we find tenable are, however,
confined to the second cause of action. He  does not argue that Caro's conduct
under the first cause of action constitutes violations of any provisions of the
Business and Professions Code as a matter of law.  The trial court, as we have
pointed out, concluded that Buschman and Caro were not acting in concert and
that Buschman was not in a fiduciary relationship with the sellers. It follows
that Buschman was dealing at arm's length in purchasing the property for
himself.  Caro did not acquire any interest in the property.  There was thus
evidence to support the court's conclusion that Caro was not guilty of taking a
secret profit or of taking advantage of the sellers by purchasing the property
for himself.

   It is true that Caro presented to the sellers an offer purportedly on behalf
of Lilly Schwenger knowing that Buschman was buying the property for himself or
at least for himself and his wife as community property.  It is also a
suspicious circumstance that Buschman used the maiden name of his wife, when it
is likely that the use of the name Buschman, which was the same as that of the
real estate company operated by Caro, would have alerted the sellers and might
have affected their decision to accept the offer.  The trial court apparently
concluded that in presenting such an offer, Caro did not make any
misrepresentation and in the light of the particular facts of this case was not
under a duty to disclose the identity of the buyer.  It would appear that the
court reached this conclusion from a consideration of the totality of the
circumstances bearing upon said respondent's conduct and determined such facts
did not show a violation of the statutes as charged in the accusation. We cannot
say that such determination is without support of substantial evidence.

     Respondent Buschman Realty Co., a corporation, was charged in the
accusation filed before the Real Estate Commissioner with violations of section
10130 (engaging in real estate business without a license), section 10177,
subdivision (d) (wilful disregard of the Real Estate Law)  and section 10177,
subdivision (f) (action or conduct which would warrant denial of an application
for a license).  The hearing officer however made no findings that such
corporation had violated the above or any other sections of the Business and
Professions Code, although the commissioner revoked the license of the
corporation.  In view of the very broad findings of the trial court, we are
unable to ascertain upon what specific basis the court set aside the revocation
of the corporation's license and we must therefore conclude that such action was
predicated on the grounds that the commissioner's decision in this respect was
not supported by any findings whatsoever.

   The decision of the commissioner revoking the licenses of all three
respondents contained the following language: "Said penalties are separately and
severally imposed and shall constitute the order of the Real Estate Commissioner
of the State of California irrespective of the fact that on judicial review of
this decision one or more of the determinations of issues herein shall be found
to be contrary to fact or law." Although in respect to the respondent Caro, we
in effect sustain the trial court on the first cause of action and overrule the
trial court on the second cause of action, it is clear from the above quoted
provision of the commissioner's decision that the disciplinary action against
respondent Caro remains unaffected since "said penalties are separately and
severally imposed." We are not prepared to say that the resultant penalty on
such separate basis represents under the circumstances a clear abuse of
discretion and hence that the commissioner should redetermine the discipline
imposed.  (Cf.  Magit v. Board of Medical Examiners (1961) 57 Cal.2d 74, 87-88
[17 Cal.Rptr. 488, 366 P.2d 816].)

   The judgment of the trial court is therefore affirmed as to the respondents
Clay Henry Buschman and Buschman Realty Co., a corporation, and reversed as to
the respondent Haskell Caro.


                              20 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            JEFF V. MERRIFIELD, Plaintiff and Appellant, v. JAMES A.
           EDMONDS, JR., as Real Estate Commissioner, etc., Defendant
                                 and Appellant

                                  No. AO15073

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                 Division Three

            146 Cal. App. 3d 336; 194 Cal. Rptr. 104; 1983 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2077


                                August 22, 1983

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     The petition of plaintiff and appellant for a hearing by
the Supreme Court was denied October 19, 1983.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Santa Clara County, No. 430752, Paul R.
Teilh, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1) Brokers § 25--Duties and Liabilities of Brokers--Reimbursement From Real
Estate Education, Research and Recovery Fund--Presumptions.  --Under Bus. &
Prof. Code, § 10471, providing that an aggrieved party may recover from the Real
Estate Fund if he obtains a judgment against a licensed real estate broker or
salesperson on certain grounds, a judgment entered pursuant to Code Civ. Proc.,
§ 594, in which the licensee answered the complaint and received notice but did
not appear, was not a "default" judgment within the meaning of Bus. & Prof.
Code, § 10473, providing that a judgment against a licensee creates a rebuttable
presumption that the necessary judgment was obtained, unless it was by default,
consent, or stipulation.

(2a) (2b) Brokers § 25--Duties and Liabilities of Brokers--Reimbursement From
Real Estate Education, Research and Recovery Fund--Personal Loans.  --The trial
court erred in granting plaintiff recovery from the real estate fund (Bus. &
Prof. Code, § 10471) based on a judgment plaintiff obtained against a real
estate salesperson for failure to pay back two loans made by plaintiff to him,
where the undisputed evidence showed that plaintiff loaned the money to the
salesperson for his personal use and where the loans did not arise "directly"
from a real estate transaction, but were strictly personal loans, despite
plaintiff's characterization of them as advances on commissions. The taking of
personal loans and the giving of promissory notes therefor are not activities
which require a real estate license under the applicable statutes.

(3) Brokers § 12--Authority of Brokers--Salespersons--Contracts.  --A real
estate salesperson cannot contract in his or her own name or accept compensation
except from the broker under whom he or she is licensed.

(4a) (4b) Brokers § 25--Duties and Liabilities of Brokers--Reimbursement From
Real Estate Education, Research and Recovery Fund--Licensed Activities--Scope.
--Under Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10471, providing that an aggrieved party may
recover from the Real Estate Fund if he obtains a judgment against a licensed
real estate broker or salesperson on certain grounds, recovery is not permitted
when the loss arises directly out of a transaction in which the judgment debtor
was licensed as a real estate salesperson and he or she improperly performed
acts for which a real estate broker's license is required. Thus, when a fund
applicant recovered a judgment against a real estate salesperson for losses
arising out of the salesperson's off-site management of the applicant's
apartment house, for which a real estate broker's license was required, the
applicant was not entitled to recover from the fund. The applicant was not an
innocent member of the public whom the fund was intended to protect, since he
entered into an illegal contract with the salesperson for which a misdemeanor
penalty is provided by Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10138.

(5) Statutes § 29--Construction--Language--Legislative Intent.  --The rule that
the words of a statute should be construed according to their ordinary meaning
is a corollary to the fundamental principle of statutory construction which
requires courts to ascertain the Legislature's intent and to give effect to the
purpose of the statute, viewing its words in the context of the entire statutory
scheme.

(6) Brokers § 25--Duties and Liabilities of Brokers--Reimbursement From Real
Estate Education, Research and Recovery Fund--Purpose.  --The purpose of the
Real Estate Brokers' Act, of which Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10471, is a part, is to
raise the standards of the real estate profession by requiring its members to
deal fairly and ethically with the public, and within the context of that act,
the purpose of Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10471, is to compensate innocent members of
the public who are victimized by dishonest licensees.

(7) Brokers § 25--Duties and Liabilities of Brokers--Reimbursement From Real
Estate Education, Research and Recovery Fund--Statutory Construction.  --Bus. &
Prof. Code, § 10471, which conditions recovery from the real estate fund on a
showing that the loss "arose . . . directly out of any transaction when the
judgment debtor was licensed and performed acts for which a license is required
under this part . . ." is to be construed as requiring that the loss arose
either "directly out of any transaction when the judgment debtor was licensed
[as a broker] and performed acts for which a [broker's] license is required
under this part, . . ." or "directly out of any transaction when the judgment
debtor was licensed as a [salesperson] and performed acts for which a
[salesperson's] license is required under this part, . . ."

COUNSEL: Hoge, Fenton, Jones & Appel, William J. Elfving and Peter Waite for
Plaintiff and Appellant.

George Deukmejian and John K. Van de Kamp, Attorneys General, and Richard F.
Finn, Deputy Attorney General, for Defendant and Appellant.

JUDGES: Opinion by Barry-Deal, J., with Scott, Acting P. J., and Feinberg, J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: BARRY-DEAL

OPINION

     James A. Edmonds, Jr., as Commissioner of the Department of Real Estate
(Commissioner), appeals from a judgment directing payment of $ 7,000 from the
separate account in the real estate fund for purposes of real estate education,
research, and recovery (the Fund) to Jeff V.  Merrifield (plaintiff), who had
obtained a judgment against Darrell Jones (defendant), a licensed real estate
salesperson. Plaintiff also appeals.  Weconclude, as to the Commissioner's
appeal, that the trial court erred in directing payment of the $ 7,000, because
plaintiff's judgment for this amount did not come within the provisions of
Business and Professions Code section 10471. 1 As to plaintiff's appeal, we find
that the trial court properly denied plaintiff recovery of other losses because
they arose from transactions which were not within the purview of defendant's
license.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   All
statutory citations are to the Business and Professions Code unless otherwise
indicated.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

I. The Facts

   Plaintiff, a practicing dentist, became acquainted with defendant, a licensed
real estate salesperson, when defendant became a patient.  Plaintiff used
defendant as his agent in the purchase of an apartment building on South Avenue
in Turlock.  Defendant was then working as an agent in a realtor's office,
Allstate Real Estate, in Modesto.  While this transaction was being negotiated,
on June 19, 1978, plaintiff loaned defendant $ 3,000, in exchange for which
defendant signed a promissory note for $ 3,300, ". . . to be paid in full and no
further [sic] than a year later." Plaintiff loaned the money to defendant for
"[financial] assistance," and characterized the loan as an "advance on
commissions" earned by defendant.  The note was never paid.

   Later, defendant acted as plaintiff's agent in negotiating a second purchase
of real property on Olive Street in Turlock.  On January 3, 1979, plaintiff
loaned defendant $ 4,000, secured by a note due September 1, 1979.  This loan
was never paid.  Plaintiff also characterized this loan as an "advance . . .
against future commissions." The purchase of the Olive Street property was never
consummated because plaintiff withdrew from the transaction in February 1979.

   After purchasing the South Avenue property, plaintiff retained defendant as
his property manager of the apartment building.  Defendant's duties included
collection and deposit of rent, placement of tenants and maintaining a
reasonable occupancy level, general maintenance, property improvement,  and
securing the services of an assistant resident manager. The parties did not
enter into a written agreement.  Defendant's salary was to be based on a formula
of $ 3.50 per unit per month.  Plaintiff paid him $ 1,000 on October 2, 1978, $
500 on December 10, 1978, and $ 727.10 in March 1979.  It is not clear from the
record how plaintiff arrived at these figures.

   While defendant was acting as property manager, plaintiff gave him a check
for $ 521.54, with defendant as payee, to be used as "petty cash" for paying
certain maintenance and supply expenses.  Defendant never paid these bills, and
plaintiff had to pay the creditors later.

   Some tenants paid their rent to defendant in cash.  He would then write a
personal check to be deposited in plaintiff's rental account.  Three of these
checks totalling  $ 1,319.50 were returned for insufficient funds.  Defendant
never reimbursed plaintiff.

   Plaintiff filed a complaint against defendant for his losses arising out of
the above transactions, alleging causes of action for breach of fiduciary duty,
intentional misrepresentation, conversion, money had and received, debt, account
stated, and money owed.  Defendant, through counsel, filed a "General Denial" to
the complaint, but did not appear for trial.  Judgment was entered in favor of
plaintiff in the amount of $ 10,268.14, plus interest in the amount of $
1,395.86, plus costs.  (See Code Civ. Proc., § 594.)

   On May 5, 1981, plaintiff filed an application in the court for payment from
the Fund pursuant to section 10471.  The trial court concluded that the loans of
$ 3,000 and $ 4,000 were recoverable, and judgment was entered accordingly.  The
Commissioner's appeal and plaintiff's appeal followed.

II. Discussion

A. The Commissioner's Appeal

   Section 10471 provides in relevant part that an aggrieved party may apply for
recovery from the Fund if he obtains a judgment against a licensed real estate
broker or salesperson ". . . under grounds of fraud, misrepresentation, deceit,
or conversion of trust funds arising directly out of any transaction when the
judgment debtor was licensed and performed acts for which a license is required
under this part, . . ." "[This] part" refers to part 1 (Real Estate Law) of
division 4 of the Business and Professions Code, and deals with "Licensing of
Persons." (§ 10000 et seq.)

   It was stipulated that defendant was a licensed real estate salesperson at
all relevant times.   But before recovering under section 10471, plaintiff had
to show that the following facts were also true: (1) plaintiff obtained a
judgment based on fraud, misrepresentation, deceit, or conversion of trust
funds; (2) defendant's improper acts arose directly out of a transaction; (3)
defendant was licensed; and (4) the transaction was one for which a license is
required under the Real Estate Law.  (§ 10471; see also § 10472 for additional
requirements not relevant here.)

   (1) The Judgment

     The existence of a judgment against a defendant-licensee normally creates a
rebuttable presumption that the first element exists.  However, where the
judgment in favor of the applicant ". . . was by default, stipulation, or
consent, . . . the applicant shall have the burden of proving that the cause of
action against the licensee was for fraud, misrepresentation, deceit, or
conversion of trust funds . . . ." (§ 10473; Buccella v. Mayo (1980) 102
Cal.App.3d 315, 325 [162 Cal.Rptr. 369].)

   Despite the Commissioner's characterization of it as such, the underlying
judgment herein was not a "default judgment" (emphasis omitted), but was one
entered pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure section 594.  That section provides
in pertinent part that where a defendant who has answered the complaint receives
proper notice of trial but does not appear, the plaintiff may proceed with his
case and take judgment.  This is what occurred in the case at bench.  The
hearing was one which was "uncontested"; it was not a default hearing ( Wilson
v. Goldman (1969) 274 Cal.App.2d 573, 576-577 [79 Cal.Rptr. 309]), and the
judgment was not a default judgment.

   Neither does it appear that the judgment was entered by consent or
stipulation.  (See 4 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (2d ed. 1971) Proceedings Without
Trial, § 158, p. 2814.) We therefore conclude that the judgment created the
rebuttable presumption under section 10473. 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   We
perceive no real difference between a default judgment and one entered pursuant
to Code of Civil Procedure section 594 for purposes of a hearing on an
application for recovery from the Fund.  However, we leave to the Legislature
the question of whether such a judgment should be included in the list of those
which do not raise the presumption under section 10473.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      The evidence regarding the $ 7,000 loans adduced at the hearing rebutted
that presumption.  Upon the facts which we summarized above, we cannot say that
the trial court erred when it found that defendant's conduct did not amount to
fraud or deceit, but that it constituted "breach of fiduciary duty," which is
not a basis for recovery from the Fund.

   In its memorandum of decision the trial court found that defendant's failure
to repay the $ 7,000 amounted to a conversion of trust funds within the  meaning
of section 10471.  This was incorrect.  The parties agree that the $ 7,000 was
not trust funds within the meaning of section 10145 (licensee accepting funds
from others in connection with a real estate transaction must place them in
escrow or trust fund account).  (See Circle Oaks Sales Co. v. Smith (1971) 16
Cal.App.3d 682 [94 Cal.Rptr.  232].) Nevertheless, plaintiff argues that a
constructive trust arose when defendant converted plaintiff's funds.  (See
generally 7 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (8th ed. 1974) Trusts, § 134, p. 5490.)
The flaw in this argument is that the undisputed evidence shows that plaintiff
loaned the money to defendant for thelatter's personal use, not for the benefit
of another, as is the case in a trust situation.  When defendant failed to repay
the loan, he breached a promise to pay plaintiff; he did not convert trust funds
which belonged to or were held for plaintiff.  The cases upon which plaintiff
relies are factually distinguishable in this regard and are therefore
inapposite.  ( Nordahl v. Department of Real Estate (1975) 48 Cal.App.3d 657,
659 [121 Cal.Rptr. 794] [defendant received funds from plaintiff to invest for
plaintiff, then used them for his own purposes]; Dombalian v. Fox (1979) 88
Cal.App.3d 763, 765 [152 Cal.Rptr. 86] [broker forged clients' initials to
escrow instructions and thereby converted their funds to his use].)

   (2) Arising Directly From a Transaction

   The loans did not arise "directly" from the real estate transactions.
Although plaintiff characterized the loans as "[advances] on commissions," the
circumstances indicate that they were simply personal loans.  The first loan was
made in June 1978 for one year, but escrow closed, and commissions on the South
Avenue purchase were paid in August 1978.  Plaintiff testified that the loan was
for "[financial] assistance." The second loan was made in January 1979 for eight
months, but the pending real estate transaction was never consummated.  Thus,
despite plaintiff's characterization, the payments to defendant cannot be deemed
prepayment of commissions "arising directly out of" the real property
transactions within the meaning of section 10471.

   (3) & (4) Defendant Is Licensed and Acts Require a License

   Section 10130 declares it unlawful for anyone to act as a real estate broker
or salesperson without first obtaining a license. Section 10131 defines real
estate broker as one who does certain enumerated acts (such as negotiating the
purchase or sale of real property) for another and for compensation.  Section
10132 defines real estate salesperson as one ". . .  who, for a compensation or
in expectation of a compensation, is employed by a licensed real estate broker
to do one or more of the [enumerated] acts [which a broker may do]."  A real
estate salesperson cannot contract in his or  her own name or accept
compensation except from the broker under whom he or she is licensed. (§ 10137;
Grand v. Griesinger (1958) 160 Cal.App.2d 397, 406 [325 P.2d 475].)

     The taking of personal loans and the giving of promissory notes therefor
are not activities which require a real estate license under the above code
provisions.  We therefore conclude that the trial court erred in granting
plaintiff recovery from the Fund for his losses occasioned by the two loan
transactions.  (See Froid v. Fox (1982) 132 Cal.App.3d 832, 839-840 [183
Cal.Rptr. 461]; Buccella v. Mayo, supra, 102 Cal.App.3d at pp.  322-326;
McGaughey v. Fox (1979) 94 Cal.App.3d 645 [156 Cal.Rptr.  593].)

    B. Plaintiff's Appeal

     The undisputed evidence showed that while defendant was acting as
plaintiff's manager of the South Avenue property, he misappropriated $ 1,319.50
in collected rents, $ 521.54 from petty cash, and an amount which is not clear
from the record in salary advances.  It is apparent from the size of the
judgment recovered in the proceeding under Code of Civil Procedure section 594
that plaintiff's recovery included these sums.  The court below denied
plaintiff's application for recovery from the Fund as to these transactions,
stating in its memorandum of decision, ". . . as to the property management
aspect, . . . the defendant was not acting within the purview of his license as
a real estate salesman." (Italics added.) Plaintiff assigns this holding as
error on his appeal.  We agree with the trial court.

   Section 10471 conditions recovery from the Fund on, inter alia, a showing
that the loss arose ". . . directly out of any transaction when the judgment
debtor was licensed and performed acts for which a license is required under
this part, . . ." (Italics added.)

   The property management acts which plaintiff hired defendant to perform and
which defendant in fact performed for plaintiff require a real estate broker's
license. (§ 10131.) 3 Defendant was licensed as a real estate salesperson.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Section
10131 provides in relevant part: "A real estate broker within the meaning of
this part is a person who, for a compensation or in expectation of a
compensation, does or negotiates to do one or more of the following acts for
another or others: . . . [para. ] (b) Leases or rents or offers to lease or
rent, or places for rent, or solicits listings of places for rent, or solicits
for prospective tenants, or negotiates the sale, purchase or exchanges of leases
on real property, . . . or collects rents from real property, or improvements
thereon, . . ." Section 10131.01 states that the above quoted subdivision does
not apply to resident apartment managers or their employees.  Defendant was not
a resident apartment manager. (In his declaration in support of his application
for payment from the Fund, plaintiff stated that defendant was not a resident
manager. Plaintiff testified that one of defendant's duties was ". . . the
ultimate securing of what we call an assistant resident manager, somebody who
would be living on site . . . .")
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     Thus this cases raises an issue which our research reveals to be one of
first impression: is recovery under section 10471 permitted where the loss arose
directly out of a transaction when the judgment debtor was licensed as a real
estate salesperson and he or she improperly performed acts for which a real
estate broker's license is required?  We answer in the negative.

   One principle of statutory construction often cited is that the words of a
statute should be construed according to their ordinary meaning.  (E.g., Moyer
v. Workmen's Comp. Appeals Bd. (1973) 10 Cal.3d 222, 230 [110 Cal.Rptr. 144, 514
P.2d 1224]; Prunty v. Bank of America (1974) 37 Cal.App.3d 430, 436 [112
Cal.Rptr. 370].) If we were to apply only this rule to the language under
consideration, we would find plaintiff's contention persuasive, since the
statute merely requires that the licensee perform an act for which "a" license
is required under the "part" of the code dealing with licensing of both
salespersons and brokers. Thus, the ordinary meaning of the word "a" would
render this interpretation: the loss arose ". . . directly out of any
transaction when the judgmentdebtor was licensed [as a broker or salesperson]
and performed acts for which a [broker's or salesperson's] license is required
under this part, . . ."

     However, the rule regarding ordinary meaning of words is a corollary to the
fundamental principle of statutory construction which requires us to ascertain
the Legislature's intent and to give effect to the purpose of the statute,
viewing its words in the context of the entire statutory scheme.  ( Moyer v.
Workmen's Comp. Appeals Bd., supra, 10 Cal.3d at p. 230.)  The purpose of the
Real Estate Brokers' Act, of which section 10471 is a part, is to raise the
standards of the real estate profession by requiring its members to deal fairly
and ethically with the public.  ( Middelsteadt v. Karpe (1975) 52 Cal.App.3d
297, 302 [124 Cal.Rptr. 840].) Within the context of that  act, the purpose of
section 10471 is to compensate innocent members of the public who are victimized
by dishonest licensees. (See Powers v. Fox (1979) 96 Cal.App.3d 440, 447 [158
Cal.Rptr. 92]; Robinson v. Murphy (1979) 96 Cal.App.3d 763, 766 [158 Cal.Rptr.
246]; Nordahl v. Department of Real Estate, supra, 48Cal.App.3d at p.  663.)

     In our view, plaintiff does not qualify as an innocent member of the
public, since he entered into an illegal contract with defendant.  Plaintiff's
direct hiring of defendant as a nonresident apartment manager was illegal
because (1) nonresident apartment management is a broker's function (§ 10131,
subd. (b)), (2) a licensed salesperson can only act as a nonresident manager
through a licensed broker (§ 10132), and (3) a salesperson can only contract
through the broker under whom he or she is licensed (§ 10137).  (See Grand v.
Griesinger, supra, 160 Cal.App.2d at p. 406.)

    Section 10139 provides a criminal penalty for one acting as a broker without
a license, and section 10138 provides a misdemeanor penalty for the client of
such person. 4 The Legislature cannot in reason have intended on the one hand to
impose upon one in plaintiff's position a criminal penalty and on the other hand
to allow him compensation from the Fund.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   Section
10138 provides in relevant part: "It is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of
not exceeding fifty dollars ($ 50) for each offense, for any person . . . to pay
or deliver to anyone a compensation for performing any of the acts within the
scope of this chapter, who is not known to be or who does not present evidence
to such payor that he is a regularly licensed real estate broker at the time
such compensation is earned . . . ."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      We therefore interpret the language in question as requiring that the loss
arose either "directly out of any transaction when the judgment debtor was
licensed [as a broker] and performed acts for which a [broker's] license is
required under this part, . . ." or "directly out of any transaction when the
judgment debtor was licensed as a [salesperson] and performed acts for which a
[salesperson's] license is required under this part, . . ." This interpretation
is the only proper one because it best attains the purposes of the statute.
Although it enlarges the ordinary meaning of the words used, it thereby avoids
absurd results which clearly could not have been intended by the Legislature.  (
Moyer v. Workmen's Comp. Appeals Bd., supra, 10 Cal.3d at p. 232.) 5

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   As to the
effect of illegality of the contract, see generally Fellom v. Adams (1969) 274
Cal.App.2d 855 [79 Cal.Rptr. 633]; Estate of Prieto (1966) 243 Cal.App.2d 79,
85-86 [52 Cal.Rptr. 80]; Richardson v. Roberts (1962) 210 Cal.App.2d 603 [26
Cal.Rptr. 829]; Willig v. Gold (1946) 75 Cal.App.2d 809 [171 P.2d 754].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

 III. Conclusion

   Recovery from the Fund of the $ 7,000 judgment arising from the promissory
notes cannot stand.  The court properly denied recovery from the Fund of
plaintiff's losses arising from the apartment management transactions.

   That portion of the judgment awarding plaintiff recovery of $ 7,000 from the
Fund is reversed; in all other respects the judgment is affirmed.  Costs to the
Commissioner on the appeal and on the cross-appeal.


                              21 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           ARCHIE W. JONES, Appellant, v. SAN BERNARDINO REAL ESTATE
              BOARD (a Nonprofit Corporation) et al., Respondents

                                 Civ. No. 5928

            Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District

            168 Cal. App. 2d 661; 336 P.2d 606; 1959 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      2507


                                 March 12, 1959

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court
was Denied May 6, 1959.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of San Bernardino
County.  R. Bruce Findlay, Judge.

   Action for damages for loss of commissions, contacts, business associations
and clientele alleged to have been occasioned by wrongful expulsion as a
salesman member of a local real estate board.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Brokers--Employment--Membership in Local Realty Board.  --There is nothing
unreasonable or contrary to the corporate powers of a local real estate board in
requiring salesmen to be employed on a full-time basis in order to qualify for
membership on the board.

(2) Id. -- Employment -- Membership in Local Realty Board.  --Where there was no
requirement at the time plaintiff obtained employment as a part-time real estate
salesman with a broker that he be employed on a full-time basis in order to
qualify for membership on the local realty board, but after he became a member
the board amended its by-laws so as to make employment on a full-time basis a
requisite for membership and he was notified of the amendment and given ample
opportunity to comply therewith if he so desired, he was not compelled to be a
member of the board in order to work as a part-time salesman and the board did
not deprive him of the right to work so as to entitle him to recover damages for
loss of commissions in view of evidence showing that he was thereafter employed
as a part-time salesman, that he made no sales and earned no commission during
that time, and that, although he was free to seek employment with other brokers
in the area who were nonmembers of the board after being discharged by a broker
who was a member, he did not attempt to do so.

(3) Damages -- Speculative Damages.  -- Damages are speculative when the
probability that a circumstance will exist as an element for compensation
becomes conjectural.

(4) Brokers--Employment--Membership in Local Realty Board.  --Where the evidence
showed that plaintiff salesman was not a member of a local real estate building
board association, that membership therein was restricted to broker members of
the local real estate board, that the building association did not participate
in any way in the proceedings of the real estate board and did not interfere
with plaintiff's employment with a broker, no liability could be imposed on the
building association for damages for loss of commissions alleged to have been
occasioned by plaintiff's wrongful expulsion as a salesman member of the real
estate board.

COUNSEL: Marshall Miles for Appellant.

Lonergan & Jordan for Respondents.

JUDGES: Mussell, J.  Griffin, P. J., and Shepard, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: MUSSELL

OPINION

     This is an action in which plaintiff, a part-time real estate salesman,
sought to recover damages for loss of commissions, contacts, business
associations and clientele alleged to have been occasioned by his wrongful
expulsion as a salesman member of the San Bernardino Real Estate Board. The San
Bernardino Real Estate Building Board Association was joined as a defendant on
the theory that it was the alter ego of defendant San Bernardino Real Estate
Board. The cause was tried by the court without a jury and plaintiff appeals
from the judgment that he take nothing by reason of his complaint.

   The San Bernardino Real Estate Board is a nonprofit corporation with five
classes of membership, including brokers and salesmen. A real estate salesman to
be eligible to membership therein must be licensed and employed by a broker
member.  Plaintiff Jones during December, 1953, obtained employment as a
part-time real estate salesman with Robert Mudge, a broker in San Bernardino,
and thereafter applied for membership and became a salesman member of the San
Bernardino Real Estate Board. At this time there was no requirement that he be
employed as a real estate salesman on a full-time basis.  He was and continued
to be employed on a full-time basis in the newspaper business at Corona,
California, working for Mudge Saturdays, Sundays and evenings from December,
1953, until July, 1955, when he was discharged by Mudge.

   On June 21, 1954, the issue of part-time employment was submitted to the
membership of the real estate board for action, after notices had been sent out
to the members, including plaintiff, that there be a vote on the question.  On
the last  mentioned date section 2 of article III of the by-laws were amended to
provide as follows:

   "Broker members of this organization shall not employ salesmen or broker
associates as salesmen, on a part-time basis.

   "A part-time salesman or broker associate is one who is engaged in a line of
work other than real estate, or a line not allied to real estate, for financial
gain and for a major part of his time.

   "A broker maintaining his own office shall not be on a part-time basis as
herein defined."

   On July 16, 1954, the real estate board notified all members, including
plaintiff, that any salesman not employed on a full-time basis as of January 1,
1955, would be ineligible to renew his membership. Plaintiff's membership
automatically terminated as of January 1, 1955, because of his ineligibility to
renew it.  He was not present and did not participate in the meeting at which
the full-time rule was adopted.  He ignored this rule and tendered his dues for
1955.

   On March 17, 1955, the board, acting through its president, notified
plaintiff by letter of his ineligibility for membership, as follows:

   "In accord with the ruling concerning part-time members (Article 3, Section 2
of the By-Laws) which was adopted by a vote of the general membership on June
21, 1954 and became effective January 1, 1955, you are not eligible for
membership in the Board and Multiple as you are engaged in a line of work other
than real estate, and for a major part of your time.

   "Your employing broker has been notified that he must notify the Board as to
disposition of your license within ten (10) days, in order to abide by the 100%
membership rule of the Board.

   "Enclosed please find check in the amount of $ 17.00 refund in full payment
of 1955 dues."

   Plaintiff protested his loss of membership and demanded reinstatement, and on
March 23, 1955, was advised by the board as follows:

   "If you can certify to the Board of Directors of the San Bernardino Real
Estate Board that you are engaged in real estate on a full-time basis and not
employed elsewhere for a major part of your time, it would then be your
privilege to present this information to the Board of Directors for their
consideration."

   Plaintiff did not accept this offer and continued to work  part-time for
Mudge until discharged by him in July, 1955.  On March 27, 1955, Mudge was
suspended from membership in the San Bernardino Real Estate Board for reasons
independent of and other than those involved in this action and plaintiff's
alleged expulsion from the board.  Under the provisions of the by-laws of the
board, Mudge's suspension had the effect of suspending from the membership of
the board all salesmen employed by him on a part-time basis, including the
plaintiff.  Mudge was reinstated as a member of the board in July, 1955, and one
of the conditions of his reinstatement was that all of his salesmen be employed
on a full-time basis.  Since plaintiff was not employed on this basis, Mudge
terminated his employment in July, 1955.  Thereafter plaintiff did not seek
employment as a real estate salesman for several months and since January 1,
1956, he has been employed continuously as a real estate salesman on a part-time
basis for other real estate offices in San Bernardino.

      We find nothing unreasonable or contrary to the corporate powers of the
San Bernardino Real Estate Board in requiring salesmen to be employed on a
full-time basis in order to qualify for membership on said board.  In this
connection the trial court found as follows:

   "The enactment of the full-time rule was a proper exercise of the corporate
powers of Board and was in furtherance of the purposes for which it was
organized.  Where said rule established a standard of performance designed to
increase the quality of real estate sales service, it was not unreasonable  to
require existing members of Board to conform to the standard.  A reasonable
length of time was allowed to the existing members to conform."

   This finding is supported by the evidence.     Plaintiff was notified of the
amendment to the by-laws and was given ample opportunity to comply therewith if
he so desired.  He was not compelled to be a member of the board in order to
work as a part-time salesman. In fact, the record shows that he has been so
employed since January 1, 1956.

   It cannot be said (as claimed by appellant) that the board deprived him of
the right to work. The record shows that plaintiff's employment as a part-time
salesman did not terminate until July, 1955, when he was discharged by Mudge.
His own testimony is that he "slackened" his real estate activities "purposely"
from March 17, 1955, to July, 1955.  The record shows that he made no sales and
earned no commissions during that time; that although he was free to seek
employment with  other brokers in the area who were nonmembers of the board,
after being discharged by Mudge in 1955, he did not attempt to do so for the
balance of the year.  He claims damages for loss of commissions in the sum of $
2,000 and in the sum of $ 3,000 for loss of contacts, business associations and
clientele.    Damages are said to be speculative when the probability that a
circumstance will exist as an element for compensation becomes conjectural. (25
C.J.S., Damages, § 2, p. 460.)

   In the instant case there was no substantial evidence in the record upon
which the trial court could determine with any degree of certainty the amount of
the damages, if any, suffered by plaintiff as a result of the action of the real
estate board.

      The record shows that plaintiff was not a member of defendant San
Bernardino Real Estate Building Board Association; that membership therein was
restricted to broker members of the real estate board; that the association did
not participate in any way in the proceedings of the real estate board and did
not interfere in any way with plaintiff's employment.  Under these circumstances
no liability could be imposed upon the building association.

   There is substantial evidence herein to support the findings and judgment of
the trial court.

    Judgment affirmed.


                              22 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            CORNELIA RITA DYER, Appellant, v. D. D. WATSON, as Real
                 Estate Commissioner, etc., et al., Respondents

                                 Civ. No. 19451

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Three

          121 Cal. App. 2d 84; 262 P.2d 873; 1953 Cal. App. LEXIS 1312


                                November 4, 1953

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  Joseph W. Vickers, Judge.

   Proceeding in mandamus to compel Real Estate Commissioner to vacate order
revoking broker's license.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Brokers--Licenses--Persons Required to be Licensed.  --The description in
Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10131, of a real estate broker that is required to be
licensed, as a person who, among other things, for compensation places real
estate of others for rent extends to a person who, in advertisements describing
herself as a licensed real estate broker, states that she possesses numerous
listings of rental property and who, for compensation, gives to those responding
to the advertisements a list of properties purportedly for rent.

(2) Id.--Licenses--Revocation--Judicial Review.  --In a proceeding in mandamus
seeking to regain a real estate broker's license which had been revoked for
false representations that certain realty was for rent, testimony that certain
addresses given by the broker were nonexistent, that places named by her were
not as represented to the witness or that they were not available is not
hearsay.

(3a) (3b) Id.--Licenses--Revocation--Judicial Review.  --In a proceeding
attacking revocation of a real estate broker's license, based on
misrepresentations that certain realty was for rent, testimony as to what was
said to prospective renters by persons at the property with respect to its
nonavailability is admissible under Gov. Code, § 11513, notwithstanding it is
hearsay, as being evidence on which persons who inquire for rental property are
accustomed to rely.

(4) Id.--Licenses -- Revocation -- Hearing.  --In proceeding before Real Estate
Commissioner for revocation of a broker's license, hearsay evidence alone is
insufficient to satisfy requirement of due process of law, and mere
uncorroborated hearsay does not constitute substantial evidence.

(5) Id.--Licenses--Revocation--Judicial Review.  --In a proceeding attacking
revocation of a real estate broker's license, findings of Real Estate
Commissioner that properties represented by the broker as being available or
suitable for renting were in fact not available are sustained by corroborated
hearsay evidence to that effect, admissible under Gov. Code, § 11513, and by
direct evidence that some of the properties were nonexistent and that some were
not of the type requested by the prospective renters.

(6) Id.--Duties.  --A real estate broker who for compensation furnishes
information to prospective renters regarding rental property without knowledge
of its availability has a duty to disclose such lack of knowledge to the
prospective renters.

(7) Id.--Licenses--Revocation.  --Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10176, subds. (c) and (i)
, relating to revocation of a real estate broker's license, are not uncertain
and comply with Const. art. IV, § 24, requiring all laws to be published in no
other than the English language.

COUNSEL: Hal Hughes for Appellant.

Edmund G. Brown, Attorney General, and Lee B. Stanton, Deputy Attorney General,
for Respondents.

JUDGES: Wood (Parker), J.  Shinn, P. J., and Vallee, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: WOOD

OPINION

     The real estate commissioner revoked the license of Cornelia Rita Dyer, a
licensed  real estate broker. She petitioned the superior court for a writ of
mandate compelling the commissioner to vacate his order of revocation. The
petition was denied and she appeals from the judgment.

   In an accusation, filed by a deputy commissioner, it was charged that between
June 1, 1950, and October 5, 1950, Cornelia Rita Dyer (hereinafter referred to
as licensee), either personally or through her representatives, obtained $ 5.00
from each of 20 designated persons by falsely representing to them that she
possessed hundreds of bona fide listings of vacant rental properties at stated
rental rates in particular areas; that in each instance she should have known
that the properties she referred said persons to were not for rent, or were not
as represented, and therefore each sum of $ 5.00 was obtained under false
pretenses.  It was charged further therein that during the month of March, 1951,
she as a licensed real estate broker caused to be published classified
advertisements in the Los Angeles Examiner containing substantially the
following wording: "$ 1 a day and up restricted-unrestricted $ 5 fee renters see
Cornelia Dyer L. A.'s oldest, largest most personal rental service for best
rentals available at lowest cost furnished houses and apartments"; said
advertisements contained itemized lists of "approximately 30 to 50" purported
vacancies at rental rates of $ 30 to $ 50 monthly furnished, and also
represented that she was in possession of over 900 others, furnished and
unfurnished; said advertisements were false and misleading and were known by
licensee to be false and misleading at the time she caused them to be published.
It was also stated therein that by reason of the alleged facts the licensee
acted in violation of section 10176, subdivisions (a), (b) and (i), and section
10177,  subdivisions (c) and (f) of the Business and Professions Code.

   In a supplemental accusation it was charged that, between June 3, 1950, and
July 5, 1951, the licensee obtained $ 5.00 under false pretenses from each of 12
persons; and that licensee's advertisements in newspapers were false and
misleading.  In a second supplemental accusation she was charged with 13
additional similar violations, including a charge that she violated subdivision
(c) of section 10176.

   After a hearing the real estate commissioner found that from June, 1950, to
July, 1951 (inclusive), the licensee represented to the public at large and to
16 persons (specifically designated therein) that she possessed hundreds of bona
fide  listings of vacant properties at stated rental rates in particular areas,
and upon the payment of a registration fee she would furnish addresses of
listings of real property which were then actually available for rental for the
stated price, and if the addresses were not suitable the registrant could by
telephone contact licensee's office and secure additional addresses without
payment of additional fees; that in truth neither licensee nor her
representatives knew whether or not said listings were actually available for
rental; licensee intentionally concealed from said registrants the fact that she
had no actual knowledge of the availability of said listings, and she further
concealed from said registrants that licensee's telephone facilities were
inadequate and long delays would be encountered in seeking to reach her office
by telephone, and that they would be informed that no further listings were
available; in reliance upon the representations of licensee and without
knowledge of the falsity thereof 16 persons (designated therein) registered and
paid to licensee the registration fee required and received addresses of
listings as being available for immediate rental and when said persons called at
said addresses, they were advised that said places were not available for rental
and in several instances said places had not been listed with licensee; prior to
the time licensee would furnish any addresses of real property represented as
being available for rental purposes, licensee would enter into a written
agreement with each registrant, which agreement provided in part that the
service which licensee offered consisted "of referring Registrants to Landlords
who have listed their vacancies with her for rent," that no guarantee is made
"as to the price of rental, location or acceptance of Registrant" by landlord,
nor is registrant "obliged to accept any rental not to his liking"; said
provision of the  written agreement was in direct conflict with the oral
representations of licensee that rentals were available in particular areas at
specified rents, and licensee falsely concealed said conflict from the persons
contacting her; licensee's acceptance of compensation from various persons for
her services in the procurement of real property for rental purposes created the
relationship of principal and agent within the purview of section 10131 of the
Business and Professions Code, and she had a duty to make a full and fair
disclosure of all the facts as to the actual availability of the real property
for rental purposes; in violation of her duty as an agent she did falsely
represent to her principals that the  real properties were available for rental
purposes without actually having knowledge thereof and that said false
representations were made for the purpose of inducing others to enter into the
principal-agency relationship with her.

   The commissioner made the following determination of issues: Licensee has
been guilty of violations of section 10176 of the Business and Professions Code
as follows: making false promises of a character likely to influence, persuade
or induce [violation of subdivision (b)]; a continued and flagrant course of
misrepresentation or making of false promises through real estate agents or
salesmen [violation of subdivision (c)]; conduct which constitutes fraud or
dishonest dealing [violation of subdivision (i)].

   Licensee alleged, among other things, in her petition for a writ of mandate
that the commissioner acted without jurisdiction in revoking her license; the
evidence before the hearing officer was insufficient to show that licensee
violated any of said sections of the Business and Professions Code, and such
evidence does not support the findings of the hearing officer or the order of
revocation.

   The matter was submitted upon the record of the proceedings before the
commissioner.  The trial court found that the commissioner did not proceed
without or in excess of his jurisdiction; the findings of the commissioner are
supported by the weight of the evidence; and the findings support the order of
the commissioner.

   Appellant (licensee) contends that the commissioner did not have
jurisdiction, because appellant was not required to have a real estate broker's
license to engage in the business of such rental agent.    Section 10131 of the
Business and Professions Code provides: "A real estate broker . . . is a person
who, for a compensation, . . . negotiates the purchase or sale or exchange of
real estate, or who, for compensation, . . . rents or places for rent, or
collects rent from real estate, or improvements thereon, for another or others."
Appellant argues that she did not, for compensation or otherwise, rent or place
for rent real estate or improvements thereon; that she did not for compensation,
from the landlord, rent anything or place anything for rent; that she did not
rent anything, in that, she merely sold to registrants a list of names and
addresses and let them seek their future landlord from such list; that she
merely sold information that was selective and fitted to the price bracket and
other requirements of the customer.  Appellant states in her brief, in
summarizing the  evidence with respect to the various transactions involved,
that "in each case a customer approached your Appellant or some of her employees
at her place of business, signed a contract, the effect of which is that the
customer sought and paid for, and your Appellant received payment and agreed to
furnish, certain information respecting rental vacancies for residential
purposes." Appellant was a real estate broker and, among her employees, in her
place of business there were two real estate brokers and two real estate
saleswomen.  In 15 of the 16 violations found by the commissioner, the
prospective renters had seen appellant's rental advertisements in newspapers
prior to going to her place of business. Many of the advertisements, received in
evidence as exhibits, included a brief description of the rental property, a
statement of the amount to be paid as rent, and the words: "Lic. Real Estate
Broker Cornelia Dyer Lowest Fee Best Rentals." Said renters told appellant, in
effect, that  they wanted to rent apartments or houses under certain terms and
conditions.  Each renter paid $ 5.00 to appellant, and appellant issued a
receipt for said sum.  The receipts stated, in part, that the sum was received
for a certain number of days of rental service, and that the service which
appellant offered "consists of referring Registrants to Landlords who have
listed their vacancies with her for rent." At the top of the receipt there were
words as follows: "Cornelia Dyer Real Estate Broker Real Estate Rentals Leases."
The evidence shows that appellant, for compensation, placed real estate of
others for rent. In the 16 transactions here involved the appellant was subject,
as a real estate broker, to the jurisdiction of the real estate commissioner.
In the case of People v. Booth and Edwards, decided by the Appellate Department
of the Superior Court of Los Angeles County in 1952 (but not reported),
defendant Edwards was charged with a misdemeanor in that she acted as a real
estate salesman without a license. Booth, a licensed real estate broker, owned a
business known as "City Rental Agency," and Edwards, who was not a licensed real
estate salesman, was employed by him as a salesman. Lists of apartments for rent
were maintained at the place of business. Edwards frequently received
information from landlords about apartments for rent. The manner of conducting
the business was to give a patron a list of places supposed to fit his needs,
charge him a fee, and let him go to the places listed and negotiate for the
rental thereof.  Edwards,  the unlicensed salesman, conducted such a transaction
with a patron.  Edwards was convicted, and she contended on appeal therein that
her acts did not bring her within the definition of a real estate salesman; that
she merely informed prospective renters about places for rent, leaving the
matter thereafter to the renters and landlords. The court therein affirmed the
judgment, holding that Edwards did "place for rent" apartments listed with the
agency.  (The conviction of Booth, upon the ground that he aided and abetted the
unlicensed salesman, was affirmed.)

   Appellant also contends that the evidence was not sufficient to support the
findings of the commissioner.  She argues that the evidence to the effect that
the places were not available or suitable for renting was hearsay in that the
testimony of the complaining witnesses regarding nonavailability and
nonsuitability were statements that had been made to them out of the presence of
appellant.  As above shown, all the prospective renters (except one) in the 16
alleged violations testified that they had seen the newspaper advertisements
prior to going to appellant's place of business. Each of them testified that he
told appellant or one of her agents that he wanted to rent an apartment or house
under certain conditions; that he paid $ 5.00 to appellant and received from her
listings of residential property and a receipt for $ 5.00

   Mrs. Leatherman testified that she told appellant's agent that she wanted a
one or two bedroom house for herself and children for not more than $ 50 per
month; the agent gave her six listings; one place had been rented a week
previously and a lady told her that the agency had been notified previously;
another place had been rented; two other places were single apartments; another
place was a converted garage; each day for about three weeks thereafter she
tried to telephone the agency but the agency's telephone was busy; later she
talked with appellant who told her that she did not have time to give listings
to people who had already registered but that she gave listings only to new
registrants.

   Mrs. Lynch testified that she told appellant's agent that she wanted to rent
a two bedroom apartment for not more than $ 50 to $ 60 per month; the agent,
after stating that she hoped to find a place for her, supplied her with eight
listings; Mrs. Lynch went to all those places and found that seven of them had
been taken and that one was a hotel at a rent of $ 75 per month.

    Mrs. Thompson testified that she told appellant's agent that she wanted a
"single" apartment for about $ 35 a month; the agent gave her two listings; as
to one of the listings she found that there was no such address; she telephoned
to the other  place and a lady told her that it had been rented two weeks.

   Mrs. Rexroad testified that she told appellant's agent that she wanted a
three-room house -- a kitchen, living-room and a separate bedroom -- and not a
house in the rear; the agent gave her four listings; she went to the address of
one listing and it was not for rent; she went to another of the listings and it
had been rented for some time; the other listing was one room and a kitchenette
"in the rear"; she called the telephone number for one of the listings several
times and received no answer; she received three more listings from appellant;
she was informed by the owner or manager of one of said places that it had been
rented for five weeks and that the agency had been told several times that it
had been rented; she was informed by a man at another listing that it had been
rented for two months and that he had informed appellant's agency three or four
times that it had been rented; she called the telephone number at the third
listing several times but received no answer; she received two more listings;
she called the telephone number at one of those listings and was told that the
place had been rented for a week and that appellant had been so notified; she
called the telephone number at the other listing and was informed that it had
been rented for some time; thereafter she received two additional listings; she
called the telephone numbers for both of those listings and was informed that
they had already been rented.

   Eleven other witnesses gave similar statements of the unavailability or
unsuitability of the places to which they were sent.

   Appellant testified, in part, that in June, 1950, she registered about 800
persons for rental services; the most that she registered in any month was about
1,500; a listing is presumed to be available until cancelled definitely; when a
listing is two weeks old it is discarded;  each of her agents is responsible for
his own cancellations of listings; it is impossible "to qualify" all of the
listings, which they give out, to see whether they are still available for rent;
when she has a new listing she gives it to more than one prospective tenant --
she gives it to as many as ask for that price range.

     The testimony that there were no addresses such as certain addresses given
by appellant was not hearsay. The  testimony of witnesses, who went to various
places listed by appellant, that certain places were not houses or apartments or
were not in specified areas or did not have the specified number of rooms or
were not downstairs or were furnished was not hearsay. Also the testimony that
places were not available for renting was not hearsay.

     The testimony that persons at some of the places told the registrants that
the places had been rented or that appellant had been notified of such renting
or that the places were not for rent or had not been listed with appellant was
hearsay. Such testimony may be used, however, for the purpose of explaining the
direct evidence that the registrants were unable to rent the places.  The
testimony was admissible,  not to prove the truth of the statements made to the
registrants, but to explain the evidence that the places were not available for
renting. In section 11513 of the Government Code, chapter 5, entitled
"Administrative Adjudication," it is provided in part: ". . .  Any relevant
evidence shall be admitted if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible
persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of
the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the
admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions.  Hearsay evidence
may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence
but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be
admissible over objection in civil actions.  . . ."  Hearsay evidence alone is
insufficient to satisfy the requirement of due process of law, and mere
uncorroborated hearsay does not constitute substantial evidence.  ( Walker v.
City of San Gabriel, 20 Cal.2d 879, 881 [129 P.2d 349, 142 A.L.R. 1383].) As
above shown, the statute specially permitted hearsay in this proceeding before
the commissioner.   The evidence as to what was said by persons at proposed
rental  places, with respect to nonavailability of the places for renting, was
the kind of evidence on which persons who inquire for rental property are
accustomed to rely.   Such hearsay evidence did not stand alone and was not
uncorroborated.  Appellant testified that she was doing business with a
tremendous number of people, she registered several hundred persons per month,
it was impossible to check all the listings to see whether they were still
available, and she presumed that all the listings handed out by her office were
available.  Furthermore, irrespective of the hearsay evidence, the direct and
nonhearsay evidence, above referred to, to the  effect that many of the places
to which the registrants were referred were nonexistent or were not the kind of
property specified by the registrants, was sufficient to support the order of
the commissioner, Appellant was the agent of the prospective renters and she
charged and received from each of them $ 5.00 for furnishing information
regarding rental property.  As a real estate broker, and as such agent, it was
her duty to disclose to them that she did not know whether the places to which
she referred them were available for renting and that she was merely presuming
that the places were available.  When the hearing officer asked her if she
instructed her agents to tell the registrants that the property was just
presumed to be available, she replied "Our contract covers that" -- it "sets
forth very particularly that we take no responsibility for prior rentals." Her
reply was stricken out as not being responsive, and then she said that she
instructed her agents to tell the registrants that the properties are presumed
to be available.  As above shown, many of the registrants testified that they
had seen appellant's advertisement in a newspaper prior to going to her office.
The advertisement recited in part "renters see Cornelia Dyer . . . for best
rentals available." Those registrants, upon arriving at the office, told
appellant or her agents what kind of property they wanted to rent, and they paid
the registration fee. Thereupon appellant or her agents gave the registrants
certain addresses.  The commissioner found, as above stated, that appellant
intentionally concealed the fact that she had no actual knowledge of the
availability of said places for renting; that the provision of the written
agreement (to the effect that no guarantee is made as to price of rental,
location or acceptance of registrant) was in direct conflict with the oral
representations of appellant that rentals were available in particular areas at
specified rents; and that in violation of her duty as an agent she did falsely
represent to the registrants that the real properties were available for rental
purposes without actually having knowledge thereof.  The trial court properly
found that the findings of the commissioner were supported by the weight of the
evidence.

     Section 10176 of the Business and Professions Code provides, in part: "The
commissioner may . . . revoke a real estate license . . . where the licensee . .
. has been guilty of . . .  (b) Making any false promises of a character likely
to influence, persuade or induce.  (c) A continued and flagrant  course of
misrepresentation or making of false promises through real estate agents or
salesmen.  . . .  (i) Any other conduct . . . which constitutes fraud or
dishonest dealing." As above stated, the commissioner found that appellant had
violated said subdivisions of section 10176.  Appellant asserts that said
subdivisions (c) and (i) of said section 10176 fail, by reason of their
uncertain language, to comply with the Constitution of California, particularly
article IV, section 24.  She states, in her brief, that said section of the
Constitution provides that "all law shall be couched in such language as may be
readily understood."  That section of the Constitution provides, in part: ". . .
all laws of the State of California, and all official writings, and the
executive, legislative, and judicial proceedings shall be conducted, preserved,
and published in no other than the English language." The language of said
subdivisions (c) and (i) of section 10176 of the Business and Professions Code
is not uncertain, and those sections comply with said article IV, section 24, of
the Constitution.  In Denny v. Watson, 114 Cal.App.2d 491  [250 P.2d 692], the
petitioners sought a writ of mandate directing the real estate commissioner to
vacate his order revoking their licenses as real estate brokers. The petitioners
therein challenged the constitutionality of section 10176, subdivision (i), of
the Business and Professions Code and asserted that it violates due process of
law guaranteed by the state and federal Constitutions.  The court therein held
(p. 495) that said subdivision was constitutional, and said at page 493:
"Undoubtedly the Real Estate Commissioner was empowered to determine whether
petitioners were guilty of acts involving dishonest dealings."

   The judgment is affirmed.


                              23 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           ERNEST CARLETON, Plaintiff and Appellant, v. MARY TORTOSA,
                           Defendant and Respondent.

                                  No. C013153

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, THIRD APPELLATE DISTRICT

           14 Cal. App. 4th 745; 17 Cal. Rptr. 2d 734; 1993 Cal. App.
          LEXIS 319; 93 Cal. Daily Op. Service 2228; 93 Daily Journal
                                    DAR 3884


                            March 25, 1993, Decided

NOTICE:     Opinion certified for partial publication. *

*   Pursuant to California Rules of Court, rule 976.1, this opinion is certified
for publication with the exception of part II.

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:    Review Denied July 1, 1993, Reported at: 1993 Cal. LEXIS
3609.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Yolo County, No. 68078, Stephen L. Mock,
Judge.

COUNSEL: DeRonde & DeRonde and John A. DeRonde, Jr., for Plaintiff and
Appellant.

Murphy, Pearson, Bradley & Feeney and Mark E. Ellis for Defendant and
Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Scotland, J., with Puglia, P. J., and Sims, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: SCOTLAND, J.

OPINION

     This case presents the question whether a real estate broker had a duty to
advise her client that the client's real estate transactions could have adverse
tax consequences.

   Plaintiff Ernest Carleton, an experienced real estate investor, employed
defendant Mary Tortosa, a real estate broker, in the sale of two residential
rental properties and the purchase of two residential rental properties.
Plaintiff executed listing agreements, real estate disclosure statements, and
real estate purchase contracts which advised him that defendant's
responsibilities as a broker did not  include giving advice on tax consequences
of the transactions.  After the transactions were completed,  plaintiff was
informed  by his accountant that plaintiff incurred a tax liability of
approximately $ 34,000 because the transactions were not structured to qualify
as tax-deferred exchanges under Internal Revenue Code section 1031.  (26 U.S.C.
§ 1031; hereafter section 1031.)

   Plaintiff then brought this professional negligence action, alleging in
substance that defendant "failed to exercise reasonable care and skill in
undertaking her duties as a broker" by neglecting to warn plaintiff his
transactions could have adverse tax consequences and by failing to structure the
transactions as tax-deferred exchanges.

   Defendant filed a motion for summary judgment on the ground "plaintiff cannot
establish duty or breach of duty as a matter of law." The trial court granted
the motion, ruling: "Defendant Tortosa was in a fiduciary relationship with
plaintiff.  This relationship was defined by the documents [executed by
plaintiff].  . . .  [P] These documents evidence the nature of the fiduciary
relationship between defendant and plaintiff [which]  did not include a separate
responsibility on the part of defendant to advise plaintiff Earnest [sic]
Carleton on tax matters, but rather, specifically excluded the provision of tax
advice from the scope of defendant Tortosa's duty to plaintiff.  Plaintiff
Carleton was specifically instructed to look to other professionals for tax
advice. Thus, defendant Tortosa had no affirmative duty to provide tax advice to
plaintiff Carleton or to structure the escrows of the subject transactions in
such a way as to reap the greatest tax benefits to him.  Such advice is strictly
outside the scope of a real estate agent's fiduciary duty to her client."

   Plaintiff appeals from the order and judgment.  He claims a real estate
broker's duty to exercise reasonable skill and care for the benefit of the
client extends to advising the client that a transaction could have adverse tax
consequences and recognizing the need for a tax-deferred exchange.  According to
plaintiff, the use of " 'boilerplate' disclaimers" in the listing agreements,
disclosure forms and purchase contracts stating a real estate broker is not
responsible for giving tax advice did not relieve defendant of the duty to warn
plaintiff that his proposed transactions were in the nature of "an IRC 1031
Delayed Exchange and [to advise plaintiff] to secure the assistance of outside
professionals in the event that [defendant] could not competently handle the
transaction." (Italics omitted.) This is so, he argues, because any contractual
provision relieving a real estate broker of the duty to recognize and alert a
client to potential tax consequences of a transaction violates public policy.

   As we shall explain in the published portion of this opinion, aside from
obligations imposed by statute and implementing regulations, a real estate
broker's duty is derived from the agreement between the broker and client.  In
this case, the parties' agreement in effect specified that defendant had no duty
to recognize and advise plaintiff regarding the potential tax consequences of
his transactions.  Contrary to plaintiff's claim, this contractual provision did
not violate public policy because the Legislature has determined that sellers
and buyers of real estate should obtain tax advice from professionals other than
real estate brokers. ( Civ. Code, § 2375.) In the unpublished part of this
opinion, we reject plaintiff's contention that the trial court erred in ordering
plaintiff to pay defendant's attorney fees.  Accordingly, we shall affirm the
judgment.

   FACTS

   Plaintiff is a teacher of high school English and foreign languages with 25
years' experience in real estate investing.  With the professional assistance of
defendant, plaintiff had invested in Winters, California, for five or six years
prior to the present transactions.

   On April 17, 1990, plaintiff executed an "Exclusive Authorization and Right
to Sell" (listing agreement) to sell his property at 1028 Adams in Winters.  The
property was sold and escrow closed on May 29, 1990.

    On April 25, 1990, plaintiff contracted to purchase property at 467 Edwards
in Winters.  Escrow closed on June 18, 1990.

   On June 14, 1990, plaintiff executed a listing agreement to sell his property
at 1001 Adams in Winters.  The property was sold and escrow closed on August 15,
1990.

   On July 5, 1990, plaintiff contracted to purchase property at 1103 Hoover in
Winters.  Escrow closed on August 28, 1990.

   The listing agreements for the sales of the properties at 1028 Adams and 1001
Adams advised plaintiff: "A real estate broker is the person qualified to advise
on real estate. If you desire legal or tax advice, consult an appropriate
professional." For each of the four transactions defendant furnished plaintiff a
written "Disclosure Regarding Real Estate Agency Relationships" which advised
plaintiff: "The above duties of the agent in a real estate transaction do not
relieve a Seller or a Buyer from the responsibility to protect their [sic] own
interests.  You should carefully read all agreements to assure that they
adequately express your understanding of the transaction.  A real estate agent
is a person qualified to advise about real estate. If legal or tax advice is
desired, consult a competent professional." In addition, for each of the four
transactions plaintiff executed a "Real Estate Purchase Contract and Receipt for
Deposit" which advised him: "Legal and Tax Advice: A real estate broker or agent
is qualified to advise on real estate. If you require legal or tax advice,
consult your attorney or accountant. No representation or recommendations are
made by the broker, agents, or employees as to the legal sufficiency, effect, or
tax consequences of this document or the transaction relating thereto.  These
questions are for your attorney and or your accountant."

   During the course of the transactions, plaintiff asked defendant how many
days he had to reinvest the proceeds of the two sales in order to avoid paying
capital gains tax.  Defendant answered: "I don't know.  . . .  Ask your tax
person." Plaintiff called his accountant. "The tax lady that does [his] taxes
wasn't in, so [he] talked to her assistant, and she said [he had] forty-five
days [to reinvest]."

   After the transactions were completed, plaintiff's accountant prepared
plaintiff's income tax returns and informed him he incurred a capital gains tax
liability of approximately $ 34,000.  The transactions failed to qualify as
tax-deferred exchanges because they were not conducted through a third party
intermediary.

   DISCUSSION

   I

     "Since a summary judgment motion raises only questions of law regarding the
construction and effect of the supporting and opposing papers, we independently
review them on appeal, applying the same three-step analysis required of the
trial court.  . . .   First, we identify the issues framed by the pleadings
since it is these allegations to which the motion must respond by establishing a
complete defense or otherwise showing there is no factual basis for relief on
any theory reasonably contemplated by the opponent's pleading.  . . .  [P]
Second[], we determine whether the moving party's showing has established facts
which negate the opponent's claim and justify a judgment in movant's favor.  . .
.   The motion must stand self-sufficient and cannot succeed because the
opposition is weak.  . . .  A party cannot succeed without disproving even those
claims on which the opponent would have the burden of proof at trial.  . . .
[P]  When a summary judgment motion prima facie justifies a judgment, the third
and final step is to determine whether the opposition demonstrates the existence
of a triable, material factual issue. . . .   Counteraffidavits and declarations
need not prove the opposition's case; they suffice if they disclose the
existence of a triable  issue." ( AARTS Productions, Inc. v. Crocker National
Bank (1986) 179 Cal.App.3d 1061, 1064-1065 [225 Cal.Rptr. 203], citations
omitted; see FPI Development, Inc. v. Nakashima (1991) 231 Cal.App.3d 367,
381-382 [282 Cal.Rptr. 508].)

   Plaintiff's complaint alleges defendant was negligent in two respects: in
preparing  the deposit receipts and structuring the escrows; and in failing to
tell plaintiff of defendant's lack of expertise in structuring tax-deferred real
estate exchanges and by further failing to advise plaintiff to seek other
professional assistance in structuring the transactions.

   The issue framed by each theory of liability relates to defendant's failure
to inform plaintiff of the tax consequences of his transactions.  Plaintiff
contends defendant had a duty to "recognize a tax-free exchange setting" and to
"direct[] the client to an exchange company if [defendant] did not possess the
requisite expertise." (Italics omitted.)        (See fn. 1.) According to
plaintiff, defendant "at least had an obligation to 'issue- spot' or warn
Plaintiff about the capital gains consequences of proceeding without adequate
advice . . .." (Italics omitted.) 1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   To
provide a factual context for the claimed duty, plaintiff asks us to take
judicial notice of "the substantial 'industry' that has grown-up [sic] under
[section 1031]" as demonstrated by a series of documents contained in
plaintiff's appendix to his opening brief.  Defendant retorts the request for
judicial notice should be denied because none of the documents was before the
trial court and several documents are not proper subjects of judicial notice.

   "Appendix A" contains an advertisement and a brochure by private corporations
whose business includes conducting section 1031 exchanges.  "Appendix B" is a
private corporations summary of changes in federal regulations relating to
section 1031 exchanges; the regulations themselves are not included.  ,
"Appendix A" and "Appendix B" are not appropriate subjects of judicial notice
because they do not contain matters of "common knowledge within the territorial
jurisdiction of [this] court" ( Evid. Code, § 452, subd. (g)) and there is no
other statutory basis for judicial notice of this information.

   "Appendix C" is an official publication of the California Department of Real
Estate stating the general areas tested on the real estate brokers' examination,
including "Tax Implications of Real Estate Ownership." However, section 1031 is
not mentioned explicitly and no level of expected proficiency with section 1031
is indicated.  "Appendix D" is a California Department of Real Estate bulletin
containing a "Revised Code of Ethics for R. E. Licensees." No reference is made
to section 1031 exchanges.  "Appendix E" is an excerpt from 2 Miller and Starr,
California Real Estate (2d ed. 1989) Agency, section 3:18.

   , "Appendix C" and "Appendix D" are "official acts" of the executive
department of this state, and "Appendix E" is not reasonably subject to dispute
and is capable of immediate and accurate determination by reference to the cited
text.  ( Evid. Code, § 452, subds. (c), (h).) Thus, these documents are proper
subjects of judicial notice. However, "courts have cautioned against judicially
noticing matters that were not before the trial court.  'As a general rule the
[appellate] court should not take . . . [judicial] notice if, upon examination
of the entire record, it appears that the matter has not been presented to and
considered by the trial court in the first instance.' [Citations.] Such a rule
prevents the unfairness that would flow from permitting one side to press an
issue or theory on appeal that was not raised [in the trial court].
[Citation.]" ( People v. Hardy (1992) 2 Cal.4th 86, 134 [5 Cal.Rptr.2d 796, 825
P.2d 781].) Hardy provides an exception where the request for judicial notice is
unopposed and the matters to be judicially noticed are not reasonably open to
dispute.  ( Id., at pp. 134-135.) , Here, the request is opposed, and the
general rule applies.  Plaintiff's request for judicial notice is denied.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     In her motion for summary judgment, defendant asserted she negated
plaintiff's claims of negligence by showing she had no duty to prepare the
escrows and structure the deposit receipts so as to minimize adverse tax
consequences, she had no duty to advise plaintiff of her lack of experience with
tax-deferred exchanges, and she fulfilled any duty to advise him to seek other
professional assistance regarding the tax consequences of the transactions.  In
support of her motion for summary judgment, defendant submitted excerpts from
plaintiff's deposition, his responses to interrogatories and requests for
admissions, and documentation from numerous real estate transactions in which
plaintiff participated as buyer or seller, including those here in issue.

     We agree with the trial court that defendant's showing established facts
which negated plaintiff's claims and justified a judgment in defendant's favor.
( AARTS Productions, supra, 179 Cal.App.3d at pp. 1064-1065.)

     "The elements of a cause of action for negligence are commonly stated as
(1) a legal duty to use due care; (2) a breach of that duty; (3) a reasonably
close causal connection between that breach and the resulting injury; and (4)
actual loss or damage." ( Ahern v. Dillenback (1991) 1 Cal.App.4th 36, 42  [1
Cal.Rptr.2d 339]; 6 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (9th ed. 1988) Torts, § 732, p.
60.) Failure to prove any one of these elements is fatal to plaintiff's
recovery.  ( Banerian v. O'Malley (1974) 42 Cal.App.3d 604, 612 [116 Cal.Rptr.
919].)

     Whether a legal duty of care exists in a given factual situation is a
question of law to be determined by the court, not the jury.  ( Ballard v. Uribe
(1986) 41 Cal.3d 564, 572, fn. 6 [224 Cal.Rptr. 664, 715 P.2d 624]; Ahern,
supra, 1 Cal.App.4th at p. 42; Clarke v. Hoek (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 208, 213
[219 Cal.Rptr. 845].)  Where a duty is found to exist, a real estate agent must
fulfill it by exhibiting the degree of care and skill ordinarily exhibited by
professionals in the industry.  (2 Miller & Starr, op. cit. supra, § 3:17, pp.
94-95; Montoya v. McLeod (1985) 176 Cal.App.3d 57, 65 [221 Cal.Rptr. 353];
Timmsen v. Forest E. Olson, Inc. (1970) 6 Cal.App.3d 860, 871 [86 Cal.Rptr. 359]
; Brady v. Carman (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 63, 68 [3 Cal.Rptr. 612].)

     The degree of care and skill required to fulfill a professional duty
ordinarily is a question of fact and may require testimony by professionals in
the field if the matter is within the knowledge of experts only.  ( Miller v.
Los Angeles County Flood Control Dist. (1973) 8 Cal.3d 689, 702 [106 Cal.Rptr.
1, 505 P.2d 193]; see Carson v. Facilities Development Co. (1984) 36 Cal.3d 830,
844-845 [206 Cal.Rptr. 136, 686 P.2d 656].)  However, expert testimony is
incompetent on the predicate question whether the duty exists because this is a
question of law for the court alone.  ( Clarke, supra, 174 Cal.App.3d at p. 214
.)   Plaintiff's contention that the trial court erroneously disregarded "custom
and practice testimony, i.e., the testimony of other professionals in the same
field,"  fails because, for reasons which follow, the trial court properly
concluded defendant had no duty to structure the transaction to minimize
plaintiff's tax liability or to advise him of her lack of expertise with section
1031 exchanges.

     Real estate brokers are subject to two sets of duties: those imposed by
regulatory statutes, and those arising from the general law of agency.  (2
Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law, op. cit. supra, Agency and Employment, § 253, pp.
245-246.) Plaintiff does not contend defendant failed to fulfill a duty imposed
by statute or implementing regulation (e.g., Civ. Code, § 1102 et seq. [agent's
duty to inspect property; disclosure requirements]).  Thus, he must derive
defendant's duty from the general law of agency, i.e., from the agreement
between the principal and agent.   "The existence and extent of the duties of
the agent to the principal are determined by the terms of the agreement between
the parties, interpreted in light of the circumstances under which it is made,
except to the extent that fraud, duress, illegality, or the incapacity of one or
both of the parties to the agreement modifies it or deprives it of legal
effect." ( Rest.2d Agency, § 376;  Anderson v. Badger (1948) 84 Cal.App.2d 736,
741 [191 P.2d 768]; 3 Cal.Jur.3d, Agency, § 87, pp. 119-120; cf.  Ahern, supra,
1 Cal.App.4th at p. 43 [insurance agent owes duties normally found in agency
relationship].)

     Plaintiff's agreement with defendant is contained in the listing
agreements, disclosure statements and purchase contracts described above.
Plaintiff admitted each document was genuine, stated he read each document prior
to signing, acknowledged he understood each document was legally significant,
and admitted defendant did nothing to prevent him from reading each document in
its entirety.  Plaintiff claimed he only "glanced through" some of the documents
because "it is a bore to read through these kinds of real estate transactions."
However, his failure to read the documents does not permit him to avoid their
legal effect, and plaintiff does not contend otherwise.  (E.g., Bolanos v.
Khalatian (1991) 231 Cal.App.3d 1586, 1590 [283 Cal.Rptr. 209].)

     The listing agreements for sales of the properties at 1028 Adams and 1001
Adams  told plaintiff that defendant, a real estate broker, was  "qualified to
advise on real estate," but informed plaintiff he  should "consult an
appropriate professional" if he desired legal or tax advice. The real estate
agency disclosure forms advised plaintiff to "carefully read all agreements to
assure that they adequately express your understanding of the transaction," and
reiterated that "a real estate agent is a person qualified to advise about real
estate. If legal or tax advice is desired, consult a competent professional." 2
The real estate purchase contracts informed plaintiff that "[a] real estate
broker or agent is qualified to advise on real estate. If you require legal or
tax advice, consult your attorney or accountant." Moreover, the contracts
specifically advised plaintiff that "no representation or recommendations are
made by the broker, agents, or employees as to the legal sufficiency, effect, or
tax consequences of this document or the transaction relating thereto.  These
questions are for your attorney and or your accountant."

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   This
language is specified by Civil Code section 2375 (Disclosure Form--Contents).
Claiming the statute requires the language to appear on the disclosure form only
if the agent is representing both the seller and the buyer, plaintiff argues:
"Since [defendant] was [plaintiff's] (Seller's) agent, no such language was
required." Plaintiff is wrong: the quoted language is required to appear whether
the agent represents the seller, the buyer, or both.  ( Civ. Code, § 2375.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    These documents negate plaintiff's claim of duty. His allegation that
defendant had a duty to prepare the deposit receipts and structure the escrows
in a manner which would minimize plaintiff's tax liability is negated by the
purchase contracts' provision stating the broker makes no representation or
recommendation as to the tax consequences of the transaction.  Were defendant
subject to the alleged duty, she necessarily would "represent" she has
structured the transaction to minimize any adverse tax consequences.  This is
precisely what the document states the broker does not do.

   Plaintiff's claim that defendant had a duty to inform him of her lack of
expertise with section 1031 exchanges and to advise him to seek other
professional help in that regard is negated by the documents' provisions stating
a broker is qualified to advise on real estate but legal or tax advice should be
obtained from a "competent professional," an "attorney and or . . . accountant."
These documents also provide the very advisement which plaintiff claims
defendant should have given: that plaintiff should "seek other professional
assistance" regarding tax consequences of the transactions here at issue.

    Likewise, plaintiff's allegation that defendant had a duty to "issue- spot"
or warn him regarding tax consequences of the transactions is at odds with the
documents' admonition that plaintiff should get his tax advice elsewhere.  (Cf.
Ahern, supra, 1 Cal.App.4th 36 [absent some conduct on the part of the  agent
consistent with assuming broader duties, the agent's duties are limited to those
arising out of the contract].) 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   In Ahern,
the purchasers of an automobile insurance policy sued their insurance agent
claiming the agent negligently failed to procure certain insurance coverages or
negligently failed to advise of the availability of such coverages.  (1
Cal.App.4th at pp. 40-41, 42.) Summary judgment for the agent was affirmed
because the agent had no duty, contractual or otherwise, to procure the
additional coverage or advise the insureds of its availability.  Plaintiff
claims Ahern is "completely different from the instant case" because the
insureds "could have purchased greater insurance coverage than that actually
sold." The asserted distinction has no merit.  Plaintiff could have consulted an
attorney or an accountant, not "to look for properties to purchase in relation
to an anticipated tax-free exchange," but to ensure that the exchange of
properties he had located satisfies the legal requirements for section 1031
exchanges.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    This case is similar to Santos v. Wing (1961) 197 Cal.App.2d 678 [17
Cal.Rptr. 457], where sellers of property were dissatisfied because, as
structured, the sale had unfortunate tax consequences.  In rejecting sellers'
effort to hold the real estate agents responsible, the court explained: "We do
not find in the evidence any suggestion that the [agents] had any knowledge of
the appellants' tax situation, or what if any tax might result to the appellants
from this sale.  The [agents] did not attempt to give  the appellants any tax
advice. On the contrary, they urged appellants to seek counsel; the appellants
did have an accountant and they had an attorney, and the appellant Santos held
the seller's instructions in his possession for several days for the announced
purpose of seeking legal advice." ( Id., at p. 684.) Here, as in Santos,
defendant real estate broker did not attempt to give tax advice.  (See fn. 4.)
Rather, she repeatedly advised plaintiff in writing to seek tax advice from an
attorney or accountant. 4

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   Plaintiff
contends Santos does not aid defendant based on an interpretation of the case by
commentators.  Miller and Starr suggest the Santos court "infers [sic] that [the
broker] had a duty to disclose the tax problems if they knew [of the plaintiffs'
tax situation], but the broker's duty in that regard was satisfied by urging the
sellers to seek counsel from their attorney and accountant." (2 Miller & Starr,
op. cit. supra, § 3:18, p. 111, italics in original.) However, Santos did not
analyze whether there exists a duty to disclose tax consequences if the broker
is aware of the seller's tax situation, and the court did not consider whether
such a duty could be modified or negated by language in the agreements between
the broker and the seller. "Cases are not authority for propositions not
discussed or presented." ( People v. Hill (1974) 12 Cal.3d 731, 766, fn. 34 [117
Cal.Rptr. 393, 528 P.2d 1], overruled on other grounds in People v. DeVaughn
(1977) 18 Cal.3d 889, 896, fn. 5 [135 Cal.Rptr. 786, 558 P.2d 872].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Citing Tunkl v. Regents of University of California (1963) 60 Cal.2d 92,
98-101 and Akin v. Business Title Corp. (1968) 264 Cal.App.2d 153, 158-159 [70
Cal.Rptr. 287], plaintiff contends the disclaimer language in the listing
agreements, disclosure statements and purchase contracts should be disregarded.
Tunkl and Akin hold that contractual language exculpating a party from
responsibility for its future negligence is invalid under Civil Code  section
1668 where the contract affects a public interest.  ( Tunkl, supra, 60 Cal.2d at
pp. 96, 101- 104 [a release from liability for future negligence imposed as a
condition for admission to a charitable research hospital is invalid as contrary
to the public interest]; Akin, supra, 264 Cal.App.2d at p. 159.)

   Plaintiff's reliance on Tunkl and Akin is misplaced.  In this case, the
contractual language does not exculpate defendant from her negligence, i.e.,
from her breach of an extant duty of care.  Rather, the contractual language in
effect specifies that a real estate broker has no duty to provide legal or tax
advice. Thus, the failure to provide such information is not negligence, and the
rules governing exculpation from negligence do not apply.

   Nevertheless, plaintiff suggests that any contractual provision relieving
real estate brokers of a duty to recognize and alert a client to the potential
tax consequences of a transaction violates public policy. (Cf.  Easton v.
Strassburger (1984) 152 Cal.App.3d 90 [199 Cal.Rptr. 383] [holding broker has
duty to inspect premises; later codified in Civ. Code § 1102 et seq.]; see also
Schoenberg v. Romike Properties (1967) 251 Cal.App.2d 154, 162 [59 Cal.Rptr.
359] [duty to investigate property to determine its value].) According to
plaintiff, "current real estate practice" dictates that a real estate
professional has a duty to recognize tax consequences of a transaction and to
structure tax-deferred exchanges when appropriate.  He points to evidence that
defendant was familiar with tax-deferred exchanges, had taken a class entitled
"Unmasking and Masking and Creatively Protecting Clients in Exchanges," and had
attended a seminar on "Tax Aspects of Real Estate." Plaintiff claims that,
because brokers hold themselves out to the public as possessing special
knowledge in real estate transactions and "given the evolution of the real
estate profession into new and emerging fields (including [tax-deferred
exchanges])," public policy requires brokers to have a duty to recognize and
advise clients of the tax consequences of their transactions and of the need for
tax-deferred exchanges.

   This contention fails because the Legislature has determined that public
policy expects sellers and buyers to obtain tax advice from professionals other
than real estate brokers. By enacting Civil Code section 2375, the Legislature
has mandated that buyers and sellers be told: "A real  estate agent is a person
qualified to advise about real estate. If legal or tax advice is desired,
consult a competent professional." We decline to conclude that public policy
requires real estate brokers to provide tax advice when the Legislature has
determined that such advice should be sought from other competent professionals.

   Plaintiff also claims the "boilerplate" language in his contracts stating
defendant was not responsible for giving tax advice is adhesive and, thus,
should be disregarded.   "A contract of adhesion has been defined as 'a
standardized contract, which, imposed and drafted by the party of superior
bargaining strength, relegates to the subscribing party only the opportunity to
adhere to the contract or reject it.' [Citations.]" ( Izzi v. Mesquite Country
Club (1986) 186 Cal.App.3d 1309, 1317 [231 Cal.Rptr. 315].)  The contention
fails because, even if it is adhesive in nature, "the contract would remain
fully enforceable unless (1) all or part of the contract fell outside the
reasonable expectations of the weaker party or (2) it was unduly oppressive or
unconscionable under applicable principles of equity." (Ibid.) Because the
Legislature has determined that buyers and sellers of real estate should rely on
professionals other than real estate brokers for tax advice, any expectation on
the part of plaintiff that defendant would provide such information or
"issue-spot" tax problems was not reasonable.  Moreover, none of the contractual
terms is either "unduly oppressive" or "unconscionable." (Ibid.)

   Since defendant's showing in support of her motion for summary judgment
established facts which negated plaintiff's claims of duty, the final step of
our analysis is to determine whether plaintiff's opposition to defendant's
motion for summary judgment demonstrated the existence of a triable, material
issue of fact.  ( AARTS Productions, supra, 179 Cal.App.3d at pp. 1064-1065.) It
does not.  Plaintiff's opposition relied on excerpts from defendant's deposition
which suggest defendant was knowledgeable about the requirements for section
1031 exchanges.  While such knowledge may establish an ability to structure the
transaction to minimize tax consequences or to warn plaintiff, it does not
establish a duty to do so.  Defendant cannot be negligent for failing to do what
she had no duty to do.  ( Banerian, supra, 42 Cal.App.3d at p. 613.) 5

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   Plaintiff
asks us to augment the record to include plaintiff's and defendant's depositions
in their entirety because the latter "leaves the reader with a clear impression
that Defendant, herself, recognized a duty in 1031 exchanges." Because such
recognition would not be relevant to establish any duty on the part of
defendant, plaintiff's request for augmentation is denied.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The trial court properly granted summary judgment because defendant
demonstrated her entitlement to judgment as a matter of law, and plaintiff
failed to raise a material factual issue necessitating a trial.  ( AARTS
Productions, supra, 179 Cal.App.3d at pp. 1064-1065.)

   II *

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*   See
footnote, ante, page 745.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   . . . .

    DISPOSITION

   The judgment is affirmed.

   Puglia, P. J., and Sims, J., concurred.

   Appellant's petition for review by the Supreme Court was denied July 1, 1993.


                              24 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In the Matter of the Estate of DIONISIOS MARINOS, Deceased.
           ANDREAS D. MARINOS et al., Appellants, v. KONSTANTINOS D.
                      MARINOS, Executor, etc., Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 11284

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FIRST APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION ONE

           39 Cal. App. 2d 1; 102 P.2d 443; 1940 Cal. App. LEXIS 345


                              May 8, 1940, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:      APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of the City and
County of San Francisco decreeing distribution of an estate. Frank H. Dunne,
Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Estates of Deceased Persons--Property--Debts--Order of Application--
Statutory Construction.  --Section 750 of the Probate Code makes no distinction
between realty and personalty as to the order of application of the assets of an
estate to the debts and expenses of administration; and in this proceeding for
distribution, where the will did not designate specific property to be applied
to the payment of debts and expenses, or fail to dispose of any property, and
the devise of all the real property to the testator's wife was not exempt as
being a specific devise, the real property had to bear a proportion of the debts
of the estate and expenses of administration.

(2) Id.--Bequests--Specific Devise--Wills.  --A devise or bequest of all real
property or all personal property is not a specific devise or bequest, but is
general, and where a testator devises to his wife "all my real property", it
must be held to be a general and not a specific devise.

(3) Id.--Wills--Intention--Construction.  --In said proceeding, where the
testator's will left a stated sum to one son, and in the next paragraph left to
two other sons "all the rest of my personal property" except certain furniture,
the testator obviously intended priority to the first son as to the stated
amount, and intended that the two others should receive what remained after the
cash legacy was discharged, and dividends and the proceeds from the sale of
certain stock were applicable to payment of the cash legacy under section 751 of
the Probate Code, and said legatee was entitled to object to the ruling which
improperly exonerated the real property from its proportion of the burden for
debts and expenses.

(4) Id.--Community Property--Liability for Debts.  --In the absence of an
expression of a contrary intent, the entire community property, including the
interest of the surviving widow, is subject to the debts and expenses of
administration upon the death of the husband, but if the will designates that
debts should be paid from the interest of the husband, the wife's share of the
community property is exonerated, if the husband's share is sufficient to pay
all such debts and expenses.

(5) Id.--Wills--Intention--Construction.  --In said proceeding, where the
testator's will declared that all his property real and personal was his own
separate property, and directed that his debts "be paid out of my estate", the
testator, by referring to "my property", probably meant his share of the
community, and intended to declare that no other person had any interest in his
share of such property, and under that construction of the will, the trial court
properly exonerated the wife's share of the community property from liability
for debts and expenses of administration.

(6) Id.--Bequests--Residuary Devise--Intent.  --In said proceeding, where, when
the will was read as a whole, it appeared that the devise of "all my real
property" to the wife was not intended as a residuary devise within the meaning
of sections 750 and 751 of the Probate Code, and the will showed a studied
intent to treat the personalty and realty separately, and it could not be
claimed that said devise was a residuary devise and that not only should all
debts and expenses be paid solely from the real property, but that, under said
section 751, the executor should sell sufficient real property to satisfy the
cash legacy to the son in full.

COUNSEL: William Farnum White, in pro. per., for Appellants.

Theodore L. Breslauer for Respondent.

JUDGES: PETERS, P. J. Knight, J., and Ward, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: PETERS

OPINION

     The facts are stated in the opinion of the court.

   PETERS, P. J. -- Andreas D. Marinos, a legatee and son of the decedent, and a
partial assignee of Andreas, appeal from the decree of final distribution in the
above-entitled  estate. The controversy between appellants and respondent (the
executor of the estate) arises over the fact that all of the personal property
in the estate was consumed in the payment of debts and expenses of
administration. If the real property (all devised to the widow) is chargeable
with a proportionate part of such debts and expenses, appellants will receive a
portion of Andreas' legacy. By the decree appealed from no portion of the debts
and expenses was charged against the realty, with the result that Andreas and
his partial assignee received nothing.

   The facts are as follows: By his will the decedent devised and bequeathed his
entire estate as follows:

   "SECOND: All my property, real and personal, of every kind and character, and
wheresoever situated, is my own separate property.

   "THIRD: My will is that all my just and lawful debts and funeral charges
shall, by my executor hereinafter named, be paid out of my estate as soon after
my decease as shall to my executor be convenient and that my said executor
expend for my funeral the sum of Two Hundred ($ 200.00) Dollars, and no more.

   "FOURTH: All the rest, residue and remainder of my estate and effects, of
whatsoever nature and kind, and wheresoever situated, which at the time of my
decease I may be possessed of or entitled to, and which is not hereinbefore
disposed of, I give, devise, and bequeath as follows, to-wit:

   "1st: To my beloved son Anastasios D. Marinos, now residing in the City and
County of San Francisco, State of California, the sum of Ten ($ 10.00) Dollars,
and no more, for the reason that I have already given him Thirteen Thousand ($
13,000.00) Dollars, and my promissory note for Two Thousand ($ 2,000.00)
Dollars.

   "2nd: To my beloved son Andreas D. Marinos, now residing in the City of
Athens,  Republic of Greece, the sum of Four Thousand ($ 4,000.00) Dollars, and
no more.

   "3rd: To my beloved sons, Konstantinos D. Marinos and John D. Marinos, now
both residing in the City and County of San Francisco, State of California, all
the rest of my personal property (except the furniture of the house and as
hereinafter mentioned in paragraph fourth (4th), to be divided between them
share and share alike.

    "4th: To my beloved wife, Stavroula D. Marinos, now residing in the City and
County of San Francisco, State of California, all my real property, together
with the furniture contained in my house, No. 22 Ringold Street, San Francisco,
California."

   The estate, which was in fact community property of the testator and his
wife, consisted of two parcels of real property, undivided third interests in
two other parcels of real property, $ 291.16 in cash, and certain shares of
stock. The stock was sold in the course of administration for $ 1450.34. During
the course of administration the executor received $ 77.51 as dividends on the
stock, and net income from the realty in the amount of $ 854.36. The gross value
of the entire property, both real and personal, was a little over $ 23,400, of
which one-half was awarded to the widow by virtue of her community property
interest. Debts and expenses of administration, exclusive of executor's and
attorney's fees, amounted to $ 1473.28, and to $ 3,124.36 including such fees.
Upon the hearing of the account and petition for distribution the executor and
attorney waived fees in excess of the amount of approximately $ 1200 cash then
on hand, over and above debts and other expenses. The accounts of the executor
showed that he had applied all of the personal property to the payment of the
debts of the estate. Under the decree appealed from, all the remaining cash on
hand ($ 1199.97) was applied to the payment of executor's and attorney's fees.

     The major contention of appellants is that the real property should bear a
proportionate part of the debts and expenses of administration, and that the
widow should either be compelled to pay into the estate a sum representing this
proportion, or that real property sufficient to pay this sum should be sold
before distribution.

    We agree with appellants that the real property should bear a proportion of
the debts of the estate and expenses of administration. Under the provisions of
section 750 of the Probate Code resort is had to the estate of a testator to pay
debts and expenses of administration as follows: (1) To property designated by
the will to be thus applied; (2) to property not disposed of by will; (3) to
property given to residuary legatees and devisees; and (4) "thereafter all other
property devised and bequeathed is liable for the same, in proportion to the
value or amount of the several devises and legacies, but  specific devises and
legacies are exempt from such liability if it appears to the court necessary to
carry into effect the intention of the testator, and there is other sufficient
estate." (See, also, sec. 753, Prob. Code.)

   It is to be noted that the section makes no distinction between realty and
personalty as to the order of application of the assets of an estate to the
debts and expenses of administration. Applying the section to the will here
involved, it is to be noted that the testator did not designate specific
property to be applied to the payment of debts and expenses of administration,
merely directing that debts should "be paid out of my estate". Nor does the will
fail to dispose of any property. Its provisions are clearly all-inclusive so as
to include the entire estate of the testator. The holding of the trial court
exonerating the real property cannot be sustained on the ground that the devise
of all the real property to the wife is a specific devise, and therefore exempt
from liability for debts and expenses under the last portion of section 750.   A
devise or bequest of all real property or all personal property is not a
specific devise or bequest, but is general. This matter was exhaustively
considered and discussed in Matter of Estate of Woodworth, 31 Cal. 595, at pages
601 to 604, and pages 610 to 614. See, also, Estate of Ratto, 149 Cal. 552 [86
P. 1107], and Estate of Painter, 150 Cal. 498 [89 P. 98, 11 Ann. Cas. 760]. In
88 A. L. R. 553, there is an annotation entitled: "Bequest or devise of all
testator's personal property or real property as general or specific." At page
554 it is stated: "The rule sanctioned, seemingly without dissent, by the cases,
is that, in the absence of a clearly expressed intention of the testator to the
contrary, a bequest of all of the testator's personal property, an aliquot
portion of it, the remainder of the personal property,  or any bequest in
similar general terms, is a general and not a specific legacy." In reference to
real property the rule in United States, contrary to the rule that existed at
common law, is stated as follows (p. 560): "However, in the majority of cases
decided in this country it is held that the question whether a testamentary gift
of real estate is specific or general is to be governed by the same rule as
where the subject of the gift is personal property; that is, that, in the
absence of a clearly expressed intention of the testator to the contrary, a
devise of real property in general terms, such as 'all' of the  testator's
property, or the 'remainder' of the testator's property, will be held general,
rather than specific." Various California cases are cited in support of this
rule. Under these cases, the devise in subdivision 4th of Paragraph Fourth of
the will, supra, devising "all my real property" to the wife must be held to be
a general and not a specific devise. (See, also, 11 Cal. Jur. Ten-year Supp.
588.)

     Respondent urges that under the will the $ 4,000 bequest to Andreas could
be satisfied only from one-half the cash on hand at the testator's death -- that
is, from one-half of the $ 291.16, and that Andreas has no legal interest in the
other personal property -- the dividends and the stock. Apparently, it is the
theory of the respondent that even if the real property should have been
compelled to carry a portion of the burden of the debts and expenses of
administration and was improperly exonerated therefrom, appellants are in no
position to complain. It is contended that Konstantinos and John as the legatees
of "all the rest of my personal property" except the furniture, are the only
ones who could complain of the error, if one was made. This is on the theory
that the legacy to Konstantinos and John was a bequest of the stock, and that
the cash legacy to Andreas could be paid only from the cash on hand at the death
of the testator. This presents a question of construction of the will. Section
751 of the Probate Code provides:

   "The property of a testator, except as otherwise provided in this code, must
be resorted to for the payment of legacies in the following order:

   "(1) The property which is expressly appropriated by the will therefor.

   "(2) Property not disposed of by the will.

    "(3) Property which is devised or bequeathed to a residuary legatee."

   It seems quite clear that the bequest of Konstantinos and John, considering
its terms, and its position in the will immediately following the cash legacy of
$ 4,000 to Andreas, reasonably means that the rest of the testator's personal
property remaining after discharging the $ 4,000 bequest to appellant shall go
to Konstantinos and John. To construe the will as providing that Andreas should
get his $ 4,000 cash legacy only from cash on hand and that all other personal
property was to go to Konstantinos and John even if there  were no cash, would
be to entirely disregard the priority obviously intended for Andreas. It is our
opinion that the will directed that personalty remaining after discharging the $
4,000 cash legacy was to go to Konstantinos and John. Under this analysis of the
terms of the will the proceeds from the sale of the stock and the dividends are
applicable to payment of the cash legacy as property which is expressly
appropriated by the will to such payment within the meaning of section 751 of
the Probate Code. It follows, of course, that appellants therefore may object to
the ruling of the trial court improperly exonerating the real property from its
proportion of the burden for debts and expenses of administration, and unduly
and improperly burdening the personalty with these obligations.

     This disposes of all points urged by the appellants before the trial court
and in their briefs filed before the oral argument. At the time of argument the
court suggested two other points that had not been raised in the court below or
in the briefs. The first of these is whether the community property interest of
the wife should be charged with a proportionate share of the debts and expenses
of administration. The law is clear that in the absence of an expression of a
contrary intent, the entire community property, including the interest of the
surviving widow, is subject to the debts and expenses of administration upon the
death of the husband. ( Estate of Chanquet, 184 Cal. 307 [193 P. 762]; sec. 202,
Prob. Code; see, also, Estate of Haselbud, 26 Cal. App. 2d 375 [79 P.2d 443];
11A Cal. Jur., p. 491, sec. 358.) The converse is also true -- that is, if the
will designates that debts should be paid from the interest of the husband, the
wife's share of the community property is exonerated, if the husband's share is
sufficient to pay all such debts and expenses. Thus, in Estate of Chanquet,
supra, the will directed that the wife was to receive her one-half of the
community property, and a life estate in the residuum of the estate "after
paying and discharging all my debts, the cost of my last illness and burial, the
cost of administration of my estate . . .". The Supreme Court reversed the court
below, and held that the quoted phrase, when taken in connection with the other
provisions of the will, should be interpreted to mean that the testator had
designated that debts and expenses of administration must be paid out of the
husband's share of the community  property.   In the instant case the testator
declared, in Paragraph Second of the will, that: "All my property, real and
personal . . . is my own separate property." Then in Paragraph Third he stated:
"My will is that all my just and lawful debts and funeral charges shall, by my
executor hereinafter named, be paid out of my estate as soon after my decease as
shall to my executor be convenient . . .". (Italics ours.) The respondent argues
that by the italicized portion of this paragraph the testator has definitely
expressed his intention that debts and expenses should be paid out of his estate
alone. Although the clause is not as clear as the comparable provision in the
Estate of Chanquet, supra, we agree with this interpretation of this paragraph.
In its correct sense the words "my estate" could only refer to that estate or
property over which the testator had the right of testamentary control -- it
could not refer to the wife's share of the community property over which he had
no such control. Appellants place some emphasis on Paragraph Second, declaring
that: "All my property . . . is my own separate property", and contend that by
that paragraph the testator declared that all the property, including the wife's
share of the community, was his separate property. We cannot presume that the
testator intended by this clause to attempt to will away his wife's share of the
community property over which he must be presumed to know he had no power of
testamentary disposition. What is probably meant by that clause is that "my
property" refers to his share of the community, and that the testator intended
to declare that no other person had  any interest in his share of the community
property. In view of this construction of the terms of the will it must be held
that the trial court properly exonerated the wife's share of the community
property from liability for debts and expenses of administration.

     The second point raised at the time of oral argument must also be decided
in favor of respondent. Appellants contend that the devise of "all my real
property" to the wife, when considered with the bequest of "all the rest of my
personal property" to Konstantinos and John is a residuary bequest, and that not
only should all expenses of administration and debts of the estate be paid
solely from the real property, under section 750 of the Probate Code, but that
under section 751 of that code the executor must sell sufficient real property
to satisfy the $ 4,000 bequest of Andreas in full.  These two results would
follow if appellants' construction of the will were correct. However, when the
will is read as a whole, it seems to us that the devise of "all my real
property" was not intended as a residuary devise within the meaning of sections
750 and 751 of the Probate Code. The will shows a studied attempt to treat the
personalty and the realty separately. As already pointed out, the testator
wanted Andreas to have $ 4,000 of the personalty and Konstantinos and John to
have the balance of such personalty, if any should exist. But, when he came to
the real property, he stated that "all my real property" should go to his wife.
A residuary bequest is defined in section 161, subdivision 4, of the Probate
Code as follows: "A residuary legacy embraces only that which remains after all
the bequests of the will are discharged." In other words, the term "residuum"
implies that something has been taken from the class of property involved, and
what remains is the residuum. (54 Cor. Jur., p. 715; 69 Cor. Jur., p. 925, sec.
2093.) Thus it has been held that a general residuary clause passes whatever may
remain of the testator's estate after the defined devises and legacies have been
satisfied. ( Estate of Hall, 183 Cal. 61 [190 P. 364]; 26 Cal. Jur., p. 958,
sec. 260.) In the instant case nothing was taken from the real property at all
-- all of the real property was devised to the wife. There was nothing left
after satisfying other devises of real property. The Probate Code itself
recognizes the distinction between a true residuary clause and a devise or
bequest of "all my property". Section 125 of that code provides that: "A devise
. . . of all the testator's real . . . property . . . passes all the real . . .
property which he was entitled to dispose of by will at the time of his death .
. .". Section 126 provides that: "A devise of the residue of the testator's real
property . . . passes all the real . . . property . . . which he was entitled to
devise . . . at the time of his death, not otherwise effectually devised . . .
by his will." The general devise mentioned in section 125 must be held to be
property "otherwise effectually devised" by the will within the meaning of
section 126.

   The decree of distribution is reversed and the matter remanded for
proceedings not inconsistent with the views herein expressed.

   Knight, J., and Ward, J., concurred.


                              25 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             BLANCHE MAY PARKMAN, Plaintiff and Appellant, v. W. A.
               SAVAGE, as Real Estate Commissioner, Defendant and
                                   Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 7220

            Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District

            227 Cal. App. 2d 436; 38 Cal. Rptr. 664; 1964 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1201


                                  May 25, 1964

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of San Diego
County.  Verne O. Warner, Judge.

   Proceeding in mandamus to compel the Real Estate Commissioner to set aside
and annul an order of the Real Estate Commissioner suspending plaintiff's real
estate broker's license.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Brokers--Licenses--Suspension--Evidence.  --A finding that a real estate
broker arranged the sale of estate real property in bad faith was supported by
evidence that a "dummy" purchaser was used because the broker knew sale of
property in an estate to the executor would be illegal, that the superior court
confirmed the sale to the "dummy" purchaser, that such purchaser immediately
thereafter transferred the property to the estate's executor and his wife
without consideration, and that the broker and her firm made a commission on the
sale.

(2) Id.--Licenses--Suspension--Grounds.  --A real estate broker arranging an
illegal transaction may be disciplined by the Real Estate Commission, regardless
of the fact that the illegal transaction, once consummated, is not void but only
voidable.

COUNSEL: Yale, Wilson, Summers & Yale and William A. Yale for Plaintiff and
Appellant.

Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, and Lynn Henry Johnson, Deputy Attorney General,
for Defendant and Respondent.

JUDGES: Griffin, P. J.  Coughlin, J., and Brown, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: GRIFFIN

OPINION

     Petitioner Blanche May Parkman, in her petition for a writ of mandate
against the Real Estate Commissioner sought to set aside and annul an order of
the commissioner suspending petitioner's real estate broker's license for a
period of 60 days.

    The trial court affirmed the decision of the Real Estate Commissioner.
Plaintiff appeals and contends that the evidence  is not sufficient to support
the finding that petitioner had violated Business and Professions Code, section
10176, sub-paragraph (i) [fraud and dishonest dealing], section 10177,
subparagraph (f) [conducting herself in a manner which would have warranted the
denial of her application for a real estate license], and Probate Code, section
583.

   The commissioner and the trial court made a determination that petitioner was
subject to disciplinary action for such violations.

    Probate Code, section 583, provides: "No executor or administrator may
purchase any property of the estate, or any claim against the estate, directly
or indirectly, nor be interested in any such purchase.  . . ."

   Facts

   Juanita B. Aaronson died December 15, 1956, and on February 5, 1957, her
husband, Sibley W. Aaronson, was the duly appointed executor of her will and he
and his daughter, Noreen (Doreen) Beggs were the beneficiaries under the will.
Petitioner, a licensed real estate broker, took a listing of the property in the
estate from the executor at a price of $ 35,000 on August 4, 1957.  The property
remained in the estate, unsold, until February 12, 1959.  During the probate of
the estate, Sibley was remarried to one Florence Munson Aaronson who had a
daughter named Janet McNeill.  In order to effect a sale of the property, it was
agreed that Sibley's new wife Florence would put up her money to buy the real
property from the estate, take it in the name of her daughter Janet, who would
in turn deed it to Sibley and Florence Aaronson.  On May 6, 1959, an offer by
Janet to purchase the property for $ 20,000, $ 2,000 down, was prepared by
petitioner as a real estate broker and this bid was submitted to Sibley as
executor, through his attorney, to purchase the property at its inheritance tax
appraised value of $ 20,000.  Janet's offer was submitted to the court and the
sale was confirmed, without disclosing to the court the facts pertaining to the
transaction, with Sibley as executor and seller and Janet as purchaser. Florence
deposited the downpayment and she was arranging to finance the balance due
through institutional financing.  The lending institution required that
Florence's husband Sibley join in the signing of the loan papers.  Florence had
the title vest in her name, with Sibley as joint tenant.  On August 24, 1959,
Janet deeded the property to Florence and Sibley, as joint tenants, without
consideration.  Petitioner, on  behalf of her real estate firm, exacted a fee of
$ 1,000 for her services, which fee was apparently paid from the estate.

   Janet, who also was a real estate broker, said that there was a conflict
between her broker's office and petitioner's office and a complaint was lodged
by Janet with the Real Estate Commissioner against petitioner.  The charge was:
"That prior to the obtaining of the listing for the sale of the property both
respondents represented to Sibley William Aaronson, his wife and his
step-daughter, that the real property could be legally and lawfully sold to the
Executor by the use of a 'dummy'; that the Aaronsons and Janet P. McNeill
believed these representations and proceeded with the transaction above outlined
under the direction and control of respondents; that the said transaction was
illegal and unlawful in that section 583 of the Probate Code of the State of
California, provides that 'No Executor may purchase any property of the estate
directly or indirectly'; that respondents well knew that said transaction was
unlawful and illegal.  . . ." The commissioner so found.  It is claimed that the
transaction was with the approval of all heirs and that accordingly it was not
illegal or unlawful; that while the wording of Probate Code, section 583, would
appear to create an unqualified prohibition against  a direct or indirect
purchase by an executor, section 583, as judicially interpreted, has been held
to be designed solely for the protection of those interested in the estate, and
the purchase by an executor directly or indirectly from the estate is not void
but voidable only at the instance of those interested in the estate (citing
United States Fid. & Guar. Co. v. Postel, 64 Cal.App.2d 567 [149 P.2d 183]);
that since an indirect purchase by the executor with the approval and
acquiescence of all heirs is neither illegal, unlawful, void, voidable or
otherwise wrongful, then of necessity the broker's participation in such a sale
cannot be fraudulent, dishonest, or otherwise susceptible to any charge of
misconduct under the rules of the Business and Professions Code.  ( Manning v.
Watson, 108 Cal.App.2d 705 [239 P.2d 688].)

     The finding that the petitioner, in bad faith, obtained an offer to
purchase property in the estate from Janet McNeill; that she arranged the sale
of the estate property using Janet McNeill as a "dummy" because she knew that
sale of the property to the actual purchaser would be illegal, has evidentiary
support.  The property was estate property. Its sale would be confirmed by the
superior court and one of the  actual purchasers was the executor of the estate.
The superior court confirmed the sale to Janet and immediately afterwards she
transferred the property to the executor of the estate and his wife for no
consideration.  Petitioner and Parkman Realty made $ 1,000 on the sale.
Petitioner well knew that the transaction was illegal and unlawful.  The
superior court found all these facts to be true.  In Marks v. Watson, 112
Cal.App.2d 196, 200 [245 P.2d 1121], it was said in this respect that: "The
'degree of harm' to the victim is not a matter of controlling importance in
fixing the penalty in disciplinary proceedings.  It is simply one of the facts
to be taken into consideration.  The basic reason for disciplinary action in
matters of this kind is the protection of the public against unethical and
dishonest conduct on the part of those engaged in the real estate business.  In
view of this purpose we cannot say that the revocation of plaintiff's license
establishes, as a matter of law, an abuse of discretion on the part of the Real
Estate Commissioner." The question was touched upon in volume 11, Opinions of
the Attorney General of California, 108, 109, where it was declared that: "A
real estate licensee may be disciplined for a substantial misrepresentation even
though the other party to the transaction suffers no pecuniary loss." See also
cases cited therein.   It therefore appears that a real estate broker who
arranges a transaction in violation of the law may be disciplined by the Real
Estate Commissioner, regardless of the fact that the illegal transaction, once
consummated, is not void but only voidable. ( Karrell v. Watson, 116 Cal.App.2d
769 [254 P.2d 651, 255 P.2d 464].)

   Judgment affirmed.


                              26 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           E. A. LYNCH, as Trustee in Bankruptcy, etc., Appellant, v.
                    DANIEL J. CUNNINGHAM et al., Respondents

                                 Civ. No. 8668

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FIRST APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION TWO

            131 Cal. App. 164; 21 P.2d 154; 1933 Cal. App. LEXIS 781


                            April 12, 1933, Decided

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing of this Cause was Denied by
the District Court of Appeal on May 12, 1933.
   A Petition by Respondents to have the Cause Heard in the Supreme Court, after
Judgment in the District Court of Appeal, was Denied by the Supreme Court on
June 1, 1933.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County. Leon R. Yankwich, Judge.

COUNSEL: Aaron Levinson and Louis Swarthe for Appellant.

Michael F. Shannon and Thomas A. Wood for Respondents.

JUDGES: DOOLING, J., pro tem. Nourse, P. J., and Sturtevant, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: DOOLING

OPINION

     DOOLING, J., pro tem. This is an appeal by the plaintiff, as trustee in
bankruptcy of Rose Murray, from a judgment denying equitable relief. Rose Murray
is a daughter of one Dan Cunningham, who died in 1912. The estate of Dan
Cunningham was distributed in 1913 in undivided interests, one-half to Margaret
Cunningham, his widow, and one-twelfth to each of his six children, including
Rose Murray. On May 10, 1923, the mother and the six children created a trust
designated as the Cunningham Estate Trust. In the creation of this trust the
entire property, which consisted of real estate, was conveyed to two of Rose
Murray's brothers, Daniel J. Cunningham and Hugh P. Cunningham as trustees. By
this deed of trust it was provided that such trustees should have the
management, care, custody and control of said property and receive the rents,
income and revenue thereof and pay all expenses in connection with such
property; that the trustees should have the power to sell and dispose of any
portion or portions of the trust property and to invest and re-invest the
proceeds subject to the other provisions of the trust deed; to borrow money and
for that purpose mortgage, pledge or hypothecate the property; to grant and
acquire, create and release easements,  make leases and otherwise manage the
trust property. The trust was expressly provided not to be terminable until the
expiration of twenty years except in the event of the death of all the
beneficiaries prior thereto. It was further provided that the trustees should
pay the net income to the beneficiaries in the proportion of their interests.
The deed of trust provided that in case of the death of Margaret Cunningham her
portion of the net proceeds should thereafter be paid to the other beneficiaries
in equal portions, and in the event of the death of any other beneficiary his
portion of the net income should be paid in equal portions to the issue of his
body by right of representation and in the event of his death without issue to
the other beneficiaries and to the issue of any other original beneficiary then
deceased. At the expiration of the trust period the trustees are required to
transfer, pay over and convey all of the trust property remaining in their hands
to the persons who shall then be beneficiaries in the proportions provided in
the trust deed.

   After the creation of this trust, judgment was recovered against Rose Murray
by one Hileman for $ 2,940.74. A writ of execution was issued on this judgment
on November 10, 1927, and levied upon all moneys, goods, credits, effects, debts
due or owing, or any other personal property belonging to the defendant, Rose
Murray, in the possession or under the control of Daniel J. Cunningham and Hugh
P. Cunningham, trustees of the Cunningham Estate Trust. This levy was made by
delivering  to Hugh P. Cunningham a copy of the writ, together with the
appropriate demand required by our code in the case of the levy upon personal
property in the possession of another. Sale at execution was had pursuant to
this levy and the property was bought at such sale by Hugh P. Cunningham, who
was acting for his mother, Margaret Cunningham, for the amount of the judgment
and accrued costs. By virtue of such sale Margaret Cunningham claims to have
acquired all of the interest of Rose Murray in and to the trust property, the
value of which is variously estimated from $ 69,000 to considerably over $
100,000.

   Rose Murray originally commenced this action for an accounting. After her
adjudication as a bankrupt the trustee in bankruptcy was substituted as
plaintiff and by amendments  to the complaint sought to have the execution sale
set aside and prayed for a judgment requiring the payment to plaintiff of all
net income received from Rose Murray's interest in the trust and trust property
subsequent to the execution sale, less the amount paid by Margaret Cunningham at
the sale on execution.

   Various attacks are leveled by appellant against the judgment appealed from.
It is claimed by him that the sale price was grossly disproportionate to the
value of the property and that this, coupled with a claimed confidential
relationship existing between Margaret Cunningham and her daughter Rose Murray,
justified the setting aside of the sale. It is claimed that the buying of the
property at the execution sale by one of the trustees acting for his mother was
a breach of his trust as trustee for Rose Murray and the sale was thereby
rendered voidable by her. It is claimed that the sale was a fraud upon the other
creditors of Rose Murray and voidable for that reason. It is likewise urged that
Rose Murray had an equitable estate in the corpus of the trust; that the corpus
being real property this equitable estate was an interest in real property and
should have been levied upon as an interest in real property (Code Civ. Proc.,
sec. 542, subd. 2), in which event Rose Murray would have had a right of
redemption (Code Civ. Proc., secs. 700a, 701, 702). Certain other minor points
are urged by appellant which we do not deem it necessary to set out here.

   It is plain that if any one of these enumerated points is good it will
necessitate a reversal of the judgment and will also render unnecessary the
consideration of any of the other points urged by appellant. For the reason that
we have reached the conclusion that Rose Murray had an equitable estate in the
corpus of the trust which was an interest in real property we shall confine our
consideration to that point alone.

   At the outset we are confronted by the claim of respondents that under
section 863 of the Civil Code Rose Murray had no estate in the corpus of the
trust but only a chose in action enforceable against the trustees. This section
of the Civil Code reads: "Except as hereinafter otherwise provided, every
express trust in real property, valid as such in its creation, vests the whole
estate in the trustees, subject only to the execution of the trust. The
beneficiaries take  no estate or interest in the property, but may enforce the
performance of the trust."

   The proper construction of this section was the subject of elaborate
consideration in Title Ins. & Trust Co. v. Duffill, 191 Cal. 629 [218 P. 14, 15]
. In that case one Harry Duffill had entered into an agreement with his wife to
create a trust for her benefit in an undivided one-fourth of any property which
he might receive from his mother, the income from such trust to be paid to the
wife. Thereafter the mother died and by her will created a testamentary trust in
certain of her property with certain of the income therefrom to be paid to Harry
Duffill until his son Albert should reach the age of twenty-one years, at which
time one-half of the corpus of the trust was to be transferred and conveyed to
Harry Duffill. In that trust, as in the one which we are considering, the
trustee was given the power "to sell, lease, improve or exchange, invest or
reinvest any or all of said property". It was the claim of Harry Duffill that
the only property which he received from his mother's estate and to which the
trust created by the agreement with his wife could attach as the corpus of the
trust created by that agreement was the income from the trust created by his
mother. This would have resulted in the payment of one-fourth of such income as
received by Harry Duffill to the trustee for his wife to be held by such trustee
in trust to pay only the income therefrom to the wife during the period provided
in the agreement between them. It was the claim of the wife, on the other hand,
that Harry Duffill took an immediate vested equitable estate in the corpus of
the trust created by his mother, that this equitable estate was property
received from his mother within the meaning of the agreement creating the trust
for the wife's benefit, and hence that one-fourth of such equitable estate was
impressed with the trust in her favor and became the corpus of the trust estate
created for her benefit, and that she was accordingly entitled to receive as
income from such one-fourth of Harry Duffill's equitable estate one-fourth of
the income which Harry Duffill received from the trust created by his mother.
The Supreme Court decided in favor of the contention of the wife. We quote at
length from that opinion because of the careful and exhaustive consideration
given by the Supreme Court to the questions there involved:  "The theory that
Harry Duffill received at  his mother's death a beneficial interest in the
property belonging to her, and that his subsequent receipts, therefore, are not
directly from her, but are receipts from the income of his property, finds
support in what we believe to be the status of the equitable interest and estate
of a cestui que trust in property in this state. It is worthy of note that in
the distribution of the mother's estate in this very matter Harry Duffill's
equitable estate was recognized beyond the provisions of his mother's will. Mrs.
Duffill intended that he should receive one-half of the income from the trust
created by her, but upon the void condition that it should be accumulated during
Albert's minority. As was pointed out by this court, it was undoubtedly the
intention of the testatrix that the income should be retained and go with the
corpus, to be held by the testamentary trustee and administered as principal,
but this intention was frustrated by her unlawful wish for accumulation of that
portion of the fund, and it was properly decreed that Harry should enter upon
its immediate use and enjoyment. ( Estate of Duffill, 180 Cal. 748, 761 [183 P.
337].) While it is beyond dispute that by the terms of the will of Eugenie A.
Duffill the legal title to all property constituting the corpus of the
testamentary trust created by her vested in the Los Angeles Trust and Savings
Bank, as trustee, immediately upon her death, and that such title was declared
and confirmed by the decree of distribution of her estate ( Western P.  R. R.
Co. v. Godfrey, 166 Cal. 346, 349 [136 P. 284, Ann. Cas.  1915B 825]), it is
equally beyond dispute that on her death there was also vested in Harry Duffill
an equitable estate or beneficial interest in her property independent of the
legal estate which vested in the testamentary trustee. In England, devises of
trust, under this doctrine of an equitable interest, are distinct substantive
devises, standing on their own basis, independent of the legal estate which is
'nothing but the shadow which always follows the trust res in the eye of a court
of equity'. ( Attorney-General v. Downing, Wilm. 1 [Eng.] 22 [97 Eng. Rep. 1].)
In a still earlier English case (Burgess v. Wheate, 1 Eden 177), Lord Keeper
Henly (page 251) said that the trust should be considered in equity as the 'real
estate' and the 'trustee should take no beneficial interest that the cestui que
trust can enjoy'. In  the same case, Lord Mansfield said (pages 217, 226): 'Now
trusts are considered . . . as the real ownership of the land . . . the same as
the land and trustee . . . is in no event to take a benefit.' The generally
accepted rule in this country also is that 'under the system now prevailing the
cestui que trust is regarded as the real owner of the property, the trustee
being merely the depositary of the legal title. His is not a property right, but
a legal duty founded upon a personal confidence; his estate is not that which
can be enjoyed, but a power that can be exercised.' (39 Cyc. 203.) Such estates
'are in equity what legal estates are in law; the ownership of the equitable
estate is regarded by equity as the real ownership, and the legal estate is, as
has been said, no more than the shadow always following the equitable estate,
which is the substance, except where there is a purchaser for value and without
notice who has acquired the legal estate.' (1 Pomeroy's Equity Jurisprudence,
4th ed., sec. 147; Underhill on Trusts and Trustees, 4th ed., p. 6, art. II.)

   "Respondents, it will be remembered, contend that Harry Duffill took no
estate or interest in his mother's property, but only the right to enforce the
performance of the trust. Such contention is largely based on section 863 of the
Civil Code, which provides that except as in the code provided 'every express
trust in real property, valid as such in its creation, vests the whole estate in
the trustees, subject only to the execution of the trust. The beneficiaries take
no estate or interest in the property, but may enforce the performance of the
trust.' Aside from the fact that but little of the property held under the
testamentary trust is real property rendering the code section of but little
moment in this discussion, the construction placed upon its provisions by
respondents does not follow. The section was adopted as part of the Civil Code
in 1872. It has been construed by this court many times, and the conclusion has
been firmly established that 'the estate which a trustee takes by virtue of
section 863 is not necessarily a fee, but only such estate as is required for
the execution of his trust'. ( Keating v. Smith, 154 Cal. 186, 192 [97 P. 300];
Morffew v. San Francisco etc. R. R. Co., 107 Cal. 587, 595 [40 P. 810].) This
rule that the trustee takes only such an estate in the trust property as is
necessary to the discharge of his trust  duties refers directly to the quantity
of his estate in the property, as, for instance, an estate for years, an estate
for life, or an estate in fee. ( Estate of Pichoir, 139 Cal. 682, 688 [73 P.
606].) In Gray v. Union Trust Co. , 171 Cal. 637, 640 [154 P. 306, 308], a
substantive 'equitable estate' was recognized to exist in one who had a
'usufructuary interest in the whole estate during her life', notwithstanding
there was 'conveyed to the trustee the whole legal title, since so much (was)
plainly necessary for the purposes of the trust (Civ. Code, sec. 863)', which
general purposes were to give the trustor the beneficial use of the property
during her life, and upon her death to see that the property went to her
nominees under her will. (See, also, Estate of Aldersley, 174 Cal. 366, 371 [163
P. 206]; Weston v. Weston, 125 Mass. 268; Crooke v. County of Kings, 97 N.Y.
421, 446; Patton v. Ludington, 103 Wis. 629, 644 [74 Am. St. Rep. 910, 79 N.W.
1073]; Williams v. Williams, 135 Wis. 60 [115 N.W. 342];  Estate of Fair, 132
Cal. 523, 550, 571 [64 P. 1000, 84 Am. St. Rep. 70].)

   "It were useless, we feel, to carry this discussion to greater length, or to
discuss other phases of the matter and probable lines of solution of the problem
here presented. Harry Duffill was vested with an equitable estate and beneficial
interest in his mother's property immediately upon her death, with only such
legal title lodged in the Los Angeles Trust and Savings Bank as is required for
the execution of the testamentary trust. That this interest was assignable is
beyond controversy. (5 C. J., p. 854; 3 Pomeroy's Equity Jurisprudence, 4th ed.,
sec. 1271. See, also, Bridge v. Kedon, 163 Cal. 493, 500 [126 P. 149, 43 L.R.A.
(N.S.) 404].) Whatever may be the duration or quantity of the equitable estate
vested in Harry, whether for years or for life, or in mere expectancy, he has
received, and is receiving, income thereon. What condition will prevail when the
testamentary trust is terminated by lapse of time or death does not now concern
us. The accrued and accruing income received by Harry, including the portion
paid to plaintiff, is income from Harry's own equitable interest, and is not an
interest in property arising out of the mother's estate. It is therefore 'income
to Martha', and should not be administered as corpus of the trust under the
August agreement, but should be accounted for and paid direct to appellant as
income."

   It will be observed of this opinion that while the Supreme Court said that in
that case but little real property was involved, nevertheless the court
considered carefully the effect of Civil Code, section 863, upon such real
property as was embodied in the corpus of the trust and it may not be said of
the opinion that the discussion of this section was mere dictum for the reason
that if section 863 had had the effect claimed for it by Harry Duffill in that
case the court of necessity would have been compelled to treat the real property
which was a part of the corpus as property in which Harry Duffill had neither a
legal nor an equitable estate and the income from that portion of the trust
property could not have been held to be income from property coming to Harry
Duffill from the estate of his mother. The Supreme Court made no such
distinction, but held that, as to the entire corpus of the trust, real as well
as personal, Harry Duffill had a present vested equitable estate.

     While the Supreme Court did not say so in so many words, it is implicit in
the decision that the proper construction of Civil Code, section 863, is that it
has reference to legal interests and estates as distinguished from equitable
interests and estates. As construed in the Duffill case this section means in
effect: "every express trust in real property . . . vests the whole (legal)
estate in the trustees. . . . The beneficiaries take no (legal) estate or
interest in the property . . ."

   This holding was foreshadowed in Estate of Fair, supra, Estate of Aldersley,
supra, and Gray v. Union Trust Co., supra, all of which were cited and relied
upon by the Supreme Court in the Duffill case. It is perfectly in keeping with
the similar holdings of the Supreme Court of Wisconsin in Patton v. Ludington,
supra, and Williams v. Williams, supra, in both of which an equitable estate in
the beneficiary was recognized despite a code section identical in language with
our Civil Code, section 863.

   Respondents cite and rely upon Ward v. Waterman, 85 Cal. 488 [24 P. 930],
Craven v. Dominguez Estate Co., 72 Cal. App. 713 [237 P. 821], Finnie v. Smith,
83 Cal. App. 707 [257 P. 866], and Houghton v. Pacific Southwest Trust & Sav.
Bank, 111 Cal. App. 509 [295 P. 1079],  claiming that they announce a contrary
doctrine. Each of those cases was concerned with a trust created for the sole
purpose of selling the real property and paying the money received from such
sale to the beneficiary. In no one of them was it contemplated that in the
execution of the trust any part of the real property should ever be returned or
reconveyed to the beneficiary, the only right which the beneficiary had under
the trust being to receive from the trustee money after the real property had
been sold. In such a situation the courts very properly held that the
beneficiary had no title, legal or equitable, in the real property, but only the
right to receive from the trustee money, a bare chose in action. This situation
is clearly distinguishable from that existing in the Duffill case and in the
case before us. In the Duffill case upon Albert's reaching the age of twenty-one
years Harry was to receive from the trustees not merely money but one-half the
corpus of the trust itself.   In the pending case at the expiration of twenty
years from the creation of the trust Rose Murray was to receive from the
trustees not merely money, but a one-twelfth interest in the real property which
constituted the corpus of the trust. In such a situation a court of equity can
look through form to substance and recognize in the beneficiary a present
equitable estate as was done in the Duffill case.

     The same result may be obtained by applying the equitable doctrine of
conversion (6 Cal. Jur., p. 528, sec. 3). Where real property is conveyed to a
trustee with directions to sell in any event it will be treated in equity as
personal property. But where the property in kind is, or may be, conveyed to the
beneficiary no such equitable conversion results.

     For the purpose of levy and sale under execution an equitable estate in
real property  has always been regarded in this state as real property (15 Cal.
Jur., p. 1018, sec. 27). In Fish v. Fowlie, 58 Cal. 373, the levy was "upon all
the right, title and interest which George Fowlie had in and to the land". It
was held that sale under such levy transferred to the purchaser Fowlie's rights
under an executory contract with the owner to sell the land to Fowlie, the court
saying:

   "The words 'real property' are co-extensive with lands, tenements, and
hereditaments. (Subd. 5, sec. 14, Civ.  Code.) Land also embraces all titles,
legal or equitable, perfect or imperfect ( Leese v. Clark, 20 Cal. 387),
including such rights as lie in contract --  those which are executory as well
as those which are executed. ( Soulard v. United States, 4 Pet. 511 [7 L. Ed.
938].) Any interest, therefore, in land, legal or equitable, is subject to
attachment or execution, levy, and sale. (Code Civ. Proc., sec. 688; Kennedy v.
Nunan, 52 Cal. 326; Le Roy v. Dunkerly, 54 Cal. 452, 460.) As a purchaser at the
sheriff's sale, the intervener, therefore, became substituted to, and acquired
all the right, title, interest, and claim, which the judgment debtor, George
Fowlie, had in the land on the 27th of January, 1876 -- the date of the levy (
Code Civ. Proc., sec. 700), and he was the owner of that interest when the
defendants mortgaged the land to the plaintiffs.

   "But it is claimed that Fowlie had no interest at the time of the levy and
sale, which passed by the sheriff's sale and deed to the intervener. Fowlie had
not the legal title to the land. He had nothing more than an interest derivable
under a contract of sale made on the 15th of June, 1875, between himself and one
W. J. Gunn, who was the legal owner. By that contract Gunn contracted to convey
the land to 'Fowlie, his heirs or assigns,' upon payment of a balance of unpaid
purchase money 'on or before the 15th of September, 1876'. No personal
obligation was given by Fowlie for the payment of the purchase money; and it
does not appear that Fowlie obtained possession under the contract, or that he
was in possession at the time of the levy or sale. Yet he had agreed to purchase
the property, and had paid part of the purchase money, and covenanted to pay the
balance at a stipulated time; and he thus became vested with such an equitable
interest in the land as was the subject of sale or transfer by himself; or of
appropriation by execution, or in any other mode prescribed by law, by his
creditors. This interest being vendible by the judgment debtor, and leviable by
his attachment or judgment creditors, was all that passed by the sale and deed
under the judgment against him to the intervener." (See, also, Le Roy v.
Dunkerly, 54 Cal. 452; Kennedy v. Nunan, 52 Cal. 326; Logan v. Hale, 42 Cal. 645
; Brown v. Campbell, 100 Cal. 635 [35 P. 433, 38 Am. St. Rep. 314].)

    It is difficult to discern any logical difference between the right to
receive a conveyance from an executory vendor which was held to create an
equitable estate in the real property in Fish v. Fowlie, supra, and Logan v.
Hale, supra, and the right to receive a conveyance at the expiration of the life
of the trust such as exists in the case under consideration. In either event,
the only existing right is to receive a conveyance of the property in the
future. If such a right creates a vested equitable estate in the one case it
should logically have the same effect in the other.

     If respondent Margaret Cunningham is correct in her contention that Rose
Murray had a mere chose in action and nothing more, then by the purchase as
personal property of the interest of Rose Murray on the execution sale
respondent has acquired all of the rights of Rose Murray under the trust. It
would result that if Rose Murray is still living at the expiration of the trust
respondent would be entitled to have the trustees convey to her the one-twelfth
interest in the real property held in trust by the trustees to reconvey to Rose
Murray. She would then have the legal title to such real property in fee and she
would have acquired such legal title by the purchase of Rose Murray's interest
in the trust as personal property, and by her purchasing it as personal property
Rose Murray would be deprived of the right of redemption given to an owner of an
interest in real property by our code. We are satisfied that no such result
should follow and under the authority of Title Ins. & Trust Co. v. Duffill,
supra, and the cases therein cited, we are likewise satisfied that while the
trustees held the legal estate of the trust property in fee, Rose Murray had an
equitable estate in one-twelfth thereof, and since the trust property was realty
that this equitable estate was an interest in real property belonging to the
defendant and standing in the name of the trustees which should have been levied
upon in the manner provided by section 542, subdivision 2, of the Code of Civil
Procedure.

   It results that the judgment appealed from should be and it is reversed with
directions to the trial court to take an accounting to determine the net income
received by respondent Margaret Cunningham since the sale on execution from the
interest of Rose Murray in the property in question, and, if such net income
with legal interest from the dates  of the various payments to such respondent
exceeds the amount paid by such respondent upon the execution with legal
interest thereon, to order such excess paid to plaintiff and to quiet the title
of Rose Murray in and to her interest in the trust and trust estate against the
claim of respondent Margaret Cunningham based upon her purchase at the execution
sale; if, however, upon such accounting such net income with interest is found
to be  less than the amount paid by such respondent upon the execution sale with
interest, to make such decree quieting title conditional upon the payment to
such respondent of the difference between such amounts within a reasonable time
to be fixed by the trial court.

   Nourse, P. J., and Sturtevant, J., concurred.

   A petition for a rehearing of this cause was denied by the District Court of
Appeal on May 12, 1933, and the following opinion then rendered thereon:

   THE COURT. On petition for rehearing counsel for respondents assert that this
court was in error in stating that the trustees under the Cunningham Estate
Trust had the power "to invest and reinvest the proceeds" from sales of trust
property. The portion of the opinion in which these words appear did not purport
to quote the language of the deed of trust but to give its effect.   That the
trustees had the powers stated is made clear by the following portions of the
deed of trust, which we quote verbatim: "Said Trustees shall have, and are
hereby granted, the right and power to sell and dispose of any portion or
portions of said real property (paragraph 2). . . . Said Trustees may purchase,
take or lease or otherwise acquire any lands or hereditaments useful in
connection with these trusts (paragraph 3). . . . All of the trust property at
any time vested in the Trustees for any of the purposes of these presents shall
be held by them upon the like trusts for sale and conversion and the like powers
and provisions in respect of management, control, disbursements and distribution
thereof and the application of the rents, revenues and income of the same, as
are herein contained concerning the property or rights therein or thereto hereby
granted or assigned to  the Trustees by the grantors herein for or on account of
these trusts. (Paragraph 6.)"

   It is plain that the trustees were given the power to sell and buy property
and to hold property subsequently acquired with trust funds subject to the trust
created. The effect of this was to give them the power to invest and reinvest.

   The petition for rehearing is denied.

   A petition by respondents to have the cause heard in the Supreme Court, after
judgment in the District Court of Appeal, was denied by the Supreme Court on
June 1, 1933.


                              27 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           HARRY F. DAVIS, Respondent, v. W. F. CHIPMAN, as Trustee,
                                etc., Appellant

                                S. F. No. 13122

                          Supreme Court of California

                  210 Cal. 609; 293 P. 40; 1930 Cal. LEXIS 430


                                October 30, 1930

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Rehearing denied.  Shenk, J., and Preston, J.,
dissented.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of the City and
County of San Francisco.  Frank J. Murasky, Judge.

COUNSEL: W. C. Sharpsteen, Cushing & Cushing and William H. Gorrill for
Appellant.

Fred L. Berry and Dozier & Kimball for Respondent.

JUDGES: In Bank. Curtis, J.  Richards, J., Langdon, J., Waste, C. J., Shenk, J.,
and Seawell, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: CURTIS

OPINION

     The defendant, as trustee under the last will and testament of Josephine A.
Phelps, deceased, was on the twenty-fourth day of April, 1924, the owner of
certain described real property situated in the county of San Mateo and
comprising 1400 acres of land or thereabouts.  On said last-named day, defendant
gave to Thomas B. Dozier, Jr., an option to purchase said real property for the
sum of $ 250,000, which said option is, in so far as the same is necessary for
the purposes of this action, in the following words and figures:

   "It is hereby agreed that I will sell and convey to you or your assignee, at
any time within three (3) months from this date, unless previously sold or
agreed to be sold, all of the property described in that certain agreement dated
March 21st, 1923, made and entered into by and between myself, as Trustee of the
Estate of Josephine A. Phelps, Deceased, under the terms of the Last Will and
Testament of said Josephine A. Phelps, Deceased, the party of the first part,
and California Homes Association, a Corporation duly and regularly organized and
existing under and by virtue of the laws of the State of California, and having
its principal place of business in the City and County of San Francisco, State
of California, the party of the second part, and recorded in Volume 75, at page
492, Official Records of San Mateo County, excepting therefrom such portions
thereof as have been sold since the above date, for the total sum of Two Hundred
Fifty Thousand Dollars ($ 250,000.00) in cash. . . .

   "The price for the several parcels into which the said property is divided
aggregates a sum largely in excess of the price quoted to you in this option to
purchase. I reserve the right to sell or to agree to sell any portion of said
property before you exercise this option to purchase. In the event that you
exercise this option to purchase,  the net sum for which said property is sold
will be credited to your account on said purchase price.

   "Anything contained in this agreement is not to bind me as an individual but
solely as said Trustee.

   "Yours very truly,

   "(Signed) W. F. Chipman,

   "Trustee of the Will of Josephine A. Phelps, Decd."

    On the same date, and it would seem as part of the same transaction,
although this is not a matter of material importance, the defendant executed and
delivered to the plaintiff a certain written agreement, of which the following
is a copy:

   "Harry F. Davis, Esq.,

   "Attorney at Law,

   "Hobart Building,

   "San Francisco, California.

   "Dear Sir: Enclosed please find copy of option to purchase, dated April 24th,
1924, from W. F. Chipman, Trustee of the Estate of Josephine A. Phelps,
Deceased, under the terms of the Last Will and Testament of said Josephine A.
Phelps, Deceased, to Thomas B. Dozier, Jr., Esq., First National Bank Building,
San Francisco, California.  Thomas B. Dozier, Jr., has requested me to send you
this copy of the above option to purchase, as he states that such option to
purchase was secured through your efforts, and that you interested him in the
property from a purchase standpoint.

   "I hereby agree, if Thomas B. Dozier, Jr., or his assignee or assignees,
exercise the above option to purchase, or any modification or change therein
which is effected by mutual consent of the parties thereto, to pay you a
commission on the sale of the property of Ten per cent. (10%) of the purchase
price of same, such commission to be due, and payable ratably and
proportionately if, as and when such purchase price is received by me, and such
commission to be due and payable only if a sale of this property is effected
under such option to purchase, or any modification or  change thereof which is
effected by mutual consent.

   "It is further understood and agreed that, on or before the expiration of
said option to purchase, both Mr. Dozier and yourself are to furnish me with the
complete names and addresses of all parties with whom you are or have been
dealing for the sale of said property under said option to purchase, and that no
commission will be due or payable to you except it is effected within one (1)
year of said expiration of said option to purchase and with one of the parties
whose name and address has been previously furnished by one or both of you, and
it is further understood that any party to whom a sale of the property is
effected through your efforts must be a party with whom there have been  no
negotiations heretofore in connection with said property.

   "Anything contained in this agreement is not to bind me as an individual but
solely as trustee.

   "Yours very truly,

   "(Signed) W. F. Chipman,

   "Trustee of the Will of Josephine A. Phelps, Decd."

   Mr. Dozier failed to exercise his option to purchase said real property
within the time fixed therein.  He did, however, in conjunction with Mr. Davis,
prior to the date of the expiration of said option, furnish to the defendant the
names and addresses of certain parties with whom, they stated in said notice,
they had been dealing for the sale of said property under said option.  Among
the names so furnished the defendant by the plaintiff and Mr. Dozier were those
of V. M. Price and the Municipal Properties Company, the address of each of
these parties being given as Santa Fe Building, San Francisco, California.

   It is conceded that the option expired on July 24th, 1924.  On July 29th,
1924, the plaintiff met the said V. M. Price on Market Street, in the city of
San Francisco.  It might be said here that V. M. Price was then and at all times
mentioned herein the president of the Municipal Properties Company, a
corporation, and in all his dealings with the parties hereto or with Mr. Dozier
he acted for said company.  At the time of the meeting of the plaintiff and Mr.
Price, as just related, the latter inquired of plaintiff how things were with
the Phelps estate, to which the plaintiff replied, "Not so good, our option is
up." Mr. Price then asked plaintiff to introduce him to the defendant, and at
the same time said, "I wonder if he will accept improvements in lieu of a heavy
down payment?" to which plaintiff replied, "I don't know but I will cheerfully
introduce you." The two then went to defendant's office, and the plaintiff
introduced Mr. Price to the defendant.  As a result of this meeting Mr. Price,
for the Municipal Properties Company, entered into an agreement with defendant
for the purchase of the real property described in the option.  The terms of the
agreement provided for a payment of $ 2,500 down and the balance over a period
of years, with the agreement on the part of Mr. Price that he and his company,
who was the real purchaser,  would put in certain improvements on the property
such as streets, sewers and water mains, and  would grade the land in order to
make it suitable for subdivision purposes.  This agreement between the defendant
and the Municipal Properties Company was executed on August 1, 1924.  Before the
defendant would accept Mr. Price's offer, or enter into any agreement of sale
with him or his company, he secured an agreement from the plaintiff and Mr.
Dozier waiving interest on commissions to be paid them.  Upon this point Mr.
Dozier testified as follows: "He told me that he would not accept that offer
[Price's offer] unless Mr. Davis would waive the interest on his commission.  .
. .  I told him I would take the matter up with Mr. Davis on the following
morning and he asked me to write him a letter to confirm the arrangement if it
was satisfactory to Mr. Davis and for both Mr. Davis and myself to sign the
letter." As a result of this conversation the following letter was signed by the
plaintiff and Mr. Dozier and delivered to the defendant:

   "July 30, 1924.

   "W. F. Chipman, Trustee,

   "525 Market Street,

   "San Francisco, California.

   "Dear Mr. Chipman: In regard to the matter of the Option to Purchase, dated
April 24, 1924, between yourself and Thomas B. Dozier, Jr., and the Agreement
for Commission on Purchase and Sale of Real Property, dated April 24, 1924,
between yourself and Harry F. Davis, we desire to advise you that we are willing
to accept a commission of ten per cent (10%) of each payment on the purchase
price on any sale by you to Virgil M. Price or the Municipal Properties Company
of the property at San Carlos, such commission to be payable to us out of and
from each payment on the purchase price if, as and when received by yourself,
without interest.

   "Trusting that this confirms our understanding of yesterday, and with kindest
regards, we are

   "Very respectfully,

   "(Signed) Thomas B. Dozier, Jr.

   "(Signed) Harry F. Davis."

   On August 7, 1924, the defendant mailed to plaintiff and Mr. Dozier his check
for $ 250, being ten per cent commission on the first payment of $ 2,500, made
by Mr. Price on  the purchase of said real property. The letter accompanying
said check is in part as follows:

   "Gentlemen: Herewith my check, as trustee of the last Will of Josephine A.
Phelps, deceased, in your favor for $ 250, being 10% commission of the first
payment of $ 2,500 made by Virgil M. Price, pursuant to agreement  for the
purchase and sale of real property by and between W. F. Chipman, Trustee, and
Virgil M. Price, dated August 1, 1924.

   "This payment to you is in accordance with your letter of July 30, 1924, a
copy of which I enclose, wherein you confirm the understanding between us prior
to the execution of the agreement for purchase above referred to. . . .

   "As you will recall, the new proposition made by yourselves in behalf of Mr.
Price for the purchase of the properties differed so radically in the matter of
payments that it was only entertained by myself and Mr. Sharpsteen because of
several advantages that we believed would benefit the Estate.

   "Among those advantages was the provision for immediate improvements on the
premises at a cost of $ 50,000.00, the payment of commission to you if when and
as received without interest, and other features that convinced Mr. Sharpsteen
and myself that such a contract would be desirable.

   "Attached to the enclosed check for $ 250.00 please find vouchers in
duplicate which kindly sign and return to me promptly.

   "Sincerely trusting that the agreement between Mr.  Price and me may have
most beneficial and satisfactory results for all concerned.

   "With kind regards,

   "Yours respectfully,

   "(Signed) W. F. Chipman, Trustee."

   Thereafter the defendant made the following payments on account of commission
on payments made by Mr. Price on the purchase price of said real property:
August 7, 1924, $ 125, January 17, 1925, $ 145, and January 31, 1925, $ 105.

   Defendant refused to make any further payments under his said agreement,
although prior to the institution of this and the companion case of Dozier v.
Chipman, Mr. Price had paid to defendant the full purchase price of said real
property. Prior to the commencement of said actions the plaintiff, on or about
July 28, 1924, assigned to the said Thomas B. Dozier, Jr., one-half of his claim
against the defendant, and the court found that said assignment was with the
knowledge and consent of the defendant.  Plaintiff instituted this action to
recover of the defendant the sum of $ 12,125, being one-half of the commission
of ten per cent of $ 250,000, the full purchase price of said real property,
less the sum of $ 375, paid thereon by defendant.  An action for a like amount
against defendant was also instituted by the said Thomas B. Dozier under his
assignment from plaintiff.  The two actions were tried on the same evidence.
Judgment was rendered in favor of the plaintiffs therein and against the
defendant for the full amount sued for.  The defendant has appealed from the
judgment in each action.

   The basis of defendant's refusal to pay the claim of the plaintiff was that
plaintiff was not at the time defendant wrote the letter of April 24, 1924, in
which he agreed to pay plaintiff said commission, nor at the time of the sale of
said real property, on August 1, 1924, to the said V. M. Price, a licensed real
estate agent or broker, and therefore plaintiff had no legal claim to said
commission, or any part thereof.

   Appellant now makes the same contention, in this court that was made by him
in the trial court -- that is, that plaintiff, not having been a licensed real
estate broker during any of the time he was dealing with the defendant, cannot
recover for his services rendered under the agreement set forth in the letter of
April 24, 1924.

   Section 2 of the act, which we will refer to as the Real Estate Brokers' Act
(Stats. 1919, p. 1252), as it stood at the time of the transaction involved,
defined a real estate broker as follows:

   "A real estate broker within the meaning of this act is a person,
copartnership or corporation who, for a compensation, sells, or offers for sale,
buys, or offers to buy, or negotiates the purchase or sale or exchange of real
estate, or who, for compensation, negotiates loans on real estate, leases, or
offers to lease, rents, or places for rent, or collects rents from real estate,
or improvements thereon, for others as a whole or partial vocation."

    Section 20 of the same act provided that no person acting in the capacity of
a real estate broker shall bring or maintain any action for collection of
compensation "for the performance of any of the acts mentioned in section two
hereof without alleging and proving that such person . . . was a duly licensed
real estate broker . . . at the time the alleged cause of action arose."

     Turning now to the letter of April 24, 1924, upon which the plaintiff
relies in support of his claim for a commission on the sale of the property
mentioned therein, we observe that in the first place it contains an agreement
on the part of the defendant to pay the plaintiff a commission of ten per cent
on the purchase price, "if Thomas B. Dozier, Jr., or his assignee or assignees,
exercise the above option to purchase" said real property. This letter, which
was addressed to the plaintiff, in its opening paragraph stated that "Thomas B.
Dozier, Jr., has requested me to send you this copy of the above option to
purchase as he states that such option to purchase was secured through your
efforts, and that you interested him in the property from a purchase
standpoint." As we read these two paragraphs together their meaning is clear.
If Dozier, Jr., either personally or through others, exercised his option to
purchase said property defendant was to pay plaintiff a commission on such sale
in consideration of the services rendered by plaintiff in interesting  Dozier in
said property.  The conditions of this agreement it is conceded were not met by
plaintiff.  Dozier did not exercise his option nor was any agreement for the
sale of said property effected during the life of said option.  We may dismiss
this agreement, therefore, from any further consideration.  The sale which was
entered into with Price was made after the expiration of the option.
Accordingly plaintiff cannot claim under this agreement any commission for
making such sale.

     The third paragraph of the letter, however, contained a further agreement.
This agreement was, in effect, that the plaintiff and Dozier, on or before the
expiration of said option, were to furnish to defendant the names and addresses
of all parties with whom they had dealt for the sale of said property under said
option, and if the property, within one year after the expiration of said
option, should be sold to one of the parties whose name and address had been
previously furnished to defendant, then and in  that event he would pay to the
plaintiff a like commission on the sale of said property as that provided in the
previous paragraph of said letter.  It is under this paragraph of the letter
that the plaintiff contends that he is entitled to recover in this action.
Under the agreement set forth therein it was necessary before plaintiff was
entitled to claim a commission for three acts to be performed.  First, plaintiff
or Dozier must have dealt for the sale of the property with the person to whom
the property was subsequently sold.  Second, they must have sent to defendant
the name and address of said party on or before the date of the expiration of
the option.  Third, the property must have been sold within one year to one of
the parties whose name plaintiff or Dozier had sent to the defendant as a party
with whom they had dealt for the sale of said property under said option.

     It is questionable, whether, under the terms of this agreement, plaintiff
or Dozier were required to bring about a sale of said property, after the
expiration of said option, Their part was fulfilled, we think, when they had
performed the first two conditions of this agreement.  They were required,
however, first to deal for the sale of said property under the option with the
person who thereafter purchased it, and, secondly, they were to furnish the name
of such purchaser to the defendant on or before the expiration of the option.
For these services the defendant agreed to pay a commission on the sale of said
property.  Of course, the mere furnishing of the names of the parties with whom
they had dealt for the sale of the property is not the performance of any act
mentioned in section 2 of the Real Estate Brokers' Act, and such services could
be performed and compensation collected therefor by one not a licensed real
estate broker. But we hardly think we can say the same thing regarding the act
of dealing with a party for the sale of the property.  It is not easy to
perceive how a person could deal with another for the sale of property without
offering to sell the property to such person.  If, therefore, the plaintiff,
acting as the agent of the defendant for a compensation, offered to sell said
property to Price, then he was performing an act expressly mentioned in section
2 of the Real Estate Brokers' Act as one which  could be legally performed only
by a licensed real estate broker.

     However, the plaintiff contends that while he dealt with Price for the sale
of the property he did not offer to sell said property directly to Price but
simply attempted to interest Price in joining a syndicate which would take over
Dozier's option and purchase the property.  The evidence shows that Price was
interested in the purchase of the property during the life of the Dozier option,
and approached the plaintiff and Dozier with that end in view, but that both
plaintiff and Dozier refused to entertain any offer from Price for the purchase
of the property, and sought to interest him in their scheme to form a syndicate
to purchase the property.  Price was not interested in the syndicate plan, and
declined to become a party to it, and there the matter was dropped, so far as
Price was concerned, until after the option expired.  Under this state of facts,
did plaintiff offer to sell the property?

   Plaintiff contends, as stated already, that while he dealt with Price for the
sale of the property he did not offer to sell the property to Price.  That
plaintiff's dealings with Price contemplated and involved a sale of the
property, we think, there can be no question.  Under no other theory can it be
held that plaintiff dealt with Price for the sale of the property.  These
negotiations with Price contemplated a sale of the property.  The fact that the
sale was not to be made to Price directly, but to a company or syndicate of
which Price was to be a member, was not material.  In either event the dealings
of the parties contemplated a sale of the property, and if a sale, then,
necessarily, there must have been an offer to sell the property, either to
Price, individually, or to him as a member of the syndicate. As an offer to sell
property by an agent for a compensation cannot legally be made except by a
person holding a license as a real estate broker, it follows that the act of
plaintiff in making said offer was illegal, and will not support a promise to
pay for said services.  ( Wise v. Radis, 74 Cal. App. 765 [242 Pac. 90]; Haas v.
Greenwald, 196 Cal. 236 [59 A. L. R. 1493, 237 Pac. 38].)

   We do not think the case of Shaffer v. Beinhorn, 190 Cal. 569 [213 Pac. 960],
is applicable to the facts of this case.  There all that the plaintiffs, who
were not licensed real  estate brokers or licensed real estate salesmen,  were
required to do in order to be entitled to compensation for their services was to
"find anyone interested in the purchase of such ranch to whom the said defendant
would be able to negotiate a sale thereof," or to "introduce to said defendant
anyone to whom the said defendant would be able to negotiate a sale thereof."
The court held that a complaint predicated upon such an agreement stated a good
cause of action.  "The acts of plaintiffs, therefore, as alleged in the
complaint, fall short of those defined by the Real Estate Brokers' Act as
constituting either a real estate broker or real estate salesman." In that case
the plaintiffs were not required to do anything except to find a person
interested in the ranch and introduce him to defendant.  They were not required
to sell the ranch or to offer it for sale, or to deal with any person for the
sale thereof, or to take any part in negotiating its sale.  In the present
action, while the plaintiff may not have been required to do anything toward
effecting a sale of the property after the expiration of the option, yet during
the option he was required to deal with the subsequent purchaser for the sale of
the property, and this, as we have already stated, he could not do without
either directly or indirectly offering to sell him the property.

     While plaintiff had no license to act as a real estate broker at or before
the sale of said real property to Price, he did secure such a license on July
24, 1925, and from this last-named date continuously to the commencement of this
action (except for the month of January, and the first twenty-seven days of
February of 1926) held a license to act as a real estate broker. While the
plaintiff was thus the holder of a valid broker's license there was paid to
defendant on the purchase price of said real property approximately the sum of $
190,000.  It is now contended by the plaintiff that he is entitled to recover
the commission provided for in the agreement with defendant on all payments made
on account of said purchase price during the time he held such license.

   Plaintiff bases this contention upon the provisions of the Real Estate
Brokers' Act (section 20), which provides that no recovery for commission on
sale of real estate by a real estate broker can be had unless it is alleged and
proven that such person was a licensed real estate broker at the  time the
action arose.  In Houston v. Williams, 53 Cal. App. 267 [200 Pac. 55], the
broker had no license required by said act at the time the commission contract
was executed but at the time he obtained a purchaser for the property he had the
proper license. These facts were alleged in the complaint and found to be true
by the court.  A judgment in favor of the broker was sustained by the appellate
court.  In this action the court held that the cause of action arose when
plaintiff obtained a purchaser for the property.  In discussing the question the
court said, after quoting section 20 of the Real Estate Brokers' Act (page 271):
"Manifestly the legislature herein undertook to prescribe an essential condition
of recovery but limited its operation to the time when the cause of action
arose. By implication any earlier time was excluded.  It is a reasonable
construction of the act to hold that it is unlawful for anyone to engage in the
business of a real estate broker without having secured a license, but he is not
precluded from recovering compensation for his services if he had such a license
at the time his cause of action arose although his contract may have been
executed prior to that time, when he had no license. Herein, manifestly, the
cause of action arose when the plaintiff obtained a purchaser for the property
and it is not disputed that then he had the proper license, and it was so
alleged in the complaint."

   We find no decisions of our courts that have extended the rule beyond that
enunciated in that case.  To adopt plaintiff's construction of the statute would
be to defeat the whole object and purpose of the Real Estate Brokers' Act. In
Riley v. Chambers, 181 Cal. 589 [8 A. L. R. 418, 185 Pac. 855], this court held
that the primary purpose of the Real Estate Brokers' Act was to require the real
estate brokers and salesmen to be "honest, truthful, and of good reputation".
In Houston v. Williams, supra, the appellate court held that, "It (the Real
Estate Brokers' Act) was designed . . . to protect the public against
unscrupulous operators".  Under plaintiff's version of this statute a person
without a license to act as a real estate broker might enter into contracts for
the payment of a commission for the sale of real property, might interest
prospective purchasers in the purchase of said property, might actually effect a
sale of said property for the owner, in fact, he might do anything  that a
licensed broker might do, and then by having his contract provide for the
payment of his commission at a future date, collect his commission, provided he
secured a license on or before the date his commissions became due.  We are
satisfied that the legislature never intended the act should receive any such
construction.

   Then again the results that would follow from such a construction indicate
its fallacy.  The act provides that it shall be unlawful for any person to act
as a real estate broker without first obtaining a license therefor.  (Sec. 1.)
It declares that the violation of this provision of the act shall be a penal
offense punishable by imprisonment in the state prison or the county jail, or by
a fine not to exceed $ 2,000, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Sec. 17.)
If the courts were to place the construction upon this act contended for by the
plaintiff, a person might be  prosecuted in the criminal court for the violation
of this statute and convicted, suffer fine and imprisonment in the state prison
for such act, and at the same time, but on the civil side of the court, might
recover judgment for the same services for the doing of which he was then
suffering punishment under the judgment of conviction entered against him in the
criminal action.  We cannot bring ourselves to believe that such contradictory
and inconsistent results were ever contemplated by those responsible for the
enactment of the Real Estate Brokers' Act. In many instances, no cause of action
arises in favor of a person for the performance of an act made illegal by
statute.  This is particularly true when the statute is one enacted for the
purpose of regulating a particular business for the protection of the public.  (
Wood v. Krepps, 168 Cal. 382 [L. R. A. 1915B, 851, 143 Pac. 691].) The Real
Estate Brokers' Act belongs to this class of statutes.  ( Riley v. Chambers,
supra.)

   In Houston v. Williams, supra, it was held that a limitation upon this rule
was made by section 20 of the act, and that the rule in all its rigor should not
apply to a person holding a broker's license at the time he consummated a sale
of real property even though he had no such license at the time he entered into
a contract with the owner to pay him a commission.  The court there held that a
reasonable construction of the act would permit such a holding.  While agreeing
with the appellate court in this ruling, we  are further of the opinion that it
would be a most unreasonable construction of the statute to hold that it
permitted an action to be maintained as in the present proceeding where the
plaintiff had no license at the date the sale of the property was effected, or
during any of the time during which he rendered the services for which he seeks
to recover, and only secured such a license practically a year after the sale
was effected. As plaintiff held no broker's license at the time the sale
involved herein was consummated, he is not entitled to recover compensation for
his services, all of which were rendered prior to his securing any license.

     We are asked by defendant in case we should reverse the judgment appealed
from to make new and additional findings of fact and direct that judgment be
entered in favor of the defendant.  We are satisfied from a study of the
findings that a judgment in favor of the defendant based thereon would not be
proper, that the findings of the trial court would not support a judgment in
favor of the defendant.  Therefore, in order for us to direct the entry of a
judgment in favor of the defendant it would be necessary for this court to
reverse the judgment and make new findings of fact.  In Tupman v. Haberkern, 208
Cal. 256 [280 Pac. 970, 976], this court defined the powers of appellate courts
in cases like the present action as follows: "And if new findings be made as a
basis of a reversal, with directions to the trial court to enter a judgment for
the appellant, it must appear from the record . . . that on no theory grounded
on reason and justice could the party defeated on appeal make a further
substantial showing in the trial court in support of his cause." In view of the
rule so recently promulgated by this court, we are of the opinion that the
present action is not one in which we should exercise our power to make new
findings and base thereon an order reversing the judgment and directing the
trial court to enter a judgment in favor of the defendant.  For this reason we
are of the opinion that the order of this court should be limited to a simple
reversal of the judgment.

     We reverse the judgment in this action reluctantly.  The equities of the
case are all in favor of the plaintiff.  Even the defendant during the trial
conceded that from an  equitable standpoint plaintiff was entitled to recover
for his services.  During the negotiations between Price and the defendant which
led up to the sale of the property to Price, defendant delayed acceptance of
Price's offer until he could have an agreement with plaintiff and Dozier
regarding their commission, and after the sale to Price had been effected,
defendant wrote the letter of August 7, 1924, in which he confirmed his
agreement to pay a commission and acknowledged his liability to plaintiff and
Dozier for their services.  Not only that, but defendant actually paid to
plaintiff and Dozier a commission upon the first and two subsequent payments on
the purchase price of the land sold to Price.  If it were in the power of the
defendant to ratify his agreement with plaintiff and Dozier, he surely
accomplished such a ratification by his letter just referred to.  But the acts
of plaintiff for which he seeks to recover compensation, having been expressly
prohibited by statute, were beyond ratification by the parties.

   It should be said, however, in explanation of the defendant's position in
this matter, that he is not acting for himself, but as the trustee of trust
property.  He, therefore, cannot be governed by the equitable considerations of
this transaction, but can be held accountable to the beneficiaries of his trust
to a strict legal performance of his duties.  It is apparent, therefore, that
should he, as such trustee, expend any of the trust funds which may come into
his hands for any purpose not permitted by some express provision of law, he
could be held liable for such expenses to the beneficiaries of the trust, and
could be forced by them to restore from his own private means all money thus
illegally expended by him.  There can be no criticism of the position taken by
the defendant, and none is  intended by anything that we have said in this
opinion regarding his failure to comply with his written agreement.

   The judgment is reversed.


                              28 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           WM. M. STAFFORD, as Administrator, etc., Appellant, v. E.
          MARTINONI, as Administrator, etc., Respondent; E. B. JEWETT,
                           Intervener and Respondent

                                S. F. No. 10032

                          Supreme Court of California

                 192 Cal. 724; 221 P. 919; 1923 Cal. LEXIS 395


                               December 27, 1923

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Alameda
County.  Stanley A. Smith, Judge Presiding.

COUNSEL: W. F. Stafford, Wm. M. Stafford and Harry I. Stafford for Appellant.

Morrison, Dunne & Brobeck and Herbert W. Clark for Respondent.

Clarence E. Todd and Vincent Surr for Intervener.

JUDGES: In Bank. Richards, J., pro tem.  Wilbur, C. J., Lawlor, J., Lennon, J.,
Kerrigan, J., and Seawell, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: RICHARDS

OPINION

     In this action the plaintiff, as administrator of the estate of Charles R.
Brown, deceased, brings suit against the defendant as administrator with the
will annexed of the estate of Caroline R. Brown, deceased, and in his complaint
herein alleges that Charles R. Brown and Caroline R. Brown were, in the lifetime
of both, husband and wife; that Charles R. Brown died intestate in the city of
Oakland, California, on the eighth day of April, 1910; that at the time of his
death he was the owner of certain real estate, consisting of certain parcels of
land specifically described in said complaint, and was also the owner and
possessed of a sum of money in excess of $ 10,000, all of which real and
personal property was the community property of himself and said wife, Caroline
R. Brown; that upon his death said Caroline R. Brown took possession of all of
the said real estate and personal property and dealt with, controlled, and
administered the same thereafter and down to the time of her death on the
twenty-first day of December, 1914, when she died testate; that on the seventh
day of November, 1912, said Caroline R. Brown was appointed administratrix of
the estate of her deceased husband and duly qualified as such; and that she
thereafter filed an inventory and appraisement of the property of her deceased
husband's said estate wherein she set forth and stated under oath that the only
property belonging to the estate of Charles R.  Brown, deceased, was a parcel of
land in the county of Fresno, which was appraised in the sum of $ 1,450 and
which she petitioned the court to set apart to her absolutely as his widow,
under the provisions of section 1469 of the Code of Civil Procedure; that her
petition in that regard was granted by the court having jurisdiction over said
estate; that said Caroline R. Brown never during her lifetime accounted
otherwise for any other property belonging to the estate of the said Charles R.
Brown, deceased, but, on the contrary, by her last will and testament, left all
of her property to her own heirs; that upon her death the defendant herein, E.
Martinoni, was appointed administrator with the will annexed of the estate of
Caroline R. Brown, deceased, and as such took and holds possession of all of
said real estate and personal property for the heirs of said Caroline R. Brown,
deceased, who claimed to be the owners thereof; that said Charles R. Brown upon
his death left certain heirs whose names are set forth in said complaint; that
on the sixth day of December, 1916, the plaintiff herein, Wm. M. Stafford, was
duly appointed administrator of the estate of Charles R. Brown, deceased, duly
qualified, and has since been acting as such administrator. Wherefore the
plaintiff prays for a judgment declaring that said Charles R. Brown was at the
time of his death the owner of an undivided one-half of all of said real estate
and personal property as his share of the community property of himself and of
his said wife, Caroline R. Brown, and directing that the defendant as such
administrator of the estate of Caroline R. Brown, deceased, account to said
plaintiff for all of the rents, issues, and profits of said property from and
after the date of the death of the said Charles R. Brown, deceased, and for such
other and further relief as may be proper in the premises.

   The defendant herein by his answer specifically denies the averments of the
several paragraphs of plaintiff's said complaint in so far as these undertake to
set forth the ownership by the said Charles R. Brown of any interest in the real
or personal property described in said complaint, and then proceeds to
affirmatively allege that all of the real and personal property set forth
therein was at all times prior to her death the separate property of the said
Caroline R. Brown, and that the same and the whole thereof consisted of property
which was held by her before her marriage with said Charles  R. Brown or was
acquired by her after such marriage by gift, bequest, devise, or descent with
the rents, issues, and profits thereof, and that at the time of her death and
for a long time prior thereto said Caroline R. Brown was the owner in fee simple
absolute and was in the possession as such of all of said real and personal
property.

   The defendant also pleads several sections of the Code of Civil Procedure as
a bar to said action under the statute of limitations.

   In addition to the foregoing answer of the defendant E. Martinoni, as
administrator of the estate of Caroline R. Brown, deceased, one of his heirs
appeared and filed, with  permission of the court, a complaint in intervention,
wherein he sets forth substantially the same matters as were averred in the
complaint of the said administrator.

   Upon the trial of the cause the plaintiff introduced in evidence certain
documents and other evidentiary matter tending to show the origin, ownership,
and condition of the real and personal properties of Charles R. Brown and
Caroline R. Brown during the period between the date of their said marriage and
the date of the death of said Charles R. Brown, and also tending to show the
dealings of said Caroline R. Brown with respect to said real and personal
property after the death of her said husband, and the present condition thereof
or of the proceeds thereof.  The plaintiff also offered, and there was admitted
in evidence, certain statements, acts, and conduct of said Caroline R. Brown,
both before and after the date of the death of her said husband, and which were
in the nature of admissions against interest.  When the plaintiff rested his
case the defendant offered no documentary or oral evidence in support of the
denials and averments of their said pleadings, but rested his defense to said
action solely upon certain asserted presumptions of law, to be hereafter
adverted to, and also upon his plea of the statute of limitations.  The trial
court in deciding said cause upheld the contention of the defendant based upon
said presumptions of law, holding that said Caroline R. Brown was, during her
lifetime, the owner of the whole of said real and personal property as her sole
and separate estate, with the exception of the said Fresno parcel of land, as
property either acquired by her prior to her marriage with said Charles R. Brown
or acquired by her  after her said marriage with said Charles R. Brown, by gift,
devise, or descent; and that as to said Fresno parcel of land she had acquired
the same and the ownership thereto under the provisions of section 1469 of the
Code of Civil Procedure; and that the said plaintiff as administrator of the
estate of said Charles R. Brown, deceased, had no right, title, or interest in
said property.  The court further found that the action was not barred by the
statute of limitations.  A judgment was accordingly rendered and entered in the
defendant's favor and for his costs.  It is from such judgment that this appeal
has been taken.

   It is the appellant's contention upon this appeal that the findings and
decision of the trial court to the effect that said Caroline R. Brown was at the
time of, or at any time prior to, the death of her said husband, Charles R.
Brown, the owner of all or of any of the real and personal property set forth in
said complaint as her sole and separate property, is not supported by the
evidence in the case; that in so far as the said defendant's claim of such
ownership is based upon an ownership by her of any portion of said real or
personal property prior to her marriage with said husband is concerned, said
finding is contradicted by the undisputed evidence to the contrary, and that in
so far as the said claim of ownership in said Caroline R. Brown is based upon
the presumptions of law solely relied upon by them, said presumptions and the
operation and effect thereof as evidence in the case were fully overthrown by
the substantial and undisputed evidence educed by the plaintiff upon the trial
and hence were insufficient to furnish any foundation for the findings and
judgment in the defendant's favor.  The consideration of the appellant's
contentions in the foregoing respects requires a brief recital of the
practically undisputed facts of the case.

   Charles R. Brown and Caroline R. Brown were married in Tombstone, Arizona, on
March 17, 1880.  At the time of his said marriage Charles R. Brown was
conducting a restaurant at said place and was earning therein about a thousand
dollars a month.  Caroline R. Brown prior to her marriage was working for said
Charles R. Brown in his said restaurant, and it is clearly shown from the
undisputed evidence, including her own statements and admissions, that she had
neither money nor property at the time of her marriage with  Charles R. Brown.
This disposes at the outset of the finding of the trial court that said Caroline
R. Brown was the owner of any portion of said real or personal property as her
separate property and estate by virtue of having acquired the same prior to her
marriage with Charles R. Brown.  Subsequent to their said marriage Charles R.
Brown and his wife continued to live for a time in Arizona, but later, and about
the year 1886, appear to have removed to Hanford, then in Tulare County,
California, where they lived between 1886 and 1902 and where for a time Charles
R. Brown ran a hotel or boarding-house and also purchased and sold real estate.
During those years he purchased four separate parcels of real estate, paying
therefor in the aggregate $ 6,100 and taking the deeds therefor in his own name
only.  During the same period he sold two pieces of real estate for the sum in
the aggregate of $ 11,100.  During this period also he opened a bank account
with the First National Bank of Hanford, where the total amount of deposits
between November 16, 1887, and February 4, 1904, amounted to the sum of $
17,224.42.  He closed his account at said bank on November 7, 1904.  During the
period of his residence in Hanford, Charles R. Brown engaged in other
transactions of a business character.  He borrowed at one time certain money,
giving as security therefor a mortgage upon real property. This note and
mortgage were executed by himself alone.  He also granted to the county of
Tulare certain rights of way across the lands owned by him, executing  the grant
in his own name only.  Whatever other transactions in the purchase and sale of
real estate were engaged in by him during the period of his residence in Hanford
were all conducted in his own name alone, Mrs. Brown taking no active part in
any of the foregoing transactions and having no bank account there in her own
name. In about the year 1902 Charles R. Brown and his wife removed to Elmhurst,
Alameda County, where they continued to reside up to the time of his death.
Prior to his said removal certain bank accounts had been opened with the Union
Trust Company of San Francisco.  The first of these was opened on December 31,
1896, and closed on July 11, 1905.  It stood in the name of Charles R. Brown and
showed a total deposit in the sum of $ 6,176.86.  The second of those accounts
was opened on June 26, 1899, in the name of Caroline R. Brown,  and was also
closed on July 11, 1905, showing a total deposit in the sum of $ 3,002.73.  The
third of said accounts was opened May 22, 1903, in the name of C. R. Brown and
was closed on June 1, 1903, showing total deposits in the sum of $ 3,800.  The
C. R. Brown referred to in this account was elsewhere shown to be Charles R.
Brown.  The fourth of said bank accounts stood in the name of Caroline R. Brown
or Charles R. Brown and was opened January 22, 1906, and closed January 2, 1908,
and its total deposits aggregated $ 8,308.05.  The fifth of said bank accounts
was opened November 18, 1905, in the names of Caroline R. Brown or Charles R.
Brown and was closed on January 1, 1906, with total deposits aggregating $
7,214.87.  The sources of these several deposits have not been shown, with the
exception of one item in the fourth of said accounts which stood in the name of
both spouses, which item consisted in a deposit of $ 3,000 and which was
evidently in the form of a draft drawn in favor of the husband and which had for
its source a payment made by one W. R. Wiles upon a piece of land in Tulare
County owned by Charles R. Brown and sold by him to said Wiles.  Some light is
thrown upon these several bank accounts by the following facts disclosed by the
undisputed evidence in the case.  The removal of the Browns from Hanford to
Elmhurst was apparently caused by the fact that the husband's health was
failing.  Whether this failure of health on his part had for its cause a kick on
the head which he received from a cow or was due to some other cause does not
very clearly appear, but it does appear, both from the direct evidence of
friends of the family and from the express statements and admissions of Caroline
R. Brown, that from a date not long after the removal to Alameda County, Charles
R. Brown's failing health and mental powers incapacitated him more and more from
attending to his business to a degree which seemed to require that Mrs. Brown
should increasingly take over the active management of their business affairs.
Upon this point there were statements and admissions by her testified to by
several persons who were intimate friends of the family and whose testimony
stands unimpeached in the record, which are most significant.  These several
witnesses testified to conversations held with Mrs. Brown on various occasions
with respect to her husband's mental and physical condition during the several
years preceding his death, and they may be summarized as showing that Mrs.
Brown, beginning not long after the removal to Elmhurst, undertook for the first
time to handle actively the business affairs of the family on account of the
failing health and capacity of her husband and before long assumed entire
control thereof, engaging chiefly in the business of loaning money, and finally
and for some time before his death conducting her various transactions without
consulting her husband and dealing with respect to both her real estate and
personal property transactions in her own name, and to the extent that at the
time of his death on April 8, 1910, there was no money in any bank account
standing in the name of Charles R. Brown, nor was there any real property
standing in his name, with the single exception of the Fresno County parcel of
land, which was inventoried as constituting the whole of his estate.

   In determining the question presented in this case as to how far the
presumptions of law relied upon by the respondents herein in support of their
claim that the whole of the property, both real and personal, in respect to
which an accounting is sought in this action, was to be held the separate
property and estate of Caroline R. Brown, it is important to note that the time
and state of the properties of both classes to which said presumptions are to be
given application, if at all, is that period of time which lies prior to and up
to the time of the death of Charles R. Brown, since it is plain that if Caroline
R. Brown, as the wife of Charles R. Brown, was not entitled, prior to his death,
to the benefit of said legal presumptions investing her with the title to said
properties, both real and personal, as her separate property, by reason of the
fact that they had come to be placed in her own name, she could not thereafter
become entitled thereto by any changes in the form of said properties or of the
proceeds thereof so long as these could be identified as being derived from
properties held by the community prior to her husband's death; since as to the
whole amount of all such properties treated as community property at the time of
the death of her said husband she would be chargeable as the trustee thereof for
the benefit of his estate and heirs. Having this evident proposition in mind it
may be well before dealing with  these properties in detail to set forth the two
presumptions of law upon which the respondents  solely rely in support of their
contention that the whole of said properties were separate properties of
Caroline R.  Brown.  The first of these presumptions is that expressly set forth
in section 164 of the Civil Code and upon that clause therein which states:
"Whenever any property is conveyed to a married woman by an instrument in
writing, the presumption is that the title is thereby vested in her as her
separate property." The other of said presumptions is the asserted presumption
that when property is purchased with community funds and placed in the name of
the wife it will be presumed to have been a gift from her husband.  In
determining whether these presumptions can be given application to those
properties which had come to be placed in the name of Caroline R. Brown prior to
the death of Charles R. Brown we will first deal with the personal property in
the form in which it existed at and prior to the date of the death of Charles R.
Brown.  As has already been seen, Mrs. Brown had no property prior to her
marriage with Charles R. Brown; neither did she acquire any property after her
marriage with Charles R. Brown by devise or bequest from any person or by any
express gift from Charles R. Brown.  Whatever personal property she acquired or
held in her own name after her marriage with Charles R. Brown and prior to the
date of his death was personal property acquired during the existence of the
marriage relation between herself and Charles R. Brown.  It must therefore be
held to be community property under the first clause of section 164 of the Civil
Code as it read prior to and at the date of the death of Charles R. Brown,
unless that portion of said section of the Civil Code can be held to have been
modified by the succeeding clauses of said section of the code.  If not so
modified it would follow irresistibly that no presumption of any kind could be
indulged in which would have the effect of defeating the express language of
that portion of said section of the Civil Code.  The opening clause of said
section of the code reads as follows: "All other property acquired after
marriage by either husband or wife is community property." To indulge the
presumption that personal property thus acquired and standing in the name of the
wife is a gift from the husband and is therefore her separate property would
obviously be to destroy the declared effect of this opening clause of said
section 164 of the  Civil Code, unless its effect can be held to have been
modified as to personal property by the succeeding clauses of said section.  It
is the contention of the respondents herein that this opening clause of said
section 164 of the Civil Code has been modified as to all property, both real
and personal, by the succeeding clause thereof, wherein it is stated that
"whenever any property is conveyed to a married woman by an instrument in
writing, the presumption is that the title is thereby vested in her as her
separate property." The scope to be given to this clause in said section of the
code in the way of modifying the preceding clause thereof turns upon the
interpretation of the words "conveyed" and "conveyance" as employed in this and
in the other clauses of said section which follow after it.  It would seem to be
obvious, reading these several clauses of said section together, that the terms
"conveyed" and "conveyance" as employed therein have reference only to transfers
of real property. Such was the interpretation placed upon these terms as used in
said section of the code by this court in the case of Booker v. Castillo, 154
Cal. 672 [98 Pac. 1067], wherein it was held that these terms as used therein
had reference to real property only.  A like interpretation was placed upon
these terms as employed in said section in the case of Peyser v. Bradbury, 138
Cal. 570 [72 Pac. 165], wherein it was held that a mortgage did not come within
the meaning to be given to the term "conveyance" in said section of the code.
It is our conclusion, therefore, that the opening clause of section 164 of the
Civil Code, in so far as it relates to the acquisition of personal property by
either spouse during coverture, other than by gift, devise, or bequest, has not
been modified by the terms of the succeeding clauses of said section, the latter
having reference solely to transfers of real estate. The authorities fully
support this view.  ( Hammond v. McCullough, 159 Cal. 639 [15 Pac. 216]; Estate
of Pepper, 158 Cal. 619 [31 L. R. A. (N. S.) 1092, 112 Pac. 62]; Rowe v.
Hibernia Bank. 134 Cal. 405 [66 Pac. 569]; Fennell v. Drinkhouse, 131 Cal. 447
[82 Am. St. Rep. 361, 63 Pac. 734]; Van Camp v. Van Camp, 53 Cal. App. 17 [199
Pac. 885]; Brenneke v. Smallman, 2 Cal. App. 306 [83 Pac. 302].) It follows from
this conclusion and from the foregoing authorities in support thereof that as to
all of the personal property which was originally the community  property of
these spouses standing in the name of the husband, but which came during the
years between 1902 and 1910 to stand in the name of the wife, said properties
were community property at the date of the husband's death.  They consisted in
five promissory notes, each secured by mortgage, viz.: The note of Chas. Norling
dated February 24, 1909, for the sum of $ 1,250; the note of Robert Norling
dated March 16, 1909, for the sum of $ 1,000; the note of Hulda Mallett dated
June 6, 1909, for the  sum of $ 800; the note of Wm. F. Courtney dated July 7,
1909, for the sum of $ 2,000, and the note of A. H. Illiohan dated July 7, 1909,
for the sum of $ 2,200.  These notes amount in the aggregate to the sum of $
7,250 and they and the mortgages which secured them were all outstanding on the
eighth day of April, 1910, the date of the death of Charles R. Brown, and being
community property they became a part of his estate, and standing as they did in
the name of his widow, Caroline R. Brown, were held by her in trust for his
estate; and they or the proceeds thereof are still so held, and hence should
have been accounted for in this action by the administrator of her estate.  The
evidence in the case also shows that in addition to the sums of money which had
been loaned by Caroline R. Brown upon the foregoing securities there was a
considerable sum of money which stood in the names of Caroline R. or Charles R.
Brown upon the books of several banks during the years between 1905 and 1910
when Charles R. Brown by reason of his failing health and mental powers was
retiring from the active management of the community properties and as to which
moneys no accounting was ever made by Caroline R. Brown to the estate of her
deceased husband. All such moneys were community property and as to the whole
thereof, existing in the form of money or personal property at the time of her
husband's death, Caroline R. Brown, upon his death, became the trustee thereof
for the benefit of his estate and heirs; and hence she or her administrator
should have been held to an accounting therefor and for the investment and
proceeds thereof in this action.   It follows that in so far at least as the
personal property of the community in being prior to and at the date of the
death of Charles R. Brown the findings of the trial court were erroneous and
hence the judgment based thereon must be reversed as to such personal property.

    The next question with which we are called upon to deal is as to the status
of the real estate of the community prior to and at the date of the death of
Charles R. Brown.  Prior to the date of the removal of Charles R. and Caroline
R. Brown, his wife, from Hanford to Elmhurst, no real estate stood in the
latter's name, nor did it appear that she had any money or personal property in
any considerable amount.  She had a savings account with the Union Trust Company
of San Francisco, opened while she was still residing in Hanford, and with
reference to which accretions and withdrawals in sums less than $ 50 were from
time to time made down to July 11, 1905, when the then balance, amounting to $
3,002.73, was withdrawn and the account closed.  She had, so far as the record
discloses, no other account or money or personal property on hand prior to the
year 1905.  On June 9, 1903, the first piece of real estate to be purchased and
taken in her name was the lot acquired from H. C. Morris, by deed of that date
conveying lots 46 and 47 of the Warner tract,  in the county of Alameda, which
property, so far as the record discloses, she still held in ownership and
possession at the date of the death of Charles R. Brown.  The record shows that
the purchase price of these lots was the sum of $ 500 and that it does not
appear to have been derived from any fund on hand in Caroline R. Brown and it
would, therefore, follow that the purchase price of this property must otherwise
have been derived from the community funds which then, with the small exception
noted, stood in the name of Charles R. Brown.  The next acquisition of real
estate was that of lots 5, 6, 7, and 8 in block "A" of the Shepardson tract, in
Alameda County, purchased from the West End Building Association on July 13,
1905, the deed being taken in the name of Caroline R. Brown and the property
still standing in her name at the date of the death of Charles R. Brown in 1910,
and also at the date of her death, in 1914, and being one of the tracts of land
described in the complaint herein.  The purchase price of this property appears
to have been $ 1,800, which must have been drawn from the community funds of
that date.  The next purchase of real estate was that from Charles Strum,
evidenced by deed dated October 31, 1907, to Caroline R. Brown, conveying a lot
35x80 feet on the corner of Eighth Street and Haight Avenue, in said county, for
a  stated consideration of $ 1,000.  At this time all of the money of the
community had been transferred in the bank accounts either to the name of
Caroline R. Brown or of Charles R. and Caroline R. Brown, but since these moneys
in either name were community property the amount of the purchase price of this
property must be held to have been derived from these funds.  The only other
piece of real property acquired prior to the death of Charles R. Brown was that
purchased from B. Alexander by deed dated January 6, 1910, taken in the name of
Caroline R. Brown, describing a portion of lot 7 in block "B" of the Sloane
tract, in said county, and which property was still held by Caroline R. Brown at
the time of her death and is set forth and described in the complaint herein.
The consideration paid for this property is stated to have been $ 1,000, which
also must have come from the community funds then in the hands of Caroline R.
Brown, since there was apparently no other source from which it could have come.
As to these four pieces of real estate, acquired during the lifetime of Charles
R. Brown, but conveyed to and standing in the name of Caroline R. Brown, it is
the contention of the respondents herein that they were and are entitled to the
full benefit of the presumption expressly  created by the clause in section 164
of the Civil Code reading: "But whenever any property is conveyed to a married
woman by an instrument in writing, the presumption is that the title is thereby
vested in her as her separate property." The respondents further contend that
where it appears that the purchase price of such real estate was derived from
community funds it will be presumed that the property was intended as a gift to
the wife from her husband in order to support the presumption that it was her
separate property expressly created by section 164 of the Civil Code.  The
appellant herein does not dispute the existence of these two presumptions nor
their applicability in a proper case to real estate conveyed to the wife during
coverture; but the appellant insists that these presumptions are disputable
presumptions and that they are susceptible of application only to cases where
there is no substantial evidence in the record to the contrary.  ( Fanning v.
Green, 156 Cal. 279 [104 Pac. 308]; Holmes v. Holmes, 27 Cal. App. 546 [150 Pac.
793].) Conceding this contention to be correct we are still confronted with the
fact  that the trial court has by its findings given full effect to the
presumptions upon which the respondents rely and in so doing has treated the
evidence in opposition to such presumptions as not sufficiently substantial to
overthrow them; and that, therefore, as to the real estate conveyed to Caroline
R. Brown in her own name during the lifetime of her husband such findings of the
trial court upon the evidence then before it may be correct, but should, we
think, be subject to further consideration and review upon a retrial of the
entire cause.   The disputable presumption raised by section 164 of the Civil
Code is a form of evidence under the express terms of section 1957 of the Code
of Civil Procedure. It may be controverted by other evidence, direct or
indirect, but unless so controverted the court or jury is bound to find
according to the presumption.  ( Code Civ. Proc., secs. 1961- 2061.) It is,
therefore, for the court or jury to determine whether or not the evidence
against the presumption is sufficient to overthrow it.  ( People v. Milner, 122
Cal. 171-179 [54 Pac. 833]; Moore v. Gould, 151 Cal. 723-726 [91 Pac. 616];
Hitchcock v. Rooney, 171 Cal. 285-289 [152 Pac. 913].)   As to the real property
conveyed to Caroline R. Brown during the lifetime of her husband we are,
therefore, disposed to hold that the finding of the trial court that the same
was the separate property of Caroline R. Brown was justified by the existing
state of the evidence in the case.   As to so much of the real property
described in the complaint herein as was acquired by Caroline R. Brown after the
death of her husband, a different question is presented, since, as to such
property, the presumptions relied upon by the respondent based upon the language
of section 164 of the Civil Code and of the cases construing the same have no
application.  As to some of said real estate at least there is positive and
incontrovertible evidence going to show that title to it in Caroline R. Brown
was derived directly from the personal property which we have found to be a
portion of the community estate at the date of the death of Charles R. Brown.
For example: The tract of land described in said complaint as lying on the
southeasterly line of Grant Avenue and consisting of a lot 50x118 feet, in the
county of Alameda, was purchased by Caroline R. Brown on May 26, 1913, at
foreclosure sale thereof on account of the mortgage given to her thereon by
Charles Norling on  February 24, 1909, and which mortgage and the note which it
secured we have above held to have been a portion of the community assets of
Charles R. and Caroline R. Brown.  This piece of real estate, being thus
identified as derived from that source, must, therefore, be held to have been
the proper subject of an accounting herein.

   As to the piece of real estate in Fresno County which was set apart to
Caroline R. Brown, deceased, upon her representation that it constituted the
entire estate of Charles R. Brown and was of the value of less than $ 1,500, it
would seem that as to this piece of real estate, confessedly community property,
and which was thus wrongfully set apart to her, the present administrator of the
estate of her deceased husband would be entitled to an accounting in a court of
equity.

     As to the remainder of the real estate held by Caroline R. Brown at the
time of her death, other than that conveyed to her during the lifetime of her
husband, and also as to the personal property, consisting in the main of notes
and mortgages taken by her for loans made during the four years succeeding the
date of her husband's death which she survived him, we think her administrator
should be held to such an accounting as would disclose what portion of such real
and personal estate, if any, was derived from the community property of Charles
R. and Caroline R. Brown as it existed at the date of the death of Charles R.
Brown.  We think the undisputed evidence in the case sufficient to cast the
burden of making such showing upon the administrator of Caroline R. Brown,
deceased, since at the death of her husband she became the trustee of his
portion of the community property for the benefit of his estate and heirs.

   The judgment is reversed.


                              29 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           H. H. EASTWOOD, Respondent, v. ANNA STEWART, as Executrix,
                                etc., Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 3844

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SECOND APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION TWO

             64 Cal. App. 614; 222 P. 369; 1923 Cal. App. LEXIS 268


                           December 4, 1923, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:      APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Ventura
County. Merle J. Rogers, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Estates of Deceased Persons--Employment of Real Estate Agent--Status--Right
to Except to Account.  --Since the addition of section 1559 to the Code of Civil
Procedure the claim of a real estate agent employed under authorization given
pursuant to that section constitutes one of the "demands against the estate,"
and such agent so employed is a person "interested in the estate," within the
meaning of section 1635 and 1637 of that code, and he is entitled to appear and
file exceptions to the administrator's or executor's account, and if his claim
has been omitted therefrom he may ask to have the account surcharged to the
extent of the commission found to be due him.

(2) Id.--Demand of Real Estate Agent--Jurisdiction--Waiver of Claim--Liability
of Executrix.  --Jurisdiction to pass on the demand of a real estate agent
employed under authority conferred pursuant to section 1559 of the Code of Civil
Procedure is vested exclusively in the court sitting in probate; and where an
agent, so employed, does not contest the final account of the executrix, and
does not appear at the settlement thereof to make any claim for commissions, he
is concluded by the settlement of such account and final distribution, and he
may not thereafter maintain an action against the executrix to recover his
commissions.

COUNSEL: Robert M. Clarke for Appellant.

Charles F. Blackstock for Respondent.

JUDGES: Finlayson, P. J. Works, J., and Craig, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: FINLAYSON

OPINION

     FINLAYSON, P. J. This is an action by a real estate agent to recover
commissions alleged to have been earned by him in finding a purchaser for
certain real property which was a part of the assets of the estate of Mary E.
Sebastian, deceased. The defendant, the executrix of the last will and testament
of the decedent, is sued in her representative capacity, i. e., she is sued "as"
the executrix of the last will and testament of her testatrix. The action is
based upon a written contract for commissions entered into by plaintiff and the
executrix during the course of the latter's administration of the estate of her
testatrix. The executrix appeals from a judgment in favor of plaintiff.

   On November 11, 1918, the superior court, sitting in probate, made an order
authorizing the executrix to sell all the real property belonging to the estate
of her testatrix. The preliminary steps essential to the making of the order
were duly taken under the law then in force. On December 24, 1918, the court,
acting under the grant of power contained in section 1559 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, made its order authorizing the executrix to employ a real estate
agent. On December 31, 1918, plaintiff and the executrix, pursuant to the
authorization thus given by the  court, executed the contract upon which this
action was brought. By the terms of their contract the executrix authorizes
plaintiff to secure a purchaser for the property and agrees that, upon a
purchaser being secured whose bid shall be accepted and to whom a sale shall be
made by her and confirmed by the court, she will pay plaintiff a commission of
five per cent on the first ten thousand dollars and two and one-half per cent on
the balance of the purchase price. On November 8, 1920, the property was sold by
the executrix to a purchaser procured by plaintiff; and on November 22, 1920,
the sale was confirmed by the court.

   On December 11, 1920, the executrix rendered her final account, prayed a
settlement of her administration and petitioned for final distribution of the
estate. She set up that all debts had been paid, but made no mention of
plaintiff's claim for commissions. A day was appointed for the settlement of the
account and notice thereof was given as required by law. On December 27, 1920,
the court settled the account and made final distribution of the estate.
Plaintiff did not contest the account, nor did he appear at the settlement
thereof to make any claim for commissions. Instead, he brought this action
against defendant, as executrix, some time after her final account had been
settled and the decree of final distribution had been made.

   One of the points made by appellant is that respondent's remedy was in the
probate proceeding, and that because he did not appear therein he is concluded
by the settlement of the final account and may not now maintain this action for
his commissions. We are constrained to hold with appellant on this contention.

   At the time when respondent made his contract with appellant section 1559 of
the Code of Civil Procedure -- added to the code in 1909 (Stats. 1909, p. 251)
-- empowered the court, sitting in probate, to make an order authorizing an
executor or administrator to enter into a contract with any bona fide real
estate agent to secure a purchaser of the real property of the estate. The
section, as it then read, contained this provision: "If a sale to a purchaser
obtained by such agent is returned to the court for confirmation and said sale
be confirmed to such purchaser, such contract shall be binding and valid as
against the estate. By the execution of any such contract no personal liability
shall attach to the executor or administrator, and no liability of any kind
shall be incurred by the estate unless an actual sale is made and confirmed and
unless such contract be by the court first authorized."

   Prior to this code amendment an executor or administrator could not create
any liability against the estate in his charge by his contracts with real estate
agents, attorneys, or others employed to assist him in the performance of his
duties. The real estate agent, attorney, or other person so employed by the
executor or administrator had no action or claim against the estate. Whatever
claim he had was against the executor or administrator in his individual
capacity, who in turn, if the expenditure was made in good faith and was proper,
might be credited therewith in the settlement of his accounts with the estate. (
Maxon v. Jones, 128 Cal. 77 [60 P. 516]; Estate of Willard, 139 Cal. 501 [64 L.
R. A. 554, 73 P. 240]; Hickman-Coleman Co. v. Leggett, 10 Cal. App. 29 [100 P.
1072]; Briggs v. Breen, 123 Cal. 657 [56 P. 633].) Therefore, it formerly was
held that a real estate agent, attorney, or other person employed by the
executor or administrator to assist in the administration of the estate was not
a person "interested in the estate" within the meaning of sections 1635 and 1637
of the Code of Civil Procedure, and that, therefore, he was not required to
contest the accounts of the executor or administrator nor was he concluded by
the settlement thereof. ( Briggs v. Breen, supra.)

     Since the addition of section 1559 to the code the claim of a real estate
agent, employed under authorization given pursuant to that section, constitutes
one of the "demands against the estate," and as such it ranks among "the debts
of the estate." (Sec. 1643, subd. 5.) Such agent, so employed, is therefore a
creditor of the estate. Being a creditor of the estate, he is a person
"interested in the estate," within the meaning of sections 1635 and 1637. He is
entitled to appear and file exceptions to the administrator's or executor's
account, and if his claim has been omitted therefrom he may ask to have the
account surcharged to the extent of the commission found to be due him. "Upon
the settlement of an account, every creditor [italics ours], heir, legatee or
devisee is a person interested,  and as such has a right to enter an appearance
and become a party." ( Estate of McDougald, 143 Cal. 476 [77 P. 443].) Because
he is a person "interested in the estate," a real estate agent, employed
pursuant to authority conferred under section 1559, is concluded by the
settlement of the account and the allowance thereof by the court. ( Sec. 1637,
Code Civ. Proc.)

     Moreover, jurisdiction to pass on the demand of a real estate agent
employed, as was this respondent, under authority conferred pursuant to section
1559, is vested exclusively in the court sitting in probate. Though the claim of
a real estate agent employed pursuant to an order of the court made under
section 1559 may not be a claim against the estate within the meaning of
sections 1490 to 1514, inclusive, for the reason that it is not a claim which
accrued against the decedent in his lifetime, or resulted directly from
contracts made, or acts performed, or wrongfully omitted to be performed, during
the decedent's lifetime, it is nevertheless a claim which comes under the head
of "expenses in the care, management and settlement of the estate" referred to
in section 1616; and of such claims the court, sitting in probate, has the
exclusive jurisdiction. ( Gurnee v. Maloney, 38 Cal. 85 [99 Am. Dec. 352].)

   The personal representative of the decedent being exempt, under the express
terms of the statute, from all individual liability, and the real estate agent
having no claim directly against the property of the estate in the hands of the
administrator or executor, the claim is a matter for determination in the
probate proceedings, where all persons interested in the estate can be heard.
All persons interested in the estate, the heirs, legatees, and creditors, have
the right to be heard upon the propriety of the claim. The place for such
hearing is in the court sitting in probate after the administrator or executor
has rendered his account of expenses and disbursements, upon notice thereof to
the parties interested. Such parties could not be heard in an action such as the
one now before us -- an action at law by the real estate agent against the
personal representative of the decedent. If the superior court, in the exercise
of its general jurisdiction over actions at law, could render judgments on such
claims, the other persons interested in the estate might never be heard at all;
and the court sitting  in probate, whose peculiar province it is to hear and
determine all matters concerning the expenses and disbursements attending the
administration of an estate, and wherein the heirs, legatees, and creditors may
be heard as to the propriety of such expenses and disbursements, might be robbed
of the jurisdiction which rightfully belongs to it in matters of probate.

   As early as Gurnee v. Maloney, supra, it was decided that the probate court
has exclusive jurisdiction of claims which seek to charge the estate with
expenses of administration. That was an action by an attorney to recover against
the estate counsel fees and moneys expended for the benefit of the estate. The
defendant, sued in his capacity as administrator of the estate, demurred to the
complaint on the ground that the district court had no jurisdiction. In the
course of its opinion the supreme court said:  "Conceding the liability of the
estate upon such contracts as are set forth in the complaint, we do not think
they constitute claims against the estate within the meaning of sections 128 to
140, inclusive, of the Probate Act [sections 1490-1504, inclusive, of the Code
of Civil Procedure]. The claims therein referred to are such as accrued against
the intestate in his lifetime, or resulted directly from the contracts made, or
acts performed, or wrongfully omitted to be performed, during his lifetime. The
charge now in question, if necessary and proper to preserve the estate, comes
under the head of expenses of administration referred to in section 219 [1616 of
the Code of Civil Procedure]. The whole estate is in the custody and under the
control of the probate court. It has jurisdiction of the whole subject matter,
and it is its exclusive province, subject to appeal to this court, to determine
what items of expenditure incurred during the administration under its own
supervision are proper charges against the estate . . . . The parties interested
in the estate are entitled to be heard upon the propriety of such expenditures;
otherwise the administrator might, through judgments collusively permitted in
the district courts, allow the whole estate to be squandered. The heirs and
creditors cannot be heard in such actions in the district court. In Hope v.
Jones (24 Cal. 89), we held that the district court had no jurisdiction to
interfere with the apportionment of commissions between administrators,  in a
suit by an administrator against his coadministrator. If the district court has
no jurisdiction to entertain such a suit, we do not see why it should have
jurisdiction to intermeddle in any other matter purely of administration . . . .
The assumption of jurisdiction by the district court, to hear and determine such
questions, would, it seems to us, be a direct interference with the
administration of an estate actually in progress under the supervision of the
probate court."

   These views do not conflict with anything said by our supreme court in Golden
Gate Undertaking Co. v. Taylor, 168 Cal. 94 [Ann. Cas. 1915D, 742, 52 L. R. A.
(N. S.) 1151, 141 P. 922]. That case, an action by an undertaker against the
executrix to recover funeral charges, is sui generis . In the first place,
funeral charges are ordinarily incurred before the appointment of an executor or
administrator, and are not, strictly speaking, expenses of administration.
Whereas charges for services performed by a real estate agent in the sale of
property of the estate are expenses of administration, and as such are allowable
to the executor or administrator under section 1616, if the real estate agent
was duly employed. Moreover, a charge for funeral expenses is made a preferred
debt of the estate ( sec. 1643, Code Civ. Proc.); and, as was said by the court
in Golden Gate Undertaking Co. v. Taylor, supra (p. 100), "To await the
settlement of accounts would be destructive of the preference given by the
code." But such course of reasoning is not applicable to the demand of a real
estate agent for commissions earned under a contract made pursuant to authority
conferred under section 1559, for his is not a preferred claim, and there is
therefore no reason why it should not await the settlement of the accounts in
the probate proceeding.

   The conclusion at which we have arrived makes it unnecessary to consider the
other points presented by appellant.

   The judgment is reversed.

    Works, J., and Craig, J., concurred.


                              30 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          NORMAN W. TATTERSON et al., Respondents, v. STANDARD REALTY
             COMPANY (a Fictitious Partnership) et al., Appellants

                                 Civ. No. 5671

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FIRST APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION TWO

             81 Cal. App. 23; 253 P. 770; 1927 Cal. App. LEXIS 802


                           January 25, 1927, Decided

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing of this Cause was Denied by
the District Court of Appeal on February 24, 1927, and the Following Opinion
then Rendered thereon.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Alameda
County. J. A. Smith, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Broker's Commissions -- Pleading -- Joinder -- Waiver.  -- Where a real
estate broker employing a salesman joined in an action by the salesman to
recover commissions for the exchange of real property and set up in the
complaint a contract with the salesman, by which the latter was to have as his
compensation such sum as defendants agreed to pay for negotiating the exchange,
and alleging that he waived his right to said sum in favor of the salesman, the
broker was not entitled to a recovery and the trial court erred in overruling
defendants' demurrer to the complaint.

(2) Id.--Exchange of Real Property--Licenses--Evidence--Judgments.  --In such
action, a judgment in favor of the salesman was not authorized, where the facts
showed that he was not employed by the broker to make the exchange, but was
completing an exchange begun while employed as salesman for another broker, and
was not as to the exchange either a broker or a salesman employed by a licensed
broker to negotiate the exchange of real estate, pursuant to sections 1, 2 and
20b of the Real Estate Brokers' Act (Stats. 1919, p. 1252, and acts amendatory
thereof).

(3) Real Estate Brokers' Act -- Contract by Salesman for Exchange of Real
Property--Statutory Construction.  --The Real Estate Brokers' Act (Stats. 1919,
p. 1252, and acts amendatory thereof), defining a real estate broker and
salesman, do not authorize the execution of a contract for the exchange of real
property by a real estate salesman in his own name.

(4) Appeal--Record--Minutes of Lower Court--Amendment--Rehearing.  --A petition
for rehearing will not be granted to permit the amendment of the minutes of the
lower court and to change the record on appeal to show that a paragraph of an
amended complaint was stricken out, where the matters contained therein appeared
in another paragraph. (On denial of rehearing.)

(5) Broker's Commissions--Action by Salesman for Commissions on Exchange of Real
Property--Right of Recovery--Contracts.  In this action by a real estate
salesman to recover commissions for the exchange of real property, where
plaintiff was not within the definition of a real estate salesman under section
2 of the Real Estate Brokers' Act (Stats. 1919, p. 1252, and acts amendatory
thereof), he was not entitled to recover, although the promise to pay the
commission was contained in a contract between the principals to the exchange
agreement, where the seller was not claiming the commission as part of the
consideration and where the amount to be so paid was specifically designated as
real estate commission. (On denial of rehearing.)

COUNSEL: G. E. Duke, in pro. per., and A. A. Montague for Appellants.

Daniel Rygel and George M. Naus for Respondents.

JUDGES: STURTEVANT, J. Nourse, J., and Koford, P. J., concurred.

OPINION BY: STURTEVANT

OPINION

     STURTEVANT, J. Norman W. Tatterson commenced an action against the
defendants to recover a sum of money alleged to be due as commissions earned by
him in effecting an exchange of real properties. Thereafter the defendants
appeared and such proceedings were had that the trial court made an order
authorizing the plaintiff to file an amended complaint joining Carl H. Nieper as
a coplaintiff. An amended complaint was filed, the defendants demurred thereto,
their demurrer was overruled and thereupon they answered and a trial was had
before the court sitting without a jury. The trial court made findings of fact
in favor of the plaintiffs and from a judgment entered thereon the defendants
have appealed under section 953a of the Code of Civil Procedure.

    The appellants present a large number of points, but in the view that we
take of the record it will not be necessary to consider all of them.

     As to the plaintiff Carl H. Nieper, we think that the demurrer of the
defendants should have been sustained. In their complaint the coplaintiffs
alleged:

    "I.

   "That at all times herein mentioned the said Carl H. Nieper was and is a Real
Estate Broker, duly licensed by the Real Estate Board under the State Real
Estate Department Act of the State of California and doing business as a Real
Estate Broker in the State of California with his principal place of business in
the City of Oakland.

   "II.

   "That at all times herein mentioned plaintiff Norman W. Tatterson was a real
estate salesman, duly licensed by the Real Estate Board under the State Real
Estate Department Act of the State of California and in the employ of said Carl
H. Nieper as a real estate salesman fully authorized to make contracts of sale
or exchange of real property in his own name as the agent of said Carl H.
Nieper. That said Norman W. Tatterson did enter into agreement with said
defendants with the knowledge and consent of said plaintiff Nieper as his
authorized agent and salesman.

   "III.

   "That said Carl H. Nieper did agree with said Norman W. Tatterson that he the
said Norman W. Tatterson was to have and receive as his compensation for
securing the execution of the contract on file herein such sum as the defendants
agreed to pay.

   "IV.

   "That he hereby waives all of his right in and to the said sum to said Norman
W. Tatterson.

   "V.

   "That the said defendants G. E. Duke and M. E. Duke, his wife, John Doe and
Richard Roe are the owners of the Standard Realty Co., a fictitious
co-partnership doing business in the City of Oakland, County of Alameda, State
of California.

   "VI.

   "That on the 15th day of July, 1925, the above named plaintiff and defendants
executed, delivered, and entered  into a contract in writing bearing the date of
that day, a copy of which said contract is hereby attached and marked Exhibit
'A' and made a part of this complaint.

   "VII.

   "That said plaintiff has fully performed all of his terms of the contract,
and that said defendants have not performed all of their terms of the contract,
to wit: the payment to the said Norman W. Tatterson of the sum of One Thousand
Five Hundred Dollars ($ 1,500.00) as and for commissions for services rendered.

   "VIII.

   "That on the 20th day of July, 1925, the said offer of exchange made by the
said defendants was accepted in writing by the party of the second part of the
said contract hereinbefore mentioned as Exhibit 'A,' and defendants were
notified of the said acceptance on the 21st day of July, 1925, by plaintiff,
Norman W. Tatterson.

   "IX.

   "That there is now due, owing and unpaid the sum of One Thousand Five Hundred
Dollars ($ 1,500.00)."

   Exhibit "A" attached to the amended complaint is an exchange agreement
written on the approved form of the California Real Estate Association and by
its terms the Standard Realty Company offers to exchange properties in the city
of Richmond, Contra Costa County, for properties located in the city of
Berkeley, county of Alameda, for the terms therein designated. A paragraph
therein is as follows: "Norman W. Tatterson of Oakland, California, is hereby
authorized to act as agent for all parties hereto and may accept commission
therefrom and should this offer be accepted by the second party the undersigned
agree to pay said agent $ 1500 commission for services rendered to become due on
the execution of this agreement by all parties hereto." The offer purports to be
signed on July 15, 1925, by the Standard Realty Company and to have been
accepted on July 20, 1925, by an acceptance in writing executed by Maggie Gregg,
the owner of the property located in Berkeley. Neither the offer nor the
acceptance is signed by anyone else.

   The complaint pleaded Nieper out of court in favor of his coplaintiff Norman
W. Tatterson. In paragraphs III and IV it is alleged:

    "That said Carl H. Nieper did agree with said Norman W. Tatterson that he
the said Norman W. Tatterson was to have and receive as his compensation for
securing the execution of the contract on file herein such sum as the defendants
agreed to pay.

   "That he hereby waives all of his right in and to the said sum to said Norman
W. Tatterson."

   On the trial of the case uncontradicted evidence was introduced in the form
of a writing dated June 27, 1925, by which the allegations of paragraphs III and
IV of the amended complaint were proved. But in making findings no finding was
made in response to said paragraphs.

   It follows that the demurrer should have been sustained because as to Nieper
the complaint was insufficient, and, furthermore, that in the absence of the
demurrer no judgment should have been entered in favor of the respondent Nieper.

     As to the respondent Tatterson, the appellants present numerous attacks,
the general scope of which is to contend that exhibit "A" was illegal and that
the amended complaint did not state facts sufficient and that the proof was not
sufficient to establish a right in favor of Tatterson under the provisions of
chapter 605, Statutes of 1919, and the acts amendatory thereof.

   The record discloses that prior to the month of June, 1925, Carl H. Neiper
was a duly licensed broker and that Seulberger-Dunham & Co. was a duly licensed
broker; that Tatterson was a duly licensed real estate salesman in the
employment of Seulberger-Dunham & Co.; that on the twenty-seventh day of June,
1925, he applied to have his license as a salesman transferred from that company
to Carl H. Nieper; that it was transferred on the twenty-ninth day of June,
1925; it further appears that at the time Tatterson attempted to make this
change that he claimed to have certain listings or unfinished business on hand;
that on June 27, 1925, Nieper addressed a letter to Tatterson in which he
stated: "In return for your co-operation and transferring your salesman's
license above mentioned I agree to let you retain all commissions or profits
from the sales you may make that are now pending."  It further appears that the
exchange transaction involved in this case is one of the listings which the
plaintiff Tatterson so claimed to have at the time that he  became an employee
of Nieper, and, except as we have stated, that Nieper never employed Tatterson
"for a compensation," or otherwise, to effect the exchange involved in this
case. No writing was produced showing or tending to show that Tatterson, in so
far as the transaction involving this exchange was concerned, acted or was
acting as the agent of Nieper, was employed by Nieper, or compensated by Nieper.

   The statute (Stats. 1919, p. 1252, as amended by Stats. 1921, p. 1294, and
Stats. 1923, p. 93) provides: "Sec. 1. It shall be unlawful for any person,
copartnership or corporation to engage in the business, or act in the capacity
of a real estate broker, or a real estate salesman within this state without
first obtaining a license therefor.

   "Sec. 2. A real estate broker within the meaning of this act is a person, . .
. who, for a compensation, . . . negotiates the . . . exchange of real estate .
. . for others as a whole or partial vocation.

   "A real estate salesman within the meaning of this act is one who for a
compensation is employed by a licensed broker to . . . negotiate the . . .
exchange of real estate, . . . as a whole or partial vocation . . . .

   "One act, for a compensation, of . . . offering for another to . . . exchange
real estate, . . . shall constitute the person, . . . making such offer of . . .
exchange . . . a real estate broker or salesman within the meaning of this act .
. . .

   "Sec. 20b. Every officer, agent or employee of any company, and every other
person who . . . willfully violates or fails to comply with any of the
provisions of this act, . . . is guilty of a public offense, and shall be
punished by imprisonment in the state prison or the county jail for a term not
to exceed two years, or by a fine of not to exceed two thousand dollars . . . ."

   From the foregoing provisions contained in the statute it is clear that the
legislature has divided all persons, who for a compensation negotiate for others
exchanges of real estate,  into two classes, (1) brokers and (2) salesmen; and
has prohibited others (except certain classes of persons not here involved) from
engaging in such business without first complying with the statute. It has also
placed restrictions and limitations on brokers and salesmen and has provided
penalties for violations. In the case entitled Riley v. Chambers, 181 Cal. 589,
at page 593 [8 A. L. R. 418, 185 P.  855, 856], speaking of this particular
statute, the court said: "Now the single primary purpose of the act is to
require of real estate brokers and salesmen that they be 'honest, truthful and
of good reputation.' All of its provisions, including the requirement of a
license, are but incidental to this single purpose and is designed to accomplish
it." Tatterson does not claim he was a broker. He did not allege nor prove, and
the court did not find, that he was employed by Nieper to conduct this
particular exchange nor that he was so employed for a compensation. On the other
hand, Tatterson claimed that it was personal business which he took to the house
of Nieper and that Nieper authorized him to complete it.

     The trial court found the facts as alleged in paragraph II of the amended
complaint in the words of said paragraph. The expression "fully authorized to
make contracts" was but a conclusion. It was not a statement that Nieper for a
compensation had employed Tatterson to make a contract of exchange. The
expression that Tatterson was authorized to make contracts of exchange of real
property "in his own name" is another conclusion, and, as we think, an improper
conclusion on a question of law. The statute does not directly or indirectly
authorize that method of executing one of the contracts enumerated in the
statute.

   The judgment is reversed.

   Nourse, J., and Koford, P. J., concurred.

   A petition for a rehearing of this cause was denied by the district court of
appeal on February 24, 1927, and the following opinion then rendered thereon:

     THE COURT. Respondents in their petition for a rehearing have urged that a
rehearing be granted so that sufficient time shall be available to them to take
the necessary proceedings to amend the minutes of the court below and change the
record on this appeal correspondingly. They state that in this way they will be
able to show that paragraph IV of the amended complaint was stricken out by the
court below.  We are not disposed to follow this suggestion because, even with
paragraph IV stricken out, paragraph III of the complaint also shows that
plaintiff Nieper has passed over to Tatterson all his interest in the
commission.

     Respondents, reinforced by new counsel, urge now for the first time that
the illegality of the contract sued on is collateral, inasmuch as the promise to
pay commissions to Tatterson is contained only in the contract between the
principals to the exchange agreement. They claim that this commission is really
a part of the consideration due to the seller from the buyer. But this is not a
case where the buyer is retaining for himself a part of the agreed consideration
upon the claim that the seller has directed an application of it in performance
of a void contract. Here the exchange contract was not consummated and in this
action we are not determining whether the consideration named is due and payable
from the defendant to the seller. The clause containing the promise upon which
this action is based specifically  designates the fifteen hundred dollars as
real estate commission and this action is brought to recover that sum as such.

   The petition for a rehearing is denied.

   A petition by respondents to have the cause heard in the supreme court, after
judgment in the district court of appeal, was denied by the supreme court on
March 24, 1927.


                              31 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           Estate of FRANK L. DA ROZA, Deceased.  EDWARD L. DA ROZA,
             Appellant, v. IDA M. FARRELL, as Administratrix, etc.,
                                   Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 7407

            Court of Appeal of California, Third Appellate District

          82 Cal. App. 2d 550; 186 P.2d 725; 1947 Cal. App. LEXIS 1238


                               November 24, 1947

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from an order of the Superior Court of Sacramento
County confirming a sale of real property.  Peter J. Shields, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Decedents' Estates--Sales--Real Property--Confirmation.  --An order of the
probate court confirming a sale of real estate as being for the advantage and
best interests of the estate and the heirs, was supported by the evidence where
the estate owned but 17/27ths of the interest in such property, the price was
the highest sum bid and was in excess of the value fixed in the inventory and
appraisement of the assets, each of five heirs was entitled to but one-fifth
share of the estate's interest therein, and discord existed between the heirs.

(2) Id.--Sales--Real Property--Advantage and Best Interest of Estate.  --The
administratrix of a decedent's estate is authorized to sell real property at
private sale, for the advantage, benefit, and best interests of the estate,
regardless of whether there were funds in the estate sufficient with which to
pay all debts and expenses of administration.

(3) Id.--Sales--Real Property--Confirmation--Objections.  --In a proceeding for
the confirmation of a sale of real estate by an administratrix of a decedent's
estate, the burden is on the contestant to prove that it was not for the best
interests of the estate to sell the property.

(4) Id.--Sales--Real Property--Confirmation--Appeal.  --The order of a probate
court confirming or refusing to confirm the sale of real property for the best
interests of the estate should be affirmed on appeal where there is substantial
evidence to support the order.

(5) Id.--Sales--Real Property--Confirmation--Objections.  --A sale of real
estate, which would otherwise be for the best interests of the estate, cannot be
defeated on the sole ground that the sale would not be to the advantage or best
interests of one heir only, who opposes the sale. A sale on the ground of best
interests of the estate need not be beneficial to a particular heir, if
generally beneficial.

(6) Id.--Sales--Real Property--Hearing.  --In determining the benefits of a sale
of real property of an estate, the court has a right to take into consideration
not only the condition of the estate with respect to the property on hand and
the ability to pay all debts and expenses of administration, but also the
character of the subject of the sale, the interest of the estate in the
property, the actual value and condition of the market for such property in the
vicinity, and the fact that dissension exists between the heirs.

(7) Id.--Sales--Real Property--Confirmation--Appeal.  --In a proceeding for
confirmation of a probate sale of real estate, evidence that the market for such
property had reached a peak and was declining and other evidence that property
would enhance in value in a short period of time merely created a conflict of
evidence on the issues of value and the advantages or best interests of the
estate resulting from the sale, which issues were solely within the province of
the trial judge to determine, and where there was adequate evidence to support
his determination, it was not disturbed on appeal.

(8) Appeal--Objections--Witnesses.  --An appellate court must assume that the
officer performed his duty and that the witnesses were sworn, where the record
fails to disclose that the witnesses were sworn; and where the record discloses
no objection to their testimony on that ground, it must be presumed that there
was no objection. An objection to the competency of the evidence was thereby
waived and could not be urged for the first time on appeal.

COUNSEL: Ernest Spagnoli for Appellant.

Wallace Shepard for Respondent.

JUDGES: Thompson, J.  Adams, P. J., and Peek, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: THOMPSON

OPINION

     Edward L. Da Roza, one of five heirs at law of the estate of Frank L. Da
Roza, deceased, has appealed from an order of the probate court confirming the
sale of real estate. After a formal hearing at which the appellant appeared with
counsel and filed objections to the sale, the court found that "it is for the
advantage, benefit, and best interests of said estate and those interested
therein that sale be made and confirmed," and thereupon confirmed the sale.  The
appeal is presented to this court on a settled  statement of the proceeding
pursuant to rule 7 of Rules on Appeal.

   It is contended the evidence does not support the order confirming the sale;
that the court erroneously considered the evidence of two witnesses who were not
sworn as required by section 1846 of the Code of Civil Procedure, and that it
was not necessary to sell the real property since there were ample funds in the
estate with which to pay all debts and expenses of administration.  The
regularity of the notice for sale and the sale of the real property in
conformity with section 784 of the Probate Code, as amended in 1945 (Stats.
1945, p. 2066, ch. 1070), are not questioned.

     The court found that Ida M. Farrell, the duly appointed and qualified
administratrix of the estate, after publication of due and legal notice of sale
as required by law, sold to Central Counties Company, a corporation, at private
sale, all of the interest of said estate, being seventeen twenty-sevenths
interest in Lots 7 and 8, in the block bounded by 21st and 22d Streets and L and
M Streets of the city of Sacramento, according to the official plat thereof, for
the sum of $ 19,000; that said sale price was the highest and best sum bid and
the full market value therefor, and was $ 3,785 in excess of the appraised value
which was fixed at $ 15,215 by an inventory and appraisement filed October 14,
1946; that each of the five heirs of said decedent was entitled to but one-fifth
share of the estate's interest therein; that discord and hostility existed
between the contestant and the other four heirs, and that it was for the
advantage and best interests of the estate and all parties interested therein,
to sell the estate's interest in said lot.  Based on said findings the sale was
accordingly confirmed.

   We are of the opinion the order confirming sale of the estate's seventeen
twenty-sevenths interest in the lots in question is supported by the evidence,
and that we may not interfere with the probate court's discretion in finding
that said sale is for the advantage and best interest of the estate and the
heirs who are interested therein.

   From the settled statement in this case it appears that Frank L. Da Roza died
intestate, leaving surviving him five heirs at law, one of whom is the
appellant; that the estate included the said interest in the lots above
described, which were appraised October 14, 1946, at a value of $ 15,215; that
the appellant, Edward L. Da Roza owns a one-fifth share of the estate's interest
in said lots, subject to his portion of  the costs of closing the estate,
against which interest executions have been levied for satisfaction of two
unpaid judgments which were rendered against him, one for $ 6,529.66 and
interest from August 8, 1944, and the other for $ 5,428.16 and interest from
November 15, 1940; that enmity and dissension exist between the appellant and
the other four heirs regarding their respective interests in the estate; that
the final account has been filed in said estate, showing cash on hand in the sum
of $ 18,645.67, but that said account does not appear to have been settled or
approved; that the administratrix of said estate gave notice by publication as
required by law of the sale of the estate's interest in said lots, and sold the
same to Central Counties Company, a corporation, for the sum of $ 19,000, and
thereafter petitioned the probate court for confirmation of said sale; that said
petition for confirmation came on for hearing on October 21, 1946, and the
appellant appeared by counsel and filed his objections thereto, on the chief
grounds that the purchase price was disproportionate to the actual value of said
lots, and that it was unnecessary to sell the land since the estate possesses
adequate funds with which to pay all debts and expenses of administration. Oral
and documentary evidence was adduced at that hearing.

     The administratrix was authorized to sell the lots in Sacramento at private
sale, for the "advantage, benefit, and best interests of said estate,"
regardless of whether there were funds in the estate sufficient with which to
pay all debts and expenses of administration. ( Estate of Wickersham, 139 Cal.
652, 654 [73 P. 541]; Estate of Kay, 30 Cal.2d 215 [181 P.2d 1]; Prob. Code, §§
754, 758 and 785; 11B Cal.Jur. 149, § 754; 2 Bancroft's Probate Practice, p.
1042, § 568.) We may concede there is a conflict of evidence regarding the
question as to whether it was for the best interests of the estate to sell the
land.   But the burden was on the contestant to prove that it was not for the
best interests to sell the property.  (11B Cal.Jur. 146, § 751.) In the text
last cited it is said:

   "The burden of proof is on the objector as to any facts not appearing by the
return and put in issue by his objections."

     The order of a probate court confirming or refusing to confirm the sale of
real property, "for the best interests of the  estate," should be affirmed on
appeal if there is substantial  evidence to support the order.  In the Kay case,
supra, in which an order confirming the sale of real property by a guardian in
the estate of an incompetent person was affirmed on appeal, the Supreme Court
said:

   "It is clear, therefore, that the determination whether there was sufficient
evidence upon which to base the order lies within the discretion of the probate
court."

   In the present case the probate court had two questions to determine: First,
was the sale of the lots in question for the best interests of the estate, and,
second, was the price for which they were sold disproportionate to their value.
Only one of the five heirs of the deceased opposed the sale of the lots.

 A sale of real estate which would otherwise be for the best interests of the
estate could not be defeated on the sole ground that the sale would not be to
the advantage or best interests of one heir only who opposes the sale.  In the
Estate of Wickersham, supra, it is said in that regard at page 654:

   ". . . an opposition on the sole ground that the sales would not be for the
best interests of some particular heir would not have been sufficient."

   Likewise, it is said in 2 Bancroft's Probate Practice, at page 1043: "Sale on
such ground need not be beneficial to a particular heir, if generally
beneficial."

     In determining the benefits of the sale, the court had a right to take into
consideration not only the condition of the estate with respect to the property
on hand and the ability to pay all debts and expenses of administration, but
also the character of the vacant lots which were offered for sale, the fact that
the estate owned only seventeen twenty-sevenths interest in them, their actual
value and the condition of the market for such lots in that vicinity, but also
the dissension which existed between the heirs, in determining whether it was
practical or for the advantage and best interests of the estate to sell them
rather than to distribute them in undivided shares.

     The settled statement recites that "the Court received in evidence oral and
documentary evidence, . . . and that the same consisted of the following: . . ."
(reciting the evidence of several named witnesses.) The evidence of Wallace
Shepard, the attorney for the administratrix, includes the statement that "The
market for real estate of this type in Sacramento had reached a peak and was
declining." It also appears from that settled statement that the estate's
interest in the vacant lots was appraised immediately before the sale at $
15,215, and that it was sold for $ 19,000.  It is true that the appellant
testified that he did not consider the sale to be for the advantage or best
interests of the estate, and that "this particular piece of property will
enhance in value and will bring a much greater sum as a sales price within a
short period of time, or within a year or so." But the last-mentioned testimony
merely created a conflict of evidence upon the issues of the value of the lots
and the advantage or best interests of the estate resulting from the sale.
Those issues were solely within the province of the trial judge to determine.
With his conclusions on those issues we may not interfere on appeal, since there
is adequate evidence to support the findings of the court.  In 11B Cal.Jur. at
page 151, section 756, it is said in that regard:

   "The court, in confirming a sale, should exercise a sound discretion with a
view to the best interests of those who are or may become interested in the
proceeds, and its action will stand on appeal, unless an abuse of that
discretion appears."

   We conclude that no abuse of discretion on the part of the probate judge
appears, and that the findings are adequately supported by the evidence.

     Finally, the appellant contends that the evidence of two witnesses, namely,
Wallace Shepard, attorney for the administratrix, and V. L. Diepenbrock,
attorney for the purchaser, was considered by the court, in spite of the fact
that the record does not show that either of them was first sworn as a witness.
The same thing is true of the evidence of the attorney for appellant, which also
appears in the settled statement. Counsel for appellant, of course, does not
complain of the last-mentioned testimony.

    We are of the opinion the objection to the consideration of said evidence is
without merit.   Section 1846 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides in part
that: "A witness can be heard only upon oath or affirmation, . . . ." The record
affirmatively shows that evidence was adduced. But it fails to show whether said
witnesses were or were not duly sworn. In support of the order of the court, in
the absence of evidence to the contrary, we must assume the officer performed
his duty and that the witnesses were sworn. The burden is on the appellant to
show, on appeal, that the witnesses were not sworn. Moreover, the record
discloses no objection at the hearing on the part of appellant to their
testimony on the  ground that the witnesses were not sworn. We must presume that
appellant failed to object to the evidence on that ground.  He thereby waived
his objection to the competency of the evidence.  ( Trigueiro v. Skow, 24
Cal.App.2d 253, 256 [74 P.2d 836]; People v. Duffy, 110 Cal.App. 631, 635 [294
P. 496]; Tennant v. Civil Service Commission, 77 Cal.App.2d 489, 497 [175 P.2d
568]; 70 C.J. 487, § 654.) The rule in both civil and criminal cases, with
respect to waiver of the objection to testimony of witnesses who have not been
first sworn, is stated in the text of 70 Corpus Juris at page 487, which is
supported by numerous authorities from various jurisdictions, as follows:

   "The right to object to the failure to have a witness properly sworn may be
waived by failing to object in time or by express consent.  . . .  Accordingly,
it has been held that, in order to prevent waiver of an objection that a witness
has not been properly sworn, objection should be made during the trial, or
before verdict, or while the defect is capable of being remedied, and cannot be
urged as a ground for a new trial."

   The foregoing rule appears to be reasonable.  Otherwise a litigant who is
present at a trial and has full knowledge of an inadvertent omission to swear a
witness would be enabled to remain silent and speculate on receiving a favorable
judgment or verdict, failing which, he might upset the entire proceeding by
either a motion for new trial or an objection on that ground for the first time
on appeal.  The gist of the reason for the foregoing rule is that the court and
adverse litigants are entitled to notice of the omission while there is still an
opportunity to correct the oversight in procedure.

   The order confirming the sale of real property is affirmed.


                              32 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             OLIN M. TUFTS, Respondent, v. HUGH L. MANN, Appellant

                                  Civ. No. 855

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FOURTH APPELLATE DISTRICT

            116 Cal. App. 170; 2 P.2d 500; 1931 Cal. App. LEXIS 323


                            August 19, 1931, Decided

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing of this Cause was Denied by
the District Court of Appeal on September 18, 1931, and a Petition by Appellant
to have the Cause Heard in the Supreme Court, after Judgment in the District
Court of Appeal, was Denied by the Supreme Court on October 15, 1931.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County. Frank C. Collier, Judge.

COUNSEL: John J. Wilson and M. M. Holman for Appellant.

Meserve, Mumper, Hughes & Robertson and Timon E. Owens for Respondent.

JUDGES: FINNEY, J., pro tem. Jennings, Acting P. J., and Marks, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: FINNEY

OPINION

     FINNEY, J., pro tem. This is an action to recover a secret profit realized
and retained by the defendant from a sale of real property negotiated by himself
and the plaintiff. From a judgment in favor of the plaintiff the defendant takes
this appeal.

   It is the theory of the plaintiff that he and the defendant were engaged in a
joint adventure in negotiating the sale of certain real property which he held
under option, which sale resulted in the profits retained by the defendant and
that he, the plaintiff, is entitled to recover one-half of such profits. Briefly
the facts are these, as found by the court:

   In the month of August, 1926, and during all the times in question, the
plaintiff and defendant were licensed real estate salesmen, engaged in the real
estate brokerage business and associated in the office of W. M. Garland & Co.,
in buying and selling real estate as salesmen; that on or about August 13, 1926,
the plaintiff and defendant entered into an agreement to work together in
handling and selling certain real property belonging to one Macklin and commonly
known as the Fedora Hotel, Los Angeles; that it was agreed between them that the
plaintiff would obtain an option in writing from said Macklin to purchase said
property for the sum of $ 50,000 net to the seller, and that they would work
together to procure a purchaser for the property during the life of the option,
at a price in excess of the amount to be paid to said Macklin and that they
would share alike in whatever proceeds arose from the sale of the property over
and above the price to be paid Macklin, and any amount necessary to be paid to
W. M. Garland & Company as a commission. Thereafter, on or about August 15,
1926,  the plaintiff obtained, in the name of his aunt, an exclusive thirty-day
option, in writing, to purchase the property from Macklin for the sum of $
50,000, to be paid $ 15,000 in cash, on delivery of deed and certificate of
title and $ 35,000 on time, to be evidenced by a note secured by deed of trust
on said property. Thereafter, on or about September 13, 1926, the defendant
reported to plaintiff that he had procured a bona fide purchaser for said
property, to wit, one Evelyn Davies, who would be willing to pay therefor the
sum of $ 50,000, and the further sum of $ 1250 to apply on a brokerage
commission, the seller to pay the balance of said commission, to wit, $ 1250,
thus making a brokerage commission of $ 2,500 on the sale. Believing these
representations to be true, the plaintiff was thereby induced to and did
exercise his option to purchase the property and the deal for the same was
closed on the basis of this offer, during the life of the option, and J. H.
Macklin, the owner of the property, delivered his deed therefor to the
purchaser, Evelyn Davies. Thereupon the plaintiff and defendant divided the
ostensible profit or commission so made on the transaction, to wit, the sum of $
2,500, each receiving one-half the balance thereof after paying $ 833.33 to W.
M. Garland & Company.

   The court further finds that shortly thereafter the plaintiff discovered that
Evelyn Davies was not the bona fide purchaser of said property, but was in fact
acting as a dummy for the defendant and one M. E. Hutton, Jr., in  the purchase
of said property, and that one-half of the money paid for the purchase of said
property, including the ostensible profit or commission aforesaid, belonged to
the defendant and was actually paid by  him; that thereafter the property was
sold in such a way that the defendant realized for himself a profit of $
6,729.20 and secured a one-half beneficial interest in certain real property,
commonly known as 422 South Alexandria Avenue, Los Angeles, the title thereto
being held by the Title Insurance & Trust Co., as legal owners, for the benefit
of the defendant as to such interest. Thereafter, and on May 11, 1927, this suit
was begun to recover one-half of said profits and beneficial interest and
resulted in a judgment accordingly in favor of the plaintiff.

   Appellant urges numerous reasons for a reversal of the judgment in this case,
but all of such reasons relate to three principal objections which will be
discussed in their order.

     First, appellant contends that the evidence fails to support finding number
II which, in effect, finds that the appellant and respondent entered into a
joint adventure whereby they agreed, each with the other, to work together in
securing an option from J. H. Macklin on the property commonly known as the
Fedora Hotel in Los Angeles, for the sum of $ 50,000, and in selling the same to
a purchaser who would buy the property at a price in excess of the net price to
be paid the seller, and that they would share alike in whatever proceeds arose
from the sale of the property over and above the price to be paid the seller
therefor and any amount necessary to be paid W. M. Garland & Company. Appellant
further contends that the evidence fails to show any relationship between
appellant and respondent except that of co-employees engaged in business as real
estate salesmen in the office of W. M. Garland & Company at the time the sale in
question was negotiated and consummated.

   We think this objection is not well founded. The finding is made upon
conflicting evidence in which the respondent testified in substance that he
first talked to Mann about the Macklin properties about August 1, 1926, in the
Garland office; that Macklin was willing to give him the exclusive right to sell
his property and he suggested that Mann make a trip around to look over the
properties of which Macklin  had given him a list; that after making the trip
and examining the property Mann suggested that respondent "get an option" on two
or three of the best properties and, following that suggestion, on August 13,
1926, respondent secured an option on the Fedora Hotel. Respondent further
testified, in the language of the bill of exceptions: "I was working on the
basis that I had an option on this property and if he would produce a buyer I
would split with him the profit over the option price, after we had satisfied
the office with half the Realty Board commission; Mann and I had several
conversations; the first occurred about a week after the option was obtained,
about August 20th; Mann and I were by ourselves in the Garland office and I
said, 'I have the option on the Fedora signed up' and showed him the option, and
I said 'Now, if you will assist me in getting a buyer, I will split the profits
with you on this particular deal'; he said that would be satisfactory; I
couldn't quote his exact words; he told me he considered that a very steep
figure on the property and that he thought there were profitable possibilities
at that figure and he would be perfectly willing to go out and work on it on
that basis and cooperate with me." Later, "I said to Mann, 'I want to be
positive that you are actually selling this property because if you are not
actually selling it, I want to turn it over on this other deal that I have just
been offered;' he said there was no question about his selling it; I should have
faith in him; he was not attempting to keep me out of the profit in the deal; he
was merely selling it as a broker and all he expected was the commission; that
he had worked very hard on it at my suggestion, and so he had; that talk was had
about September 13th, the day the matter went into escrow." There is other
testimony in the record to the same general effect. However, it is not necessary
to quote further, as it is apparent from the quotation already made, that there
is evidence in the record to sustain the finding in question. A finding made by
the trial court on conflicting evidence will not be disturbed if, as in this
case, there is evidence to sustain the same. ( Fogg v. Perris Irr. Dist., 154
Cal. 209 [97 P. 316]; Keyes v. Nims, 43 Cal. App. 1 [184 P. 695].)

     The appellant also contends, in this connection, that there is a fatal
variance between the allegations of the complaint and the proof on which is
based the finding that the appellant and respondent entered into a joint
adventure for the purpose of handling and selling the Fedora Hotel. At the close
of the plaintiff's case, a motion was made on behalf of the plaintiff to amend
the complaint to conform to the evidence, but so far as the record shows, no
such amendment was ever made. The objection here made is directed to parts of
paragraphs I and III of the second amended complaint, which read as follows:

   Paragraph I. "That the plaintiff and defendant on the 15th day of August,
1926, and at all times thereafter until a date subsequent to the 15th day of
September, 1926, were engaged in the real estate business and associated in the
same office in buying and selling real estate as agents and brokers,"

   And Paragraph III. "That after obtaining the said option and on or about the
20th day of August, 1926, plaintiff advised defendant that he (plaintiff) had
obtained the said option and was then the owner thereof and had the legal right
then to buy said property  within the thirty-day period of said option, at and
for the purchase price of fifty thousand dollars ($ 50,000) net, and plaintiff
thereupon offered to defendant that they, plaintiff and defendant, enter into a
partnership agreement for the handling and sale of said property, plaintiff and
defendant to work jointly and severally, each for the other, and as agent of the
other, in the selling of said property for the best obtainable price, it being
then and there agreed between them that if either obtained a bona fide buyer for
said property at a price in excess of the option price thereof above named, and
the proposed sale was approved by the other, that then and in that event
plaintiff would exercise his said option and elect to buy said property and
become the purchaser thereof and obligate himself to pay the said purchase
price. It was then and there specially agreed that all profits received from the
sale of said property, or the purchase thereof, from the said owner above named,
to the amount of twenty-five hundred dollars ($ 2500), should be treated and
disposed of as commissions  on the sale of said property, and that said
commissions should be divided one-third thereof to plaintiff, one-third thereof
to defendant, and one-third thereof to the owner and operator of the real estate
office in which plaintiff and defendant were then operating, working and having
their place of business as such licensed real estate agents and brokers. It was
then and there further agreed between plaintiff and defendant that each should
in all respects fully advise the other of all knowledge which either obtained,
and in all respects would deal fairly with the other and would make known to the
other the truth of the facts with reference to any sale of said property which
might be made within the life of said option."

   It is contended by appellant that the quoted parts of the amended complaint
allege a general partnership between the plaintiff and defendant as real estate
agents and brokers in the handling and selling of real estate, whereas the proof
purports to show only a joint adventure in a single transaction in the buying
and selling of real estate, and the court has so found.

   It may be doubted whether the allegations referred to constitute an
allegation of a general partnership. But whether they do or not, it is clear
that the evidence offered was admissible under the allegations of the amended
complaint. We are satisfied that the court drew the proper conclusion therefrom,
if he believed the testimony of re-respondent, in the finding that the appellant
and respondent entered into a joint adventure for the purpose of handling and
selling the real estate in question.

     It is sometimes a difficult question whether a transaction constitutes a
partnership or just a joint adventure. One of the principal distinctions between
a partnership and a joint adventure lies in the fact that a partnership,
ordinarily, is formed for the transaction of a general business of a particular
kind, while a joint adventure relates to a single transaction of a particular
kind, although it may continue for years. There are other more important
distinctions, viz., a partner acts as a principal for himself and as agent for
his copartners in the transaction of the partnership business, whereas, in a
joint adventure, no one of the parties thereto can bind the joint adventure.
On the other hand, the resemblance between a partnership and a joint adventure
is so close that the rights, as between the adventurers, are practically
governed by the same rules that govern partnerships. Accordingly, a joint
adventurer has a right to, and may sue for, an accounting of profits, in
accordance with the agreement therefor, and the obligations growing out of the
agreement between the parties are governed by the same rules of law applicable
to partnerships ( Butler v. Union Trust Co., 178 Cal. 195 [172 P. 601]; Keyes v.
Nims, 43 Cal. App. 1 [184 P. 695]). It is therefore immaterial, in so far as the
rights and obligations of the parties herein involved are concerned, whether the
relation created between the appellant and respondent is a partnership or a
joint adventure, which we are inclined to believe it to be.

     Second, the appellant contends that the instrument procured from Macklin by
respondent and under which he claimed the right to purchase the property in
question, while referred to as an option to purchase, was merely an exclusive
listing or right to handle and sell the property, which gave respondent no right
to purchase the same.

    The original instrument executed by Macklin and delivered to respondent
covering the Fedora Hotel was lost or destroyed and no copy thereof was produced
at the trial or offered in evidence. The court, however, made the following
finding, as No. II of its findings, to wit:

   "That plaintiff, on or about the 15th day of August, 1926, obtained from one
J. H. Macklin, the owner of certain property known as the Fedora Hotel, located
at 325 East Second Street, Los Angeles, California, an exclusive thirty-day good
and valid option to purchase said property from said J. H. Macklin for the sum
of fifty thousand ($ 50,000.00) dollars net to said J. H. Macklin."

   We have carefully examined the record and are satisfied that this finding is
supported by the evidence and should not be disturbed by this court under the
familiar rule above referred to.   An option is an agreement by which an owner
invests another with the exclusive right to buy certain property at a stipulated
price, within a limited time (6 Cal. Jur., p. 48, sec. 27). It is apparent that
respondent held an option and right to purchase the   property in question, and
that such option was not merely a listing with authorization to sell the
property as agent for the owner.

     Third, appellant contends that the judgment in this case cannot stand
because neither of the parties to this action is licensed either as an
individual real estate broker or as a partner or joint adventurer, to transact
business as a real estate broker or real estate salesman, as required by the
terms of the Real Estate Brokers' Act (Stats. 1919, p. 1252, as amended by
Stats. 1921, p. 1294, Stats. 1923, p. 93, and Stats. 1925, p. 600).

   The Real Estate Brokers' Act, so far as it need be referred to here, provides
as follows:

   "Sec. 1. It shall be unlawful for any person, copartnership or corporation to
engage in the business, or act in the capacity of a real estate broker, or a
real estate salesman within this state without first obtaining a license
therefor.

   "Sec. 2. A real estate broker within the meaning of this act is a person,
copartnership or corporation who, for a compensation, sells or offers for sale,
buys or offers to buy or negotiates the purchase or sale or exchange of real
estate, . . . for others as a whole or partial vocation.

   "A real estate salesman within the meaning of this act is one who for a
compensation is employed by a licensed broker to sell, or offer for sale, or to
list, or to buy, or to offer to buy, or to negotiate the purchase or sale or
exchange of real estate, or to solicit for prospective purchasers of real estate
, . . . as a whole or partial vocation.

   "The provisions of this act shall not apply to any person, copartnership or
corporation who shall perform any of the acts aforesaid with reference to
property owned by such person, copartnership or corporation; . . .

   "One act, for compensation of buying or selling real estate of or for
another, or offering for another to buy or sell or exchange real estate, . . .
shall constitute the person, copartnership or corporation making such offer,
sale or purchase, . . . a real estate broker or salesman within the meaning of
this act.

   "Sec. 17. Any person or corporation acting as a real estate broker or real
estate salesman within the meaning of this act without a license as herein
provided shall, upon conviction  thereof, if a person, be punished by a fine of
not exceeding five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a
term not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the
discretion of the court; or if a corporation, be punished by a fine of not to
exceed five thousand dollars.

   "Sec. 20. No person, copartnership or corporation engaged in the business or
acting in the capacity of a real estate broker or a real estate salesman within
this state shall bring or maintain any action in the courts of the state for the
collection of compensation for the performance of any of the acts mentioned in
section two hereof without alleging and proving that such person, copartnership
or corporation was a duly licensed real estate broker or real estate salesman at
the time the alleged cause of action arose."

   Appellant has cited a number of authorities in support of his contention to
the effect that a person, copartnership or corporation, engaged in buying or
selling real estate, as agent for the owner, for a compensation, must be
licensed under the terms of the Real Estate Brokers' Act at the time of the
transaction, in order to be able to maintain an action against anyone for a
brokerage commission. We have no doubt as to the correctness of these decisions
when applied to the facts of these particular cases, but they have no
application to the case at bar. Respondent was not dealing with Macklin as an
agent in the sale of his property, but rather as a purchaser and owner of the
property and, therefore, the act in question had no application to him, as will
more fully appear hereafter.

   Respondent secured in the name of his aunt, from the owner, J. H. Macklin, an
exclusive thirty-day option to purchase the Fedora Hotel, for the sum of $
50,000 net to the seller, payable on the terms stated in the option. The option
was taken in the name of the respondent's aunt, whose property he had under his
control, in order to protect any profit which might result from a sale of the
property over and above the $ 50,000 to be paid to Macklin and the commission to
be paid to Garland & Company, in accordance with the suggestion of the
appellant. So far as shown by the evidence, respondent secured the option
without  assistance or contribution from his aunt. Respondent was, therefore,
the equitable owner of the option, while his aunt held the naked legal title
thereto, subject to his direction. Respondent exercised the option in favor of
Evelyn Davies, who became the purchaser of the property from Macklin under the
terms of the option. This was the equivalent of a purchase of the property from
Macklin by respondent and a sale thereof by him to Davies. Respondent stood, in
relation to this property both as purchaser and seller. He was not the agent of
Macklin, either in buying or selling the property, under the terms of his
option.

   In the case of Robinson v. Easton, Eldridge & Co., 93 Cal. 80 [27 Am. St.
Rep. 167, 28 P. 796, 797], the Supreme Court construed an instrument similar in
effect to the option here under consideration. The instrument referred to read
as follows:

   "We hereby authorize Easton & Eldridge, for us, and within five days from
date hereof, and until this authority is canceled in writing by us, to sell for
the sum of $ 10,000 -- net dollars -- the following described property situated
in the city  and county of San Francisco, state of California, to wit: 'All of
block 935 outside lands; and we will pay said Easton & Eldridge a commission of
all over said sum of $ 10,000, net, for which they may sell said property with
our consent.'"

   In construing this instrument, the court used language which is equally apt
to the opinion we are considering. The court said:

   "The relation of the defendant to the plaintiffs was not that of a mere
agent. While its authority to sell the land was derived from the plaintiffs, yet
the sale was to be made for its own account and benefit, as well as for that of
the plaintiffs. Although the authority to sell was not so coupled with an
interest as to create in the defendant an interest in the land, or to prevent
the plaintiffs from revoking the authority, yet by the terms of the
authorization the defendant acquired such a right to a portion of the proceeds
of sale as to enable it to make a contract of sale upon terms of its own
choosing. The plaintiffs, in effect, gave to the defendant an option for five
days to endeavor to sell the block of land for whatever sum it could obtain, and
upon whatever terms it might make, provided they should  receive therefor the
sum of ten thousand dollars, and agreed that defendant should have whatever sum
it could realize therefor above that amount. The relation thus created between
them was rather that of a vendor and purchaser under a contract of sale than one
of principal and agent, and a sale by the defendant thereunder was in the
capacity of a vendor upon its own account, and not for the account of the
plaintiffs. Inasmuch as the defendant was entitled to all the proceeds of the
sale in excess of ten thousand dollars, it had the right to make the sale upon
such terms as in its judgment would enable it to realize the highest price for
the land. Upon a sale by it the plaintiffs were entitled to the immediate
payment of the ten thousand dollars, but the defendant could sell the land
either for cash or upon time, as it might choose, and its terms of sale did not
require ratification by the plaintiffs." (See, also, Smith v. Blodget, 187 Cal.
235 [201 P. 584].)

     For the reasons above stated and upon these authorities, we hold that the
relation between Macklin and respondent, created by the option in the case at
bar, was that of vendor and purchaser, rather than that of principal and agent.
It follows, therefore, that respondent was not required by the Real Estate
Brokers' Act to be licensed, either as a broker or salesman, in negotiating the
sale under his option, being specifically exempted therefrom by section 2, which
exempts the owner of real property from a compliance with the provisions of said
act, in case of sales made by himself. Moreover, there was nothing in the act
which prohibited the appellant, who was a duly licensed real estate salesman,
from assisting the respondent, as owner, in negotiating the sale of the property
under option, in the manner in which he did assist in that purpose. Furthermore,
the object of the joint adventure, between appellant and respondent, was not to
engage in the business of buying and selling real estate nor to act in the
capacity of real estate brokers or salesmen for third persons, or for anyone
other than the respondent, who was acting in the capacity of owner of the
property to be sold. We are of the opinion, therefore, that the joint venture in
this case did not come within the provisions of the act referred to and
consequently respondent was not required to secure a license as broker or
salesman in this transaction.

     Joint adventurers in the purchase and sale of property must act in the
highest good faith toward each other and may not make any secret profits out of
the transaction not shared by the others. In this respect, each of the parties
is agent and trustee of the others and he must account in accordance with the
terms of the agreement between them ( Munson v. Fishburn, 183 Cal. 206 [190 P.
808];  Lomita Land & Water Co. v. Robinson, 154 Cal. 36 [18 L.R.A. (N.S.) 1106,
97 P. 10]; Menefee v. Oxnam, 42 Cal. App. 81 [183 P. 379]).  One party to a
joint adventure may sue another at law for a breach of contract or for a share
of profits, where the adventure has been closed and he is entitled to a certain
sum as his share. ( Keyes v. Nims, supra.)   The appellant in this case, without
the knowledge or consent of his coadventurer, bought, through a dummy, the
property held under option by the respondent, his coadventurer, the sale of
which property was the subject matter of their joint adventure, and appellant
then sold the same at a profit to himself of $ 6,729.20 in cash and an undivided
half interest in certain real property commonly known as No. 422 South
Alexandria Avenue, Los Angeles. The sale to the dummy realized a profit of $
2,500, which was divided between the joint adventurers and W. M. Garland &
Company, as a commission, in accordance with the joint adventure agreement, but
appellant refuses to divide with his coadventurer the secret profit which he
realized on the resale of the property.

   It is found that appellant knew that the property had a market value in
excess of the price named in the option and that he paid, out of his own moneys,
one-half of the purchase price paid therefor by the dummy; and it is a fair
inference from the findings that appellant knew, at the time of the sale to the
dummy, of a purchaser who would pay a higher price for the property than was
obtained from the dummy. It was the duty of appellant to obtain for the property
the highest possible price for the benefit of the joint adventure and, according
to his agreement, to divide the profits share and share alike with his
coadventurer, after payment of the  agreed amount to W. M. Garland & Company.
This division, which the appellant refuses to make, is required by the judgment
of  the court in this case and we see no reason for disturbing the same.

   Accordingly, the judgment appealed from is affirmed.

   Jennings, Acting P. J., and Marks, J., concurred.

   A petition for a rehearing of this cause was denied by the District Court of
Appeal on September 18, 1931, and a petition by appellant to have the cause
heard in the Supreme Court, after judgment in the District Court of Appeal, was
denied by the Supreme Court on October 15, 1931.


                              33 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           A. SCHOMIG, Petitioner, v. EDWIN T. KEISER, as Real Estate
                     Commissioner, etc., et al., Respondent

                                S. F. No. 10229

                          Supreme Court of California

                 189 Cal. 596; 209 P. 550; 1922 Cal. LEXIS 368


                               September 19, 1922

PRIOR-HISTORY:     PROCEEDING in Certiorari to review an order of the Real
Estate Commissioner revoking a license after denial of writ by District Court of
Appeal.

COUNSEL: Carl F. Wood, for Petitioner.

U. S. Webb, Attorney-General, for Respondent Keiser.

JUDGES: In Bank.  Shaw, C. J.  Myers, J., pro tem., Wilbur, J., Waste, J.,
Lawlor, J., and Richards, J., pro tem., concurred.

OPINION BY: SHAW

OPINION

     The plaintiff filed a petition for a writ of certiorari directed to the
real estate commissioner, and to the judge of the superior court of Alameda
County, in the district court of appeal of the first district, second division.
The court, without filing any opinion, denied the writ.  On petition for
rehearing this court granted a rehearing and the writ was issued accordingly.

   The petition shows that Edward Rautenberg filed a verified complaint with the
real estate commissioner against A. Schomig, showing that he was Rautenberg's
agent in the collection of payments on a contract for the sale of real estate in
Oakland; that the contract was made by Rautenberg with certain colored people
for the purchase of the land, and subsequently they sold the lots to Miss Wall,
who was making the payments to Rautenberg by means of the agency of Schomig
through the Oakland Bank of Savings, at the rate of $ 15 per month; that the
bank was to transmit said money through Schomig to said Rautenberg, that he had
received from Schomig all that had been received by him from Miss Wall excepting
the sum of $ 114, which had been paid by Miss Wall in excess of the amount due;
that Rautenberg then complained to the said bank and the bank then forced
Schomig to account to him and confess that he had received the sum of $ 114.

   The complaint was filed against Schomig to obtain an order of the real estate
commissioner revoking his license as a real estate broker or a real estate
salesman under section 12 of the act establishing a real estate commissioner and
authorizing him to revoke licenses for certain causes.  (Stats. 1919, p. 1256.)
Section 12 of the act authorizes him to revoke the license of a real estate
salesman or broker "at any time where the holder thereof is performing, or
attempting to perform, any of the acts mentioned in  section two hereof is
guilty of -- . . . 5.  Any other conduct,  whether of the same or a different
character than hereinabove  specified, which constitutes dishonest dealing."
Section 2 of the act defines a real estate broker as any person "who, for a
compensation, sells, or offers for sale, buys, or offers to buy, negotiates the
purchase or sale or exchange of real estate, or who, for compensation,
negotiates loans on real estate, leases, or offers to lease, rents or places for
rent, or collects rent from real estate or improvements thereon for others as a
whole or partial vocation." A real estate salesman is defined by the act as any
"one who for compensation is employed by a licensed broker" to do any of the
acts above stated which are to be done by the real estate broker.

     It will be seen that this does not authorize the commissioner to revoke any
license of either a broker or salesman, under the act, unless he is acting for a
compensation, and, also, unless he does the acts complained of at a time when he
is negotiating for the sale or purchase of real estate, or is selling or buying
the same or negotiating a loan thereon or offers to lease, or rent, or places
for rent, or is collecting rents, from real estate, as a whole or partial
vocation.   Any employment by any person of another to collect payment on an
agreement which has already been negotiated, and is in all respects perfected
and the terms agreed upon, does not make the party a real estate broker or real
estate salesman, and any misconduct in performing such acts would not warrant
the real estate commissioner in revoking the license of such person.    The
portion of the act which authorizes the real estate commissioner to forfeit the
license of a broker or salesman and take it away from him is highly penal in its
nature, and should not be construed to include anything which is not embraced
within its terms.  There is no charge in the complaint, and no evidence to prove
the charge if it were in the complaint, that Schomig was employed for a
compensation to do the acts complained of, or that the acts themselves
constituted a part of a contract for the sale of real estate. The evidence shows
that they were to be performed by Schomig without compensation, and that in
doing so he was not fulfilling a contract for the sale of real estate, but was
merely collecting the proceeds of a contract already made.  The commissioner was
without authority to act in the matter at all, and had no authority to revoke
the license of Schomig.

   The order of the real estate commissioner is annulled.


                              34 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In the Matter of the Estate of MARIA L. HARRIS, Deceased.
          A. E. HARRIS, Appellant, v. DONALD LARTER, as Administrator,
                           etc., et al., Respondents

                                L. A. No. 15911

                          Supreme Court of California

                9 Cal. 2d 649; 72 P.2d 873; 1937 Cal. LEXIS 442


                                October 6, 1937

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Rehearing Denied.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Orange County.
James L. Allen, Judge.

COUNSEL: W. M. Greathouse, C. E. McDowell, Head, Wellington & Jacobs and Otto A.
Jacobs, for Appellant.

R. Y. Williams and Charles D. Swanner, for Respondents.

JUDGES: In Bank.  Curtis, J.  Shenk, J., Nourse, J., pro tem., Edmonds, J.,
Waste, C. J., and Seawell, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: CURTIS

OPINION

     This is an appeal from a decree of distribution distributing to the
respondents, the two brothers and a sister of Maria L. Harris, the entire estate
of said decedent who died intestate without issue.  The appellant is a brother
of Richard T. Harris, the previously deceased husband of Maria L. Harris, who in
behalf of himself, other brothers, sisters, nieces, nephews and the wives of
deceased brothers, seeks to share in the deceased wife's estate, appraised at $
74,246.98.

   Objection to the distribution of all of the property in the estate of Marie
L. Harris, hereinafter referred to as decedent, to her relatives, was made by
appellant upon the ground that all of the property inventoried in the estate of
decedent, with the exception of two small parcels, came to the decedent by an
inter vivos gift to her from her husband of his separate property, and that
these two parcels came to her by  operation of law upon the death of her prior
deceased husband by virtue of the fact that they had been the community property
of said spouses. Appellant claims by virtue of sections 228 and 229 of the
Probate Code to be entitled to have distributed to the relatives of said R. T.
Harris, designated in said code sections, all of the separate property of said
previously deceased spouse remaining in the estate of decedent which came to
decedent by gift from her husband during his lifetime, and one-half of the
property remaining in her estate which had been the community property of said
spouses.

   In order to understand the arguments advanced relative to the applicability
of said code sections to the property inventoried in the estate of decedent,
Maria L. Harris, a brief resume of the proceedings taken in the probate of the
estate of R. T. Harris is necessary.  Upon the death intestate and without issue
of R. T. Harris in 1911, after twenty-three years of married life with Maria L.
Harris, his surviving widow, as administratrix of his estate, returned in the
inventory and appraisement of his estate, no personal property and only one
parcel of real property valued at $ 5,000, which had been purchased by him a few
days before his death and held in his name as sole grantee, which real property
she declared to be community property. Although at the time of his death, R. T.
Harris apparently owned an estate of considerable magnitude, consisting of real
and personal property, with the exception of the above mentioned real property,
none of it was included in the inventory of his estate.  The reason for this
omission was that for several years the funds of Harris and his wife had been
kept in a joint tenancy bank account, and the bulk of the real property
purchased by Harris during their married life was taken by him as sole grantee,
and by him deeded to his wife, which deeds were recorded by her after his death.
One piece of real property, included in the inventory as parcel No. 3, and known
as the Home Place, which had been acquired early in their married life, had been
deeded to Maria L. Harris as sole grantee by the grantor thereof, and another
piece of real property had been taken in the name of R. T. Harris and Maria L
Harris as joint tenants. Maria L. Harris, therefore, claimed all of the property
with the exception of the $ 5,000 piece of real property, as her own property,
and omitted it from the inventory of his estate.  During the course of the
probate, the parcel of real property was sold to one Crookshank for $ 5,000, and
the whole  purchase price applied by the administratrix to the satisfaction of
the debts of R. T. Harris, which came to slightly more than $ 5,000.  Objections
to the final account of said administratrix were made by Clara  G. Fulsom, a
sister of R. T. Harris, solely upon the ground that said administratrix had
failed to account for certain personal property of the approximate value of $
40,000, part of which consisted of shares of stock, the certificates to which
had been issued to R. T. Harris, and by him endorsed and placed in the
safe-deposit box in which was kept the property of both spouses. The probate
court in that proceeding found that the property described in the objections was
the property of Maria L. Harris, and not the property of the estate of R. T.
Harris, that nothing remained in the estate to be distributed, and approved said
final account.   Upon appeal, this court after stating that said spouses at the
time of their marriage each had separate property and had established a joint
bank account with the right of survivorship in pursuance of an agreement between
them during the early years of their marriage, which provided that all property
held or acquired by either or both of them during the marriage, should be held
in joint ownership as joint tenants, and that they had deposited the money
received from earnings, proceeds of property, and all other sources by either of
them in accordance with said agreement, and that all the property in controversy
had been acquired with money from this joint account, held that the property
acquired with funds from this joint tenancy account, in the absence of an
agreement between the parties that the character was changed, retained the
character of joint property, the same as the money with which it was obtained
and therefore belonged to the widow as the survivor.  ( Estate of Harris, 169
Cal. 725 [147 Pac. 967].) The court reached this conclusion upon the reasoning
that as there was no statutory prohibition against the transfer of personal
property by oral agreement, the agreement of the spouses to hold their property
in joint tenancy operated to create a joint tenancy in the personal property
acquired by them, notwithstanding the fact that the purchase price had actually
been withdrawn from the joint tenancy account and that, as to certain of the
personal property, the title on its face stood in the name of only one of the
joint tenants. By this decision the court laid down the rule that joint tenancy
property may be traced into personal  property and the personal property so
acquired with joint tenancy funds will be deemed to be held in joint tenancy, in
the absence of an agreement to the contrary, regardless of the circumstance that
title to said acquired property may be held by only one of the joint tenants.
Although this conclusion that where personal property is purchased with joint
tenancy funds and title is placed in the name of one of the cotenants, the joint
tenancy is not terminated, despite the destruction of one of the necessary
unities, namely, unity of title, appears to be contrary to the common law rule,
nevertheless,  this exception to the common law rule, which had its origin in
Estate of Harris, supra, has become the recognized and established law of this
state, and has been followed in numerous recent decisions.  ( Lagar v. Erickson,
13 Cal. App. (2d) 365 [56 Pac. (2d) 1287]; Estate of McCoin, 9 Cal. App. (2d)
480 [50 Pac. (2d) 114]; In re Kesler, 217 Cal. 32 [17 Pac. (2d) 117]; Young v.
Young, 126 Cal. App. 306 [14 Pac. (2d) 580].) It should be noted here, perhaps,
that the decision upon that appeal only dealt with the personal property alleged
to have been omitted from the inventory of the estate of R. T. Harris, and did
not purport to deal with any real property. This is necessarily so for the
reason that the sole objection made in said proceeding was that the
administratrix had failed to account for certain personal property. As the
administratrix by deeds held title to all of the real property of the spouses,
and the relatives of R. T. Harris apparently admitted the validity of said
deeds, no reason existed for any question to arise with reference to real
property. It should also perhaps be noted that all of the decisions which have
followed the rule laid down in Estate of Harris, supra, are decisions which
affect personal property only.

   The property involved in this controversy has been listed by appellant into
six different categories according to their nature and origin, and for
convenience of discussion, we shall use this classification.  First kind:
Parcels of real property which were purchased by deceased husband, R. T. Harris,
with funds from the joint bank account of himself and Maria L. Harris, his wife,
title to which real property was taken from time to time solely in his name and
deeds to which property were executed by R. T. Harris in favor of his wife,
Maria L. Harris, within from one to two months after each purchase respectively
and which deeds were recorded at  one time, about a month after his death.
Second kind: The sum of $ 23,000, being the proceeds  of a sale of similar real
property made by Maria L. Harris after the death of R. T. Harris.  Third kind: A
parcel of real property acquired in the early years of the married life of the
spouses, title to which was taken, and has always continued in the name of the
wife.  Fourth kind: A parcel of real property (being the whole of lot 4 and an
undivided one-half of lots 5 and 12 in block 12 of the Pacific Electric
Subdivision of the Ross Tract, referred to in parcel 4 of the inventory and
appraisement of Maria L. Harris's estate) claimed by appellant to have been
purchased by R. T. Harris before any joint bank account was created, and which
has at all times stood of record in his name, and which was omitted from the
inventory of the estate of R. T. Harris, possibly through inadvertence.  Fifth
kind: A parcel of real property purchased by R. T. Harris with funds from the
joint bank account a few days before his death and probated as community
property by his wife.  Sixth kind: Personal property held in joint tenancy by R.
T. Harris and Maria L. Harris before the death of R. T. Harris, and real and
personal property acquired by Maria L. Harris after the death of R. T. Harris
from the proceeds of such joint tenancy personal property.

   The court rejected the claim of appellant to have any part of the estate of
Maria L. Harris distributed to relatives of R. T. Harris, specified in sections
228 and 229 of the Probate Code, and made its decree distributing the entire
estate of Maria L. Harris in equal shares to the respondents,  the two brothers
and sister of Maria L. Harris, deceased.  In its decree of distribution the
court found: "The whole of said estate was the separate property of said Maria
L. Harris, deceased, and did not come to her by gift from R. T. Harris, her
deceased husband, but said decedent became the owner of the whole of said
property by right of survivorship, under an agreement entered into between said
decedent and R. T. Harris, her deceased husband, in the early years of their
married life, whereby it was agreed that all property which either owned as
separate property, or which they had or might acquire during their married life,
as community property, should be held in joint tenancy with the right of
survivorship to the one surviving.  That the said R. T. Harris predeceased said
Maria L. Harris, and all his interest in said property so held in joint tenancy
under said agreement  terminated, and Maria L. Harris became the sole owner by
right of survivorship."

   We are of the opinion that the probate court was in error in making the
finding just quoted, and upon such finding distributing the entire estate of
Maria L. Harris to the respondents.   It is undisputed that the descent of
property is governed by the law in force at the time of the death of the person
whose property is to be distributed. ( Estate of Putnam, 219 Cal. 608 [28 Pac.
(2d) 27].) The provisions of section 228 and section 229 of the Probate Code, as
amended in 1931, therefore govern and control the distribution of the property
in the estate of Maria L. Harris, who died July 2, 1933.  Prior to the 1931
amendment, whereby the word, "gift" was added to said section 229 of the Probate
Code, the relatives of a predeceased spouse were entitled to inherit in the
estate of the surviving spouse, such property as had been the separate property
of the predeceased spouse and had come to the decedent from such spouse by
descent, devise or bequest.  In 1931, the code commission, as they said, "in
order to make the section logically complete", added the word, "gift".   The
result was that upon the death of the surviving spouse the relatives of a
predeceased spouse became entitled to inherit under said provisions such
property as had been the separate property of said predeceased spouse and had
come to said surviving spouse by inter vivos gift from said predeceased spouse.
Said section after amendment read as follows: "If the decedent leave no issue,
and the estate or any portion thereof was separate property of a previously
predeceased spouse, and came to decedent from such spouse by gift, descent,
devise or bequest, such property goes in equal shares to the children of the
deceased spouse and to their descendants by right of representation, and if
none, then to the parents of the deceased spouse in equal shares, or if either
is dead to the survivor, or if both are dead, in equal shares to the brothers
and sisters of the deceased spouse and to their descendants by right of
representation."  In view of the settled law of this state that the creation of
a joint bank account is a gift inter vivos ( Bell v. Moloney, 175 Cal. 366 [165
Pac. 917]; George v. Daly, 83 Cal. App. 684 [257 Pac. 171]), and that the same
rule applies to real estate ( Tilden v. Tilden, 81 Cal. App. 535, 542  [254 Pac.
310]), we see no escape from the conclusion that the insertion of the term,
"gift" in said section 229 conferred upon the relatives of the predeceased
spouse, specified in said section, the right to take as heirs of the surviving
spouse such separate property as by the creation of a joint tenancy ownership
therein had been given by the predeceased spouse to the surviving spouse. While
for the sake of simplicity in the administration of the estates of such
decedents, it might seem desirable to interpret the word, "gift" as only
referring to outright gifts of the entire interest in separate property, and to
hold it inapplicable to the creation of joint tenancy interests, in view of the
hereinbefore cited cases, such an interpretation is not permissible.

   Appellant insists that the decision in Estate of Harris, supra, only went so
far as to hold that the personal property involved was held in joint tenancy,
and did not determine whether or not the property from which said joint tenancy
was created was the separate property of R. T. Harris and was an inter vivos
gift by R. T. Harris to his wife, and that if he can establish the fact that it
was the separate property of R. T. Harris and that the creation of a joint
tenancy ownership with his wife constituted a gift by R. T. Harris to her, he
and the other relatives of R. T. Harris are entitled to succeed to the whole
thereof under section 229 of the Probate Code.  However,  the court in Estate of
Harris, supra, did determine, as shown on the face of its opinion, that both
spouses owned separate property and entered into a binding agreement that each
would contribute all the property held by them or acquired during marriage in
joint tenancy.  It cannot be said, we think, that if a husband and wife enter
into a mutual binding agreement whereby each contributes his and her separate
property to a joint tenancy account, that the converting of said separate
property of each of the spouses into a joint tenancy ownership constituted a
gift by each to the other of his or her separate property.

     Such conclusion does not, however, entirely negative appellant's right to
inherit the real property which was bought by R. T. Harris with the funds from
this joint tenancy account (classified as the first kind of property) nor the
right of the relatives of R. T. Harris to inherit the proceeds of a sale of
similar real property which sale was made by Maria L. Harris, after the death of
R. T. Harris.  As previously indicated, the real property which was purchased by
R. T.  Harris with the joint tenancy funds was shortly after its purchase deeded
by him to his wife, and these deeds were recorded after his death.  Upon the
creation of the joint tenancy ownership, each owned their interest therein as
separate property. ( Siberell v. Siberell, 214 Cal. 767 [7 Pac. (2d) 1003].) If
it could be said that the real property purchased with the joint tenancy funds
retained the character of joint tenancy ownership by virtue of their source, R.
T. Harris by deeding the property to his wife, severed the joint tenancy and
terminated it.  ( Hiltbrand v. Hiltbrand, 13 Cal. App. (2d) 330 [56 Pac. (2d)
1292].) This gift being an inter vivos gift of his separate property, would be
upon the death of his wife, distributable to the relatives of R. T. Harris,
designated in section 229 of the Probate Code.  Since she would retain her
separate interest in the joint tenancy property, she would acquire only a
one-half interest in said property by virtue of the deed from her husband, and
the relatives of R. T. Harris would be entitled to have distributed to them a
one-half of said property.  ( Sec. 229, Prob. Code.) However, in view of section
683 of the Civil Code defining a joint tenancy, we are of the opinion, that as
to the real property herein involved, the only possible manner in which the real
property purchased with joint tenancy funds could be held to have retained its
joint tenancy character would be to impress a constructive trust upon said
property upon the theory that R. T. Harris in withdrawing joint tenancy funds
had acted in fraud of his wife's rights and for this reason should be held to
hold title to the property in his own name as trustee for the joint tenancy.
Under the facts of the instant case, such a view does not seem tenable.   It is
one of the incidents of joint tenancy that either joint tenant may convey his
separate estate by way of gift or otherwise without the approval or consent of
his other joint tenant, and upon such conveyance the joint tenancy is
terminated.  ( Delanoy v. Delanoy, 216 Cal. 23 [13 Pac. (2d) 513].) This
incident of joint tenancy ownership must be presumed to have been in the
contemplation of the parties at the time of the creation of the joint tenancy
ownership. Moreover, in view of the fact that there is not the slightest
intimation in the record that the relations of the married  couple were not most
harmonious, and in view of the testimony of Maria L. Harris in the H. T. Harris
probate matter that she was familiar with her husband's business and that
whenever there  was any purchase of property she and Mr. Harris talked the
matter over and jointly concluded whether or not they would buy the property, we
think a finding of fraud on the part of the husband would be entirely
unjustified.  This conclusion is strongly fortified by the fact that after the
purchase of each parcel of real property in his own name he executed deeds to
his wife.

     We are not willing to subscribe to the theory, in the absence of proof,
that it was the agreement of the cotenants, husband and wife, that the husband
in purchasing the real property used only his half interest in the joint tenancy
funds and took all the real property as his own separate property. Such a
holding would in other cases open wide the door of actual fraud to unscrupulous
persons and place the burden of proving the retention of an interest in joint
tenancy property upon the passive joint tenant rather than upon the person
actively transferring the title.  This would be most inequitable and work an
undue hardship upon the innocent co-owner.

     We are of the opinion that the same result flows from the severance by one
spouse of a joint tenancy ownership by the taking of property purchased with the
joint tenancy funds in his or her own name, as results when one joint tenant
deeds his interest in the property to a stranger.  ( Delanoy v. Delanoy, supra.)
The owners of said property thereafter each own the same as tenants in common.
It is true that the title stands in the name of the spouse severing the joint
tenancy and taking title to the acquired property in his or her own name. It is
elementary, however, that if the consideration for the purchase of any property
is furnished by a stranger to the title, the holder of the title, by operation
of law, holds the title in trust for the one who furnished the consideration.
It may reasonably be concluded, therefore, that in the instant case as one-half
of the purchase price of the property consisted of the undivided one-half
interest of the wife in the joint tenancy funds, that the husband in taking
title to said real property, took a one-half interest in his own right as
separate property and a one-half interest as trustee for his wife.  By this deed
to her he gave to his wife his one-half of said property which,  as we have
seen, was, prior to the execution of said deed, his separate property. This
property which he gave to his wife, his relatives are entitled to have
distributed to them by virtue of the  provisions of section 229 of the Probate
Code.  As to the one-half of said property which he held as trustee, he conveyed
this to her in fulfillment of his duty as trustee.  This one-half which belonged
to his wife in her own right, her heirs are entitled to inherit as her own
separate property. To sum up, as to the first kind of property hereinbefore set
out, consisting of parcels 9, 10, and 11, of the inventory and appraisement in
the estate of Maria L. Harris, the relatives of Maria L. Harris are entitled to
distribution of a one-half thereof as her separate property, and the relatives
of R. T. Harris designated in section 229 of the Probate Code are entitled to
have distributed to them the other one-half of said property as the separate
property of her predeceased spouse which had come to her by gift from him.

     The same applies to the proceeds of the sale of real property which had
come to Mrs. Harris under similar circumstances and which had been sold by her
in 1919.  (Classified as the second kind of property.) Section 229 of the
Probate Code would apply to this property only in the event that any portion of
it remained in her estate upon her death as during her lifetime she had a
perfect right to deal with it as she pleased as it was her own separate
property. In view of the fact that it appears that during her lifetime Maria L.
Harris gave large sums to churches and other institutions, it may be that the
appellants will have considerable difficulty in proving that any portion thereof
remained in her estate at the time of her death.  Appellant relies strongly upon
the case of Stafford v. Martinoni, 192 Cal. 724 [221 Pac. 919], as placing the
burden of making an accounting of such funds upon the administrator of the
estate of the decedent. There is language in that case to the effect that since
the widow held property during her lifetime in trust "for the benefit of his
estate and heirs", her administrator should be held to such an accounting as
would disclose what portion of such property was derived from the community
property of herself and husband.  It is apparent that in that case the reason
the widow was held to hold certain property   in trust for the benefit of her
husband's heirs, was that at the time of the death of her husband his relatives
were entitled to share to the extent of one-half in any community property owned
by the spouses not disposed of by will.  Upon the death of her husband, she
failed to include in her inventory, property which upon  her death was claimed
by her husband's relatives to have been community property of the spouses. As to
this property which should have been distributed to her husband's relatives upon
the death of her husband, it is obvious that she held it as trustee for them
during her lifetime, and the burden of accounting therefor should properly be
upon her representative.  This is not the situation here.  During her lifetime,
Maria L. Harris was the absolute owner in her own right of all the property
which had come to her from her husband.  She could give it away or will it away.
It was only in the event of her dying intestate and without issue that the right
of the relatives of her predeceased husband to inherit any part of the estate
which had come to her from him came into existence.   It has long been the rule
that where the right of a person as heir depends not merely upon the fact of a
certain relationship, but upon the fact of such relationship plus the fact that
the property he claims as heir had formerly been either the community property
of the decedent and her previously deceased spouse or else the separate property
of the latter, the burden of showing such additional fact rests upon him.  (
Estate of Simonton, 183 Cal. 53 [190 Pac. 442].)

     In view of the fact that we hold that a joint tenancy ownership in real
property cannot be created by an oral agreement by reason of the provisions of
section 683 of the Civil Code, it follows that as to the third kind of property,
being parcel 3 in the inventory and appraisement, which is claimed by appellant
to be the separate property of R. T. Harris, which property was acquired in the
early years of the married life of the spouses, title to which in 1895 was taken
and has always continued to remain in the wife, and which never became a part of
the joint tenancy transaction, if appellant can establish that it was the
separate property of R. T. Harris, and was given by him to his wife during their
marriage by deed direct to her from the grantor, the relatives of R. T. Harris
are entitled to have the whole thereof distributed to them since, as to such
parcel of real property, the gift would consist of the entire ownership of such
property.

   As to the fourth kind of property, it appears from the record that it was
acquired through two separate deeds, one dated October 1, 1906, and one dated
April 29, 1907.  This property was omitted from the inventory of the estate of
R. T. Harris.  It appears, according to the statement of appellant, that from
June 28, 1905, the only bank account of the spouses was carried in the name of
Mr. or Mrs. R. T. Harris, and that in 1909 the account was changed into a joint
tenancy account.  There seems to be no definite date fixed as to when the
spouses made the agreement to hold their separate property in joint tenancy. The
opinion in Estate of Harris, supra, merely states that it was made during the
early years of their marriage. They were married on July 23, 1888.  The
distribution of this property will depend entirely upon its character at the
time of the death of R. T. Harris, that is, whether it was his separate
property, or the community property of himself and wife, or whether it was held
by the spouses as tenants in common.  There is no finding of the court upon this
question, and the evidence is such that it cannot be determined from the record
in which of these three relationships said property was held by R. T. Harris.
When the trial court has determined this question in accordance with the rules
above announced the property will descend and belong to the parties entitled to
the same under the law of succession in force at the respective dates of the
deaths of the spouses. In no event, will respondents be entitled to have
distributed to them all of said property.

     The fifth kind of property consisted of a parcel of real property purchased
by R. T. Harris with funds from the joint bank account a few days before his
death and probated as community property by his wife.  Appellant at the probate
hearing was not permitted to introduce evidence to prove that this parcel of
real property was not in fact sold in the probate proceedings in the estate of
R. T. Harris, but was only taken by Crookshank in his own name without the
payment of any consideration and three years later was deeded back to Maria L.
Harris.  Appellant argues that in attempting to introduce such evidence he was
not collaterally  attacking the probate sale of the real property in the former
probate proceedings.  The court did not err in excluding this evidence.  If the
sale was irregular, it should have been attacked in an independent proceeding.
If Crookshank did not pay any consideration, the administratrix probably paid
the debts of the decedent out of the funds which came to her as survivor of the
joint tenancy. This would be her own separate property. In O'Connor v. Flynn, 57
Cal. 293, in setting aside a sale which was illegal by reason of the fact  that
it had been made to the executor of an estate, an account was ordered wherein
the executor was credited with the purchase price of said property.  Over twenty
years have elapsed since said sale, and we do not believe that the equities of
the situation could be adequately gone into in the hearing upon the petition for
distribution in the estate of decedent.

   As to the sixth kind of property, the probate court, with reference to the
real property, found that the decedent, Maria L. Harris, acquired seven parcels
of real property subsequent to the date of the death of R. T. Harris, her
deceased husband, by purchase with funds from the sale of stock acquired by said
decedent by right of survivorship under the joint tenancy agreement entered into
between said decedent and R. T. Harris during the early years of their married
life. It follows from what we have hereinbefore said that this real property, as
well as the personal property held in joint tenancy by R. T. Harris and Maria L.
Harris before the death of R. T. Harris, should be distributed to the
respondents, the heirs of Maria L. Harris, since section 229 of the Probate Code
does not confer upon the relatives of a predeceased spouse the right to inherit
in the estate of decedent property which came to said decedent by right of
survivorship.

     Appellant also attempted to establish the fact that in 1904 an oral
agreement was entered into between R. T. Harris and his wife, whereby R. T.
Harris agreed to give his wife all property, and she agreed that after she had
"taken a good living out of it", she would divide it equally between his
relatives and her relatives.  After her death two copies of wills were found
which were refused probate, in which she left considerable property to churches
and made some provisions for her husband's relatives as well as her own.
Although appellant presents a plausible argument as to why the probate court
herein should take jurisdiction to determine the issue of such an oral
agreement, this question cannot be litigated in a probate court, but the remedy
of a person injured by the violation of a contract to make testamentary
provision for another must be pursued in a court of equity.  ( Fuller v. Nelle,
12 Cal. App. (2d) 576, 580 [55 Pac. (2d) 1248]; Estate of Rolls, 193 Cal. 594,
596 [226 Pac. 608].)   We are of the opinion that such an oral agreement if
entered into in 1904 prior to the amendment requiring such an agreement to be in
writing would be valid, if it could be  established.  ( Staples v. Hawthorne,
208 Cal. 578 [283 Pac. 67].) This is so regardless of the joint tenancy
agreement between the spouses, as there is nothing inconsistent with an
agreement that the husband agreed to give his wife all of his property and the
wife agreed upon her death that it would be divided equally between both
families and the creation of a joint tenancy ownership. The creation of a joint
tenancy is a gift, and that may well have been the method adopted by the husband
to fulfill the terms of such an oral agreement to give his wife all the
property, if the oral agreement existed.  ( Estate of Gurnsey, 177 Cal. 211 [170
Pac. 402].)   Nor is the decision in Estate of Harris, supra, res judicata upon
this question.  As the question could not possibly arise until the death of
Maria L. Harris and her failure to perform the terms of such agreement, if any,
this previous decision could not foreclose appellant from raising the question
upon the death of Maria L. Harris.

     The argument is advanced by respondents that the finding, upon the will
contest of the wills of Maria L. Harris, to the effect that these respondents
were the sole heirs of Maria L. Harris is res judicata as to the relatives of R.
T. Harris claiming herein as heirs of Maria L. Harris, and preclude their
sharing in the estate of Maria L. Harris.  The verdict in that contest could not
affect the right of the relatives of R. T. Harris to take as heirs of Maria L.
Harris, for the reason that the material issue in said contest was simply the
validity of the two wills offered for probate. The relationship of respondents
to Maria L. Harris in the will contest was an incidental matter.

     The decree is affirmed as to the fifth and sixth kinds of property
described and set forth herein, and is reversed as to the first, second, third
and fourth kinds of property mentioned above, with directions to the trial court
to take such further proceedings as may be necessary to enable it to properly
distribute said four kinds of property to the parties entitled thereto in
accordance with the views herein expressed.


                              35 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           Estate of IRMA E. YOUNG, Deceased.  STEPHEN C. PARKER, as
          Administrator, etc., Petitioner and Appellant, v. CHARLES D.
                    PARKER et al., Objectors and Appellants.

                                    D048937

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FOURTH APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION ONE

           160 Cal. App. 4th 62; 72 Cal. Rptr. 3d 520; 2008 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 231


                            February 15, 2008, Filed

PRIOR-HISTORY:
   Superior Court of San Diego County, No. P177721, Jay M. Bloom, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(11) Decedents' Estates § 115--Actions--Return of Property Taken During
Decedent's Lifetime--Availability of Double Damages.--In an action under Prob.
Code, § 850, subd. (a), which sought to reestablish an estate's ownership of
real and personal property a decedent had transferred into a number of land
trusts and business trusts, the trial court should  have determined the merits
of the petition and to defer the valuation process until the accounting phase of
the proceedings. The statutory language of § 859 supported the estate's position
that it was appropriate to prove liability before providing underlying evidence
of double damages in the form of real property valuations. Even though the
estate should have expressly sought bifurcation of liability and damages, it
impliedly did so, and it never waived its claim of double damages regarding the
real property taken (Prob. Code, § 1000; Code Civ. Proc., §§ 598, 1048, subd.
(b)). Accordingly, the trial court should have allowed further proceedings
regarding damages, either by granting the estate's motion to reopen the
proceedings, or by ordering that proof of the value of the real property could
be established as part of the accounting to be conducted postjudgment. Under all
the circumstances, it was an abuse of discretion not to do so.

   [Cal. Forms of Pleading and Practice (2007) ch. 450, Probate: Collecting
Assets, § 450.12; Cal. Forms of Pleading and Practice (2007) ch. 456, Probate:
Management of Estate Assets, § 456.23; Cal. Probate Practice (2007) ch. 13, §
13.05; 1 Witkin, Cal. Evidence (4th ed. 2000) Opinion Evid., § 98 et seq.; 3
Witkin, Cal. Procedure (5th ed. 2008) Actions, § 653 et seq.; 1 Witkin, Summary
of Cal. Law (10th ed. 2005) Contracts, § 316 et seq.; 14 Witkin, Summary of Cal.
Law (10th ed. 2005) Wills and Probate, §§ 359, 384; 7 Witkin, Cal. Procedure
(5th ed. 2008) Trial, § 154.]

COUNSEL: James C. Stevens for Objectors and Appellants.

Kenneth H. Stone and Norman Michael Cooley for Petitioner and Appellant.

JUDGES: Opinion by Huffman, J., with McConnell, P. J., and O'Rourke, J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: Huffman

OPINION

    HUFFMAN, J.--Stephen C. Parker, as administrator of the estate of Irma E.
Young, deceased (the Estate), filed this petition under Probate Code section
850, subdivision (a), 1 to request an order and judgment establishing the
Estate's ownership of certain real property and personal property held by and
associated with a number of land trusts and business trusts created during the
lifetime of Young, on the basis that "the decedent died having a claim to real
or personal property, title to or possession of which is held by another." (§
850, subd. (a)(2)(D).) The trial court ruled that the Estate was the prevailing
party, because it had showed sufficient evidence of undue influence and fraud in
the establishment of the trusts. Judgment was issued ordering objectors and
appellants, Charles D. Parker, R. Richard Evans, and Inland Valley Management
(IVM, a business trust entity) (sometimes collectively referred to as Objectors)
to return Young's real property that had previously been transferred to the land
trusts, and to vest its title in the Estate. The court additionally ordered that
an accounting regarding personal property of the Estate that must be returned
should be completed when the judgment became final. 2 However, although
liability for double damages under section 859 was adjudged against Objectors,
no damages were awarded to the Estate for wrongful taking of property, for lack
of supporting evidence about the value of the real property taken. (§ 859 ["If a
court finds that a person has in bad faith wrongfully taken, concealed, or
disposed of property belonging to the estate of a decedent ... , the person
shall be liable for  twice the value of the property recovered by an action
under this part. The remedy provided in this section shall be in addition to any
other remedies available in law to a ... personal representative or other
successor in interest of a decedent."].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   All
further statutory references are to the Probate Code unless noted.
2   The judgment is appealable under section 1300, subdivision (k). The parties
concur that the judgment is final in nature, despite the anticipated further
accounting to be completed after this challenge to the liability portions has
been brought to finality.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Objectors now challenge that judgment for lack of substantial evidence to
support the findings of fraud and undue influence. They also claim the petition
was time-barred, because it was filed more than five years after Young was
deemed to be aware or constructively on notice of potential problems with the
trust arrangements concerning her real property. (Code Civ. Proc., §§ 318, 319,
366.1.)

   The Estate (petitioner) the judgment, on the basis that the trial court
erroneously denied it the opportunity to present evidence of the value of the
real property taken, on which the Estate's claim for double damages would be
based. 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Pending
appeal, Objector Evans brought a motion to dismiss the cross-appeal, which we
will address in part IIIA., post.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   We find that the judgment in favor of the Estate is adequately supported by
substantial evidence, regarding return of the real property and allowing an
accounting regarding the personal property. We further find that the statutory
language of section 859 supports the Estate's position that the trial procedure
it used here, to prove liability before providing underlying evidence of double
damages in the form of real property valuations, was not inappropriate. Even
though the Estate should have expressly sought bifurcation of liability and
damages, it impliedly did so, and it never waived its claim of double damages
regarding the real property taken. (§ 1000 [Code Civ. Proc. rules of practice
apply in probate proceedings]; Code Civ. Proc., §§ 598, 1048, subd. (b).)
Accordingly, the trial court should have allowed further proceedings regarding
damages, either by granting the Estate's motion to reopen the proceedings, or by
ordering that proof of the value of the real property could be established as
part of the accounting to be conducted postjudgment. Under all these
circumstances, it was an abuse of discretion not to do so. We reverse the
judgment to that limited extent only, affirming as to the balance, and remand
for further appropriate proceedings on the double damages and accounting
matters.

FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

   We will only generally outline these complicated transactions and
proceedings, adding more detail in the discussion portions of this opinion as
necessary.

A

Creation of Land Trusts and Operational Trusts; Background

   Beginning in 1951, Irma Young became a successful entrepreneur in the nursery
business. She acquired substantial assets, including the subject eight parcels
(six acres) of real property in the Blossom Valley area of San Diego County. Her
four children, including the eldest, Charles Parker (Objector or Charles) and
his brother, Stephen Parker (the Estate's administrator or Stephen),
participated in the family businesses at various times. One of Young's
properties was leased to another nursery, The Color Spot, which created lease
proceeds of approximately $ 10,000 per month from 1993 through 1999.

   During the 1980's and in 1991, Young established an estate plan and inter
vivos trust that equally benefited her four children,  with the assistance of
her lawyer at the time, Dennis Burns. Mr. Burns represented her for 15 years for
estate planning purposes and a bankruptcy of one of Young's businesses, Green
Thumb Nursery. In the 1991 estate plan, Charles was expressly to be allowed to
take his inheritance only if he did not have any tax liabilities at the relevant
time. During the 1990's, Young's physical health declined, but she remained in
normal mental health until her last illness in 2000.

   In 1992 and 1993, Charles was attending seminars about asset protection, such
as land trusts and tax planning. He told his mother, then age 78, about  them
and she became interested in those concepts, even though her attorney, Mr.
Burns, told her he did not believe that some of the opportunities (land trusts)
were legitimate tax avoidance devices. Young's accountant did her taxes and
Charles did not know her tax bracket. Young was excited about the idea of asset
protection and Stephen did not object at the time. He, Charles, and Young
attended such seminars together. Stephen felt that "the buck stop[ped] with him"
as far as his mother's finances were concerned. 4

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   "A
discussion of Land Trusts appearing in University of Illinois Law Forum (1955)
page 655, says that the land trust is an Illinois institution, and sets forth
[citation] a standard form ... . Indeed, the trust instruments here under
consideration were executed upon printed forms with the blanks filled in." (
Estate of Tutules (1962) 204 Cal. App. 2d 481, 483-484 [22 Cal. Rptr. 427].)
This "land trust" concept is not referenced in Miller and Starr, California Real
Estate, except generally as follows: "An express trust may only be created by a
written document. A trust can be created in real property by either a written
document signed by the owner and declaring the owner as trustee or by
transferring the property to another as trustee for the benefit of designated
persons. Title may also be conveyed to a trust that is a separate legal entity
formed to hold title to assets for the benefit of designated beneficiaries. ...
[¶] ... [¶] ... When property is transferred to a trustee in trust, the legal
title to the trust property is vested in the trustee, subject only to the
execution of the trust. The beneficiary does not have any legal estate in the
property, but only has the right to enforce performance of the trust according
to the terms of the trust instrument." (3 Miller & Starr, Cal. Real Estate (3d
ed. 2000) § 8:33, pp. 62-63, fns. omitted.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Charles introduced Young to several persons that he had met at such seminars
who had businesses preparing land trusts and other investment devices, and he
took her to Arizona to meet with consultants. She paid approximately $ 30,000 to
several persons to prepare such documents, some of whom took the money and did
no work, but eventually, the trusts were completed by Bruce Stokes, who ran
firms called Dublin Management and Scioto Equity Financial Group, a Nevada
corporation (collectively referred to as Stokes).

   In 1993, Young, as grantor and beneficiary, executed eight ?tax avoidance? or
"land trusts" that had been created by Stokes (all called Blossom Valley
Properties Trusts). Stephen was appointed as trustee and he signed the trust
documents that Charles gave him. Young then signed deeds to transfer her eight
parcels of real property, worth over $ 1 million, into them. The trust documents
stated that Young was the named beneficiary.

   In the same set of transactions, three operational or business trusts were
created at the same time, also under Charles's guidance, by Stokes on behalf of
Young. In each of these trusts, Stokes was a named trustee. In each of these,
the trust documents do not designate a beneficiary. First, Blossom Valley
Holdings (BVH), was supposedly created by Larry Bemis as settlor, who denied at
trial in a videotaped deposition that he had done so, although he admitted he
had known Stokes as a business associate. Minutes of BVH   transactions and a
chart were created to show that the BVH beneficial interests were held by the
four Parker children equally. Next, Young assigned her own beneficial interest
in the land trusts to BVH.

   In addition, Young participated in creating two other operational or business
trusts drafted by Stokes. The next one was Blossom Hill Investments (BHI), which
was a loan business run by Charles. Young was its manager and wrote checks on
the BHI account. Her Dean Witter brokerage account of $ 500,000 was assigned to
BHI. She paid rent for her home on one of the properties to IVM, in return for
its management of her property and some benefits. Stokes was again named as
trustee of BHI, and Bemis later denied creating it even though his name was on
it as settlor.

   Third, IVM was supposedly established by an unknown firm called Commerce
International Trust (Commerce International) as settlor, whose trustee, Southern
Enterprise, Ltd., was based in the Caribbean islands (Turks and Caicos).
Commerce International at some point became a beneficiary of IVM. It was also
the trust's certificate holder, serving some kind of trustee function. 5 IVM
employed Charles as manager and his family as employees, and it received The
Color Spot lease proceeds that had been assigned to it from 1993 through 1999. 6


- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   A
certificate holder of a trust creates a certification of trust and may present
it to establish the existence or terms of the trust, in lieu of providing a copy
of the trust instrument. This procedure is meant to ensure accuracy of the trust
contents. (§ 18100.5; 13 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (10th ed. 2005) Trusts, §
256, pp. 833-835.)
6   BVH, through Charles, later operated a nursery on this same property after
the lease expired. It was sued by a Mr. Sparber who was an employee who fell off
a greenhouse, and some of Evans's testimony from that action was read into this
record.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In 1995, Stokes decided to relocate, and a successor trustee was needed,
especially for IVM. For this purpose, Charles introduced Young to Evans, who had
a business creating trust documents and acting as a professional trustee. She
told him that she did not want the real property to be sold. Evans told Young
that the trusts needed to be updated and corrected, and there were potential tax
problems because there was an identity of interest among the various trusts,
including BVH. Evans drafted new bodies of the land trusts, with sequential
roman numeral identifiers, backdated them and retained the original signature
pages, and told Young about them. He shredded and burned the original copies of
the old pages, but a copy was inadvertently saved. Stephen was not told that the
1995 documents were backdated to 1993. At Charles's request, Stephen signed
signature pages that did not include the remainder of the documents, because
Charles told him they were needed for Young's estate.

   In 1995, Evans also prepared an assignment of the beneficial interest of the
land trust from BVH to IVM, which meant that IVM controlled the real property.
The certificate holder of IVM (Commerce International) was not able to be
located so the substituted trust provisions allowed the new IVM trustees, Evans
and a Susan O'Brien, to distribute the assets or income of the trust. Charles,
the manager of IVM, knew about the substitution, but Young and Stephen did not.
Charles was making loans for second trust deeds with BHI funds and showed them
to Young. When Evans was asked at trial if IVM or BHI had filed tax returns in
the late 1990's, he took the Fifth Amendment instead of  answering. Young
trusted Charles and Evans up until at least the early part of 2000 and did not
complain about the transactions.

   In 1995, Young saw her former attorney, Mr. Burns, and told him she thought
she had made a mistake by participating in the trust arrangements, as she might
have lost control of her property. He asked her if she had gotten involved in
one of Charles's "schemes," and she said yes. He then told her that he had
advised her against that, but she had not listened to him, and he could no
longer help her and she should get another attorney. There was evidence that Mr.
Burns told Young and Stephen in 1993 that he thought Young was "off base" in
those trust arrangements.

   In April 2000, Stephen became aware that Young was gravely ill. She asked him
to check into the status of her estate and property, but he could not find any
estate planning or trust documents in the places that she told him they were
stored at her house. Charles did not supply any when Stephen asked him for them.
Stephen then requested information from Evans, whom he had just met, and Evans
told him Young no longer owned any property, as it was in trust, so none of the
children would inherit anything. He told Stephen that he was not really entitled
to review trust documents, because they were "out of [his] jurisdiction," so to
speak. However, Evans gave him a copy of one of the land trusts.

   Stephen told Young about this and she said Charles and Evans were crooks. In
May 2000, she called her four children to the hospital and told them that her
plan was that each should share equally in her estate, and asked Charles to
verify that that was her intent, which he did.

   On July 30, 2000, Young died. Stephen was appointed the administrator of her
estate. In that capacity, he formally requested that Charles and Evans supply
him with business records relating to trusts, disposition of funds or property,
and the original irrevocable land trust dated September 27, 1993. They replied
that they did not have any such documents except for the 1991 will and inter
vivos trust. The trusts had no cash left.

B

Filing of Petition; Amendment

   On March 28, 2001, the Estate filed its petition seeking to establish its
ownership to the subject real property and requesting an order directing
transfer of the property to the Estate, as well as an accounting. (§ 850, subd.
(a)(2)(D).) The petition alleged that Charles, through undue influence, had
persuaded his mother to create the "tax avoidance trusts" and to transfer her
eight parcels of real property, worth over $ 1 million, into them. In addition,
the petition alleged that the three operational or business trusts created to
manage the properties and to manage Young's personal finances were not
legitimate entities and had no legitimate purposes.

   The amended petition filed in October 2004 requested that the real property
held in the land trusts be transferred to the Estate, added quiet title
allegations, and requested that Objectors be directed to transfer to the Estate
any remaining personal property. Breaches of fiduciary duty were alleged. The
amended petition alleged that over $ 1.5 million of Young's income and assets
had been misappropriated through undue influence, fraud and/or bad faith. The
amended petition requested an accounting of all revenues and expenses for the
three operational or business trusts from October 1993 to the present.
Entitlement to punitive damages was pled, along with an order holding Objectors
liable to the Estate "for twice the  value of the property recovered hereby,"
under section 859.

C

Trial; Statement of Decision

   At the outset of trial, the probate court heard a motion by Objectors to
bifurcate the trial to postpone any introduction of evidence of their net worth
or profits, regarding the punitive damages request. (Civ. Code, § 3295.) The
court asked if that was really necessary, since this was a bench trial, but it
granted the request. It then heard five days of testimony from Charles, Stephen,
Evans, Burns, and many other interested parties, about the events outlined above
and their perceptions of Young's knowledge about the details of the trusts and
her ability to make business decisions during that time period. At some point,
the Estate decided not to pursue punitive damages. Extensive documentary
evidence was admitted and considered by the court.

   At trial, Objectors took the position that the petition was not timely filed
in 2001, because the conversations between Young, her attorney Mr. Burns in
1995, and Stephen in 1993, had placed her on notice of any potential problems
with the trusts, but she had decided to proceed anyway and had not taken any
corrective action. The Estate responded that it was not until 2000 that its
representative became aware of problems with the trust arrangements and the
disposition of Young's assets, so as to start the running of any limitations
period. Stephen did not know who Evans was until 2000. Neither opening nor
closing arguments were reported.

   The trial court issued a tentative decision analyzing the evidence as
follows. It first found there was no bar of any potentially applicable statutes
of limitation regarding the real property transfers (such as quiet title), due
to the existence of undue influence on Young and delayed discovery by the
Estate. (Code Civ. Proc., §§ 338, subd. (d), 318, 319.) Next, the court found
that the evidence established that Charles had exerted undue influence upon
Young in persuading her to enter into the trust arrangements, which were
financially disadvantageous for her. Evans had acted in a fraudulent manner when
he substituted new portions for the previous versions of the trust documents.
The court rejected Objectors' defense that the money had been lost simply due to
an unfavorable business climate, without any fraud taking place.

   Upon receipt of the tentative decision dated March 3, 2005, Objectors
responded that the Estate had rested its case without presenting evidence of the
value of the real properties, upon which to base the double damages request, and
the case should be over. The court received a response and issued a request for
further briefing. The parties vigorously disputed whether Objectors' request for
bifurcation of the punitive damages portion of the case had impliedly also
postponed the presentation of evidence supporting the double damages award under
section 859. Objectors accused the trial court of being predisposed in the
Estate's favor by ruling on damages without sufficient evidence. The trial court
reminded Objectors' attorney of the local rule requiring respect toward the
court and counsel.

   In the final statement of decision, dated April 15, 2005, the court concluded
that counsel for the Estate had failed to present any evidence regarding the
value of the real properties, and no double damages could be awarded due to that
failure of proof. The remaining requests regarding the personal property (return
of funds, etc.) were denied without prejudice pending an accounting to be
prepared upon the  judgment becoming final in the trial court, or after
appellate review. Judgment was entered accordingly, stating that because of  the
breach of fiduciary duty, Objectors were liable for double damages for bad faith
taking of property; "however no damages are awarded as to [Objectors'] wrongful
taking of property as Petitioner failed to offer evidence as to the value of the
real property." The Estate's motion to reopen was denied in July 2005.

   Both parties timely filed their respective notices of appeal and cross-appeal
of the judgment.

DISCUSSION

   Objectors first challenge the judgment as erroneous with respect to the trial
court's ruling that the petition was timely filed within the applicable
limitations periods, due to delayed discovery of the facts constituting undue
influence and fraud. They further contend the record does not contain
substantial evidence to support the judgment in the Estate's favor, and that the
evidence actually showed that Young was capable of making her own investment
decisions and did so of her own free will.

   In the cross-appeal, the Estate argues the trial court erred as a matter of
law in its statutory interpretation that denied the Estate an opportunity to
prove double damages, based on the fiduciary duty and fraud claims.
Alternatively, the Estate contends the denial of its motion to reopen to present
evidence of the value of the real property was an abuse of discretion.

   Section 850 et seq. provides a mechanism for court determination of rights in
property claimed to belong to a decedent or another person. When the outcome of
an appeal turns on the meaning of statutory phrases, such as whether the actions
under review comported with particular statutory standards, courts may analyze
the factual record using a flexible de novo approach; if none of the facts is
disputed, the matter is decided as a pure issue of law. (Harustak v. Wilkins
(2000) 84 Cal.App.4th 208, 213 [100 Cal. Rptr. 2d 718].) Alternatively, the
record may present mixed questions of law and fact, but where issues of law
predominate, de novo review is appropriate "because of the need to consider
legislative policy and the impact it may have on valuable inheritance rights in
other cases. Resolving these issues will promote a uniform application of the
statute in question." (Ibid.)

   As the trial court in this matter aptly observed, Young was no longer present
to give her version of the events, so the trial court had to evaluate the
evidence as given by the remaining participants, to aid in interpreting the
documents. In general, in reviewing a judgment based upon a statement of
decision following a bench trial, "any conflict in the evidence or reasonable
inferences to be drawn from the facts will be resolved in support of the
determination of the trial court decision. [Citations.]" (In re Marriage of
Hoffmeister (1987) 191 Cal. App. 3d 351, 358 [236 Cal. Rptr. 543].) In a
substantial evidence challenge to a judgment, the appellate court will "consider
all of the evidence in the light most favorable to the prevailing party, giving
it the benefit of every reasonable inference, and resolving conflicts in support
of the [findings]. [Citations.]" (Howard v. Owens Corning (1999) 72 Cal.App.4th
621, 630 [85 Cal. Rptr. 2d 386].) We may not reweigh the evidence and are bound
by the trial court's credibility determinations. (Id. at p. 631; see Heller v.
Pillsbury Madison & Sutro (1996) 50 Cal.App.4th 1367, 1384 [58 Cal. Rptr. 2d
336].) Moreover, findings of fact are liberally construed to support the
judgment. (Winchell v. Lambert (1956) 146 Cal. App. 2d 575, 581 [304 P.2d 149].)

    The usual definitions of substantial evidence apply: it is "evidence ... 'of
ponderable legal significance, ... reasonable in nature, credible, and of solid
value.' " (Bowers v. Bernards (1984) 150 Cal. App. 3d 870, 873 [197 Cal. Rptr.
925], italics omitted.) In determining its existence, we look at the entire
record on appeal rather than simply considering the evidence cited by a party. (
Ibid.) "The ultimate determination is whether a reasonable trier of fact could
have found for the respondent based on the whole record. [Citation.] While
substantial evidence may consist of inferences, such inferences must be 'a
product of logic and reason' and 'must rest on the evidence' [citation];
inferences that are the result of mere speculation or conjecture cannot support
a finding [citations]." (Kuhn v. Department of General Services (1994) 22
Cal.App.4th 1627, 1633 [29 Cal. Rptr. 2d 191].) Any additional standards of
review will be stated in the following part as necessary.

I

APPEAL: LIMITATIONS

   "Statutes of limitation are designed to promote justice by preventing
surprises through the revival of claims that have been allowed to slumber until
evidence has been lost, memories have faded, and witnesses have disappeared.
[Citation.]" (Parker v. Walker (1992) 5 Cal.App.4th 1173, 1188-1189 [6 Cal.
Rptr. 2d 908] (Parker).) Section 1000 permits application of Code of Civil
Procedure rules of practice, including statutes of limitations, based on the
underlying right asserted. (Parker, supra, at pp. 1184-1185.) In Code of Civil
Procedure section 366.1, the rule regarding claims of an estate is stated: "If a
person entitled to bring an action dies before the expiration of  the applicable
limitations period, and the cause of action survives, an action may be commenced
before the expiration of the later of the following times: [¶] (a) Six months
after the person's death. [¶] (b) The limitations period that would have been
applicable if the person had not died."

   As explained in Parker, " 'Neither the caption, form, nor prayer of the
complaint will be deemed conclusive in determining the nature of the liability
from which the cause of action flows. On the contrary, the true nature of the
action will be ascertained from the basic facts a posteriori.' [Citation.]" (
Parker, supra, 5 Cal.App.4th 1173, 1189.) Thus, for purposes of analyzing the
appropriate limitations period, we consider not only the purpose of the petition
to recover real property, but also the fraud and undue influence allegations.
Where the facts adequately allege breach of fiduciary duty or undue influence,
the courts will allow a date-of-discovery rule to be applied, " 'when strict
adherence to the date of injury rule would result in unfairness to the plaintiff
and would encourage wrongdoers to mislead their fiduciary to delay bringing
suit. It is particularly appropriate when the defendant maintains custody and
control of a plaintiff's property or interests.' [Citation.]" (Parsons v.
Tickner (1995) 31 Cal.App.4th 1513, 1529 [37 Cal. Rptr. 2d 810].)

   Objectors argue there is no basis for a delayed discovery ruling. They rely
on Attorney Burns's testimony about his discussions with Young in 1993 and 1995,
to show Young must have had knowledge at those times of the accrual of any cause
of action regarding significant disputes over title of the real property. Young
was known as a successful retired businesswoman who did not have any mental
disabilities in the 1990's, and who was generally capable of understanding
business  transactions. Objectors correctly state that the mere existence of a
family relationship did not constitute proof of undue influence on the part of
Charles. (Estate of Stephens (2002) 28 Cal.4th 665, 677 [122 Cal. Rptr. 2d 358,
49 P.3d 1093].)

   Objectors then claim the trial court did not give proper weight to Attorney
Burns's evidence. In the statement of decision, the court characterized as
"vague" that testimony about the nature of Young's knowledge of the extent of
the losses to herself and/or her children, regarding any remaining rights to the
benefit of the real property held in the land trusts. The court concluded that
Young had "expressed some unhappiness about events to her attorney, Mr. Burns,
and he had some vague feeling that what Charles Parker was doing could affect
her ownership interests in the property. [¶] The result of what Parker and Evans
did really did not become known until about the middle of 2000. In fact, even
around the time of her death, Charles Parker reassured Irma Young that all four
children would inherit her property." The  court therefore ruled the actual
fraud was not discovered by the Estate until the middle of 2000, such that the
cause of action accrued at that time.

   To argue this was error, Objectors contend that various statutes concerning
disputes about real property must instead provide the applicable limitations
period. They rely on Code of Civil Procedure sections 318 (possession of real
property), 319 (title to real property), and/or 328 (tolling of statute of
limitations). As explained in Robertson v. Superior Court (2001) 90 Cal.App.4th
1319 [109 Cal. Rptr. 2d 650] (Robertson), "[t]he overall effect of these
sections is manifest: actions relating to either the possession of or title to
real property ... must be commenced within five years from the end of possession
or seizin of that property by the claimant or his or her predecessor in
interest, unless his or her chain of title includes a person who was either a
minor or insane, in which case a tolling period not to exceed 20 years is
allowed ... ." (Id. at p. 1328, fn. omitted.) According to Objectors, this
authority should control here, because the gist of the petition is a title
dispute, which became known by 1995, but the Estate was not diligent in
discovering all the relevant facts.

   However, the court in Robertson, supra, 90 Cal.App.4th at page 1325, also
recognized that various limitations provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure
apply in actions to enforce rights stated in other codes (there, Civ. Code, §
3412 [cancellation of void instruments]), or that arise in other contexts. Here,
the Estate argues that the predominant allegations in the current case are fraud
and undue influence, such that the general statements in the Robertson case
about real property limitations statutes are not controlling. The trial court
agreed, ruling that although Code of Civil Procedure section 318 or 319 could
apply if the quiet title or other real property theories were instrumental here,
this was actually a case where fraud and undue influence were the pivotal
allegations, explaining the delayed discovery of the cause of action. Moreover,
the court acknowledged that the evidence surrounding these elaborate multilevel
trusts made it difficult, if not impossible, to trace the changes in the
beneficial interests, and counsel had difficulty doing so even at the time of
trial. This supported the court's conclusion that Young could not reasonably
have been expected to understand precisely what was happening at the time, nor
could Stephen.

   The record strongly supports this application of limitations rules and
policies. The trial court correctly took into account  all of the evidence about
the underlying circumstances of the transactions, and its selection of the fraud
limitations period was a correct resolution of this mixed question of law and
fact. (Harustak v. Wilkins, supra, 84 Cal.App.4th 208, 212.) Code of Civil
Procedure section 338, subdivision (d) was the applicable rule for analyzing the
timeliness of this probate proceeding, because delayed discovery was justifiably
asserted and well supported, based on the misrepresentations and concealments on
the part of Objectors, and the roles they played and undertook in Young's life
and financial affairs. We next discuss the related evidentiary issues on the
merits.

II

APPEAL: FALSE REPRESENTATION; CONCEALMENT; UNDUE INFLUENCE

   This portion of the appeal is a substantial evidence challenge to the adverse
judgment against Objectors on the merits of the petition. To evaluate this
ruling, we first review the required elements for claims for fraud: " '(a)
misrepresentation (false representation, concealment, or nondisclosure); (b)
knowledge of falsity (or "scienter"); (c) intent to defraud, i.e., to induce
reliance; (d) justifiable reliance; and (e) resulting damage.' [Citations.]" (
Lazar v. Superior Court (1996) 12 Cal.4th 631, 638 [49 Cal. Rptr. 2d 377, 909
P.2d 981].)

   Where incidents of undue influence are alleged, the following rules apply
regarding the burden of proof. " '[W]here the relationship between the parties
is that of parent and child and the parent relies on the child for advice in
business matters, a gift inter vivos ... which is without consideration and
where the parent does not have independent advice, is presumed to be fraudulent
and to have been made under undue influence.' [Citation.] The burden of proof
then shifts to the child 'to show that the transaction was free from fraud and
undue influence, and in all particulars fair.' [Citation.] Put differently, this
presumption may be rebutted by 'evidence that the act in question had its
genesis in the mind of the parent and that he was not goaded to a completion by
any act of such child.' [Citation.] The child's burden of proof is by a
preponderance of the evidence. [Citation.]" (Estate of Stephens, supra, 28
Cal.4th 665, 677, fn. omitted.) We first set out the trial court's analysis of
the evidence and the reasoning in its statement of decision, and we then discuss
Objectors' various challenges to the judgment.

   The trial court first ruled that there was a fiduciary relationship between
Young and Objectors, based on Evans's position as trustee of her assets, and
Charles's management of those assets. The court then found that the evidence
supported the theories of both intentional misrepresentation and concealment.
The court reasoned that there was no evidence showing why Young actually  needed
to avoid taxes or to seek specialized asset preservation, such as these land
trusts supposedly accomplished. Instead, the result of the transactions was that
she lost her lease income, her brokerage account, and title to her property. The
court ruled that the 1993 trusts were null and void as the product of fraud
and/or undue influence, so that their assets must be returned to the Estate. The
court noted the evidence was that the BVH and BHI trusts were incomplete and
fraudulent, based upon the testimony of the supposed settlor, Larry Bemis, which
it found was credible about his lack of participation here. In any case, Bemis
did  not own the Young property so he could not have transferred any of her
interests.

   With regard to the 1995 changes in the trust documents, the court found that
several factors supported conclusions of undue influence by Evans and/or
Charles. The 1995 concentration of all the beneficial interests in IVM was not
in Young's best interests. Charles received concealed fees paid by Evans, who
controlled IVM assets as well as the beneficial interest of all the land assets.
The court found that the pattern of supposedly "poor economic decisions" from
1992 through 1996 was indicative of fraud and undue influence, because there was
no perceptible benefit created for Young or her heirs, but instead only for
Charles and Evans. The court stated that the evidence suggested Stephen was left
out of the loop of information and Objectors isolated Young from him.

   Finally, the court reiterated that any evidence was lacking that Young had
any unusual tax problems or any particular need for asset protection. However,
there was evidence that Charles was having ongoing problems with the IRS, so
that Young had believed it necessary to limit his inheritance rights in her
previous estate plan (only if he had no tax liability). The people who set up
the trusts at large expense were "questionable," and no California lawyer was
ever consulted in preparation of these documents. Charles benefited monetarily
from his management of IVM, and Evans had control of the real property through a
series of questionably motivated transactions. For example, the Caribbean
islands certificate holder of IVM was not shown to be a functioning company that
ever existed, as opposed to an arm of Stokes or Evans. These facts as a whole
revealed a clear pattern demonstrating fraud and/or undue influence. The court
therefore found that Objectors had failed to carry their burden of showing that
the transactions were free of fraud or undue influence, but rather, breach of
fiduciary duty to Young and the Estate had been proven.

   The court issued an order nullifying the trusts and returning the real
property and beneficial interests to the Estate. The court also issued a
restraining order restricting Objectors from taking action with regard to the
personal property, pending the accounting that was ordered. (The damages ruling
is discussed in pt. III, post.)

   On appeal, Objectors contend that they made only true representations, and
that the various business deals fell through for economic reasons that were not
their fault. They also challenge the justifiable reliance element of fraud, by
saying Young and Stephen signed all the relevant documents and were told about
their substance. Objectors assert there is no proof of any damage here, because
the land has not yet been sold, so some beneficial interest might be retained by
the Estate. Finally, Objectors argue that they were not the procuring cause of
Young's actions, and thus the record should not support any finding of undue
influence. (Estate of Stephens, supra, 28 Cal.4th 665, 677.)

   None of these arguments answers the particular, crucial problems identified
by the trial court. Objectors never identified why Young had an unfair tax
burden or other need for extensive trust services. Charles never knew her tax
bracket. By the time Young died, all the lease and brokerage money was gone and
the property transferred away, but there were no discernible advantages to Young
provided, other than some minimal property management services in return for her
payment of rent to IVM and her management of BHI. Much more than an unfavorable
business climate in Charles's private loan  business was shown to explain the
loss of assets.

   Next, the evidence taken as a whole showed that although Young and Stephen
signed the documents that they were given, sometimes without the appropriate
supporting materials, they did so under a misapprehension that the various
transactions were consistent with Young's known estate plan, to benefit her four
children equally. She never showed any intention to change that estate plan.
This misapprehension was created by the false representations and undue
influence of Objectors, as the evidence clearly showed. Third, ample proof of
damage was made in the form of loss of monetary assets and title to the real
property, even though it was not yet sold out from under the Estate. The trial
court, by ordering an accounting, impliedly found that substantial evidence
supported a finding of damage to the Estate, even if some expenditures had
properly been made for preservation of the real property, and in light of
potential past or future tax liabilities.

   Finally, to the extent that Objectors argue that they were not the procuring
causes of Young's actions, they fail to rebut the circumstantial evidence that
these transactions in part and in whole were entirely disadvantageous to  Young,
and that she would not have entered into them if she had fully understood that
they controverted her known prior estate plan. In conclusion, substantial
evidence, both direct and circumstantial, supports the trial court's conclusions
in its statement of decision.

III

CROSS-APPEAL

   The Estate challenges the judgment with respect to the trial court's rulings
on the double damages issues. First, it contends that when the trial court
agreed to bifurcate the issue of net worth for punitive damages purposes, at the
request of Objectors, this amounted to an implied bifurcation ruling regarding
liability and damages as to another type of damage request that is also punitive
in nature, i.e., double damages under section 859. Next, the Estate argues that
the accounting it had requested automatically triggered an obligation of the
trial court to, in effect, defer the determination of damages under section 859
until the liability determination was completed under section 850. Those
arguments are made under a theory of statutory interpretation, under which
courts will construe related statutory provisions together, on a de novo basis,
in an effort to implement the intent of the Legislature. (Dyna-Med, Inc. v. Fair
Employment & Housing Com. (1987) 43 Cal.3d 1379, 1386-1387 [241 Cal. Rptr. 67,
743 P.2d 1323] (Dyna-Med).)

   Further, the Estate claims that the order denying its motion to reopen the
proceedings for further evidence is an abuse of discretion under these
circumstances. The record and applicable precedents must be considered in
evaluating such an exercise of judicial discretion, which involves the " '
"exercise of discriminating judgment within the bounds of reason. [¶] To
exercise the power of judicial discretion all the material facts in evidence
must be known and considered, together also with the legal principles essential
to an informed, intelligent and just decision." ? ' [Citations.] 'The
appropriate [appellate] test for abuse of discretion is whether the trial court
exceeded the bounds of reason.' [Citations.] [¶] ... '... To be entitled to
relief on appeal from the result of an alleged abuse of discretion it must
clearly appear that the injury resulting from such a wrong is sufficiently grave
to amount to a manifest miscarriage of justice ... . ' [Citation.]"  (Estate of
Gilkison (1998) 65 Cal.App.4th 1443, 1448-1449 [77 Cal. Rptr. 2d 463].)

   To address these issues, we evaluate the manner in which the trial was
conducted on the merits of the substantive issues, in light of applicable rules
of practice.

A. Litigation/Procedure

   We first examine the extent to which the double damages issue was presented
to the trial court in the pleadings and in trial preparation. The amended
petition requested that the real property held in the land trusts be transferred
to the Estate and it sought to quiet title to those eight parcels of real
property, worth over $ 1 million. Orders were requested directing Objectors to
transfer to the Estate any remaining personal property. Breach of fiduciary duty
was pled, and an accounting of all revenues and expenses for the three
operational or business trusts was sought. Punitive damages were sought, along
with an order holding Objectors liable to the Estate "for twice the value of the
property recovered hereby" under section 859. 7

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   Before
oral argument, Objector Evans filed a motion seeking to have this court dismiss
the cross-appeal as to him, based on the pleadings and records in his personal
bankruptcy case (In re Evans (Bankr. S.D.Cal. 2005, No. 05-07441-JM7)). At oral
argument, counsel for the Estate did not object to such a dismissal as to Evans
individually, and it is granted. However, with respect to the further
proceedings that will occur upon remand, we express no opinion as to the extent
of Evans's remaining obligations to participate as trustee of Objector IVM, and
leave that issue to the trial court to resolve.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   We first observe that the trial record is somewhat sparse, in that the
opening and closing statements of counsel were not transcribed by the reporter,
and the trial briefs have not been included in the appendices provided. The
reporter's transcript shows that the first order of business at trial was to
discuss and bifurcate the punitive damages claims, as to any evidence of net
worth of the Objectors, or their profits. Evidently, no formal motion in limine
was brought, but the trial court agreed with Objectors that it would be
inappropriate at that time to consider evidence of their net worth or financial
conditions for purposes of punitive damages. However, evidence of financial
transactions that were relevant to the trust allegations of undue influence was
allowed. Eventually, counsel for the Estate confirmed with the court that it was
seeking double damages provided under the Probate Code, as opposed to punitive
damages. (§ 859.)

   Midway through trial, Objectors made a motion for judgment, which was argued
to the court. (Code Civ. Proc., § 631.8.) Objectors sought, at a minimum, to
have the court rule in their favor on the personal property claims raised, since
they argued Young always knew where all of the money  was going. They sought
this result even if the court still had to rule on the issue of title to the
property, i.e., whether it stayed in the land trust or not, as the main issue at
that point was who should hold the beneficial interest in the land trusts. The
court then inquired of counsel for the Estate what relief was currently being
sought, in addition to invalidating the transfers of title to the real property
into the land trusts. Counsel for the Estate responded that they were seeking an
accounting, and he mentioned two stages: the preliminary issues of undue
influence, and then a later proceeding to determine whether Objectors had
received money from the Estate, and the issues of whether those funds had
properly been spent for the benefit of the Estate, or should instead be
surcharged against Objectors.  The court then inquired, apparently in reference
to the arguments about the Estate's money that had been spent, "and then, in
terms of double damages, you're not asking that that be doubled at this point?
We're talking mainly about the land?" Counsel for the Estate replied, "We're
talking about the land in the context of double damages, Your Honor." The court
then denied the motion for judgment and testimony resumed. 8

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -8   Objectors
argue that the Estate's reference to Objectors' own motion to bifurcate punitive
damages should not be argued on appeal as giving rise to a right to bifurcation
as to the Estate. Objectors argue that a party is normally not permitted "to
change [his/her] position and adopt a new and different theory on appeal"
because doing so would be unfair both to the court and to the opposing litigant.
Exceptions are made when questions of law only are presented on the facts
appearing in the record. (Brown v. Boren (1999) 74 Cal.App.4th 1303, 1316 [88
Cal. Rptr. 2d 758].) Here, there is no new theory being raised on appeal, but
only a particular citation to the existing record for purposes of arguing a
point.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Throughout the trial, the Estate's evident purpose was to show the existence
of undue influence, fraud, and concealment, and to seek relief in the form of an
order to Objectors to return the real property to the Estate, along with related
personal property. At all times, Objectors contested the allegations of fraud
and undue influence, contending that Young had voluntarily placed the property
into these trust arrangements and had a good understanding of all the
transactions, and that all monies were properly spent. It was not disputed that
approximately $ 500,000 from Young's brokerage account had been expended by the
trusts, nor that The Color Spot lease proceeds were spent. However, there was
never any inquiry into the current financial conditions of Objectors, due to the
bifurcation order.

   At the conclusion of trial, the court's tentative and final statements of
decisions extensively analyzed all those evidentiary issues regarding the
probable intent of the decedent, Young. Tentatively, the court ordered that
double damages would be awarded under section 859, based on Objectors' fraud in
1993 and 1995, and "an appraisal of the real property will be required to
determine the value of the real property so that proper damages may be
determined."

   Upon receipt of the tentative decision dated March 3, 2005, Objectors took
the position that the Estate had rested its case without presenting evidence of
the value of the real properties, upon which to base any double damages request.
After further proceedings in which the extent of the bifurcation order regarding
punitive damages was disputed, the trial court concluded that counsel for the
Estate had failed to present any evidence regarding the value of the real
properties, and no double damages could be awarded due to that failure of proof.
The remaining requests regarding the personal property (funds, etc.) were denied
without prejudice pending an accounting to be prepared upon the judgment
becoming final in the trial court or after appellate review.

   The Estate brought a motion to reopen the proceedings to take further
evidence regarding the value of the real property. It argued that at trial, the
court had acknowledged that the eight parcels of real property could be worth a
little or a lot, depending on whether the lots were suitable for construction.
Counsel for the Estate submitted declarations in support of reopening. Its
probate attorney stated that he had been unable to obtain records for over four
years from Objectors about trust activities and expenditures, so it had not yet
been possible to determine the  productivity or profit potential of the subject
real property or its fair market value. He had not spent money on appraisals
because he believed he should preserve the assets of the Estate before doing so.
The Estate's trial counsel submitted a declaration about his belief that he had
to prevail on the petition to determine title and meet the criteria of section
859, so the issue of the value of the property or potential double damages
awards could next be considered. In counsel's opinion, the accounting phase of
the case would be the proper place for valuation of the real property and a
double damages assessment, as it was not possible to complete those inquiries
until the accounting was completed regarding income received from the real
property over the years. Finally, trial counsel sought relief based on
inadvertence or inexcusable neglect, since it had been reasonable for counsel to
believe that the double damages assessment would be made in the accounting phase
of the case. Objectors opposed the motion, arguing proof of value of the real
property was essential before any damages could be calculated or doubled.

   The motion to reopen was denied in July 2005, for lack of a good cause
showing, since the only accounting that was requested in the petition specified
the personal property, not the real property. The trial court correctly rejected
Objectors' position that section 859, enacted in 1994, should not be applied
retroactively. The court noted that section 859 was the successor version to
section 9869, to the same effect.

B. Statutory Scheme and Interpretation

   There is very little case law interpreting these statutes, section 859 and
its predecessors. However, some version of the double damages statute in probate
has been operative since 1850. The 1850 version provides: "If any person, before
the granting of letters testamentary, or of administration, shall embezzle or
alienate any of the moneys, goods, chattels, or effects of any deceased person,
he shall stand chargeable, and be liable to the action of the executor or
administrator of the estate, for double the value of the property so embezzled
or alienated, to be recovered for the benefit of the estate." (Stats. 1850, 1st
Sess., ch. 129, ch. IV, § 117, p. 386.) Former section 9869 (Stats. 1994, ch.
806, § 32, p. 4019), enacted in 1994 but repealed and reenacted in 2001 as
current section 859, was similar.

   The challenged ruling must be analyzed in context of the statutory nature of
the proceeding. Under section 800, the court sitting in probate is a court of
general jurisdiction and has the same power and authority with respect to the
proceedings as otherwise provided by law for a superior court. Section 1000
applies the rules of practice found in the Code of Civil Procedure to probate
trials. When a petition is brought under section 850, the issues include, as
relevant here, whether the decedent died having a claim to real or personal
property, title to or possession of which is held by another. (§ 850, subd.
(a)(2)(D).) Pursuant to section 855, "[a]n action brought under this part may
include claims, causes of action, or matters that are normally raised in a civil
action to the extent that the matters are related factually to the subject
matter of a petition filed under this part."

   Upon a sufficient showing, the probate court "shall make an order authorizing
and directing the  personal representative or other fiduciary, or the person
having title to or possession of the property, to execute a conveyance or
transfer to the person entitled thereto, or granting other appropriate relief."
(§ 856.) Such an order is prima facie evidence of the correctness of the
proceedings and of the authority of the personal representative or other
fiduciary or other person to make the conveyance or transfer, and the order
vests the person obtaining the order with the right to the possession of the
property according to the terms of the order, "as if the property had been
conveyed or transferred in accordance with the terms of the order." (§ 857,
subds. (a), (b).)

   Next, under section 859, a particular form of damages is authorized: "If a
court finds that a person has in bad faith wrongfully taken, concealed, or
disposed of property belonging to the estate of a decedent, conservatee, minor,
or trust, the person shall be liable for twice the value of the property
recovered by an action under this part. The remedy provided in this section
shall be in addition to any other remedies available in law to a trustee,
guardian or conservator, or personal representative or other successor in
interest of a decedent."

   The relief requested in the original and amended petitions included an
accounting of the revenues and expenses regarding the real properties, and for
the three business or operational trusts. The amended petition added a prayer
for punitive damages and a declaration of liability to the Estate "for twice the
value of the property recovered hereby" under section 859.

   A comprehensive statutory scheme, section 1060 et seq., governs all accounts
filed with the probate court. These must include a summary of account,
supporting schedules, and a petition or report accompanying the account,
according to prescribed formats. (14 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (10th ed. 2005)
Wills and Probate, § 384, p. 467.) "Filing an account is deemed to include a
petition requesting approval of the account. The account may include additional
petitions for authorization, instructions, or confirmation authorized by the
Probate Code, including a request for an order for compensation of the fiduciary
and the attorney. [Citation.]" (Id. at p. 468.) In cases in which fraud or
breach of fiduciary duty are found, grounds for an accounting are proven. (Union
Bank v. Superior Court (1995) 31 Cal.App.4th 573, 593 [37 Cal. Rptr. 2d 653].)

   To evaluate the trial procedure used here, we measure it against the
statutory standards of section 850 et seq., and also the importation of civil
procedure rules of practice into probate proceedings. Our inquiry is whether the
Estate failed to prove an essential element of its claim under section 859. To
answer this question, we first apply rules of statutory interpretation, and then
analyze the exercise of discretion in this case. In construing a statute, we
seek to ascertain legislative intent in order to implement the purpose of the
law: "In determining such intent, a court must look first to the words of the
statute themselves, giving to the language its usual, ordinary import and
according significance, if possible, to every word, phrase and sentence in
pursuance of the legislative purpose. A construction making some words
surplusage is to be avoided. The words of the statute must be construed in
context, keeping in mind the statutory purpose, and statutes or statutory
sections relating to the same subject must be harmonized, both internally and
with each other, to the extent possible. [Citations.] Where uncertainty exists
consideration should be given to the consequences that will flow from a
particular interpretation. [Citation.]" (Dyna-Med, supra, 43 Cal.3d 1379,
1386-1387.)

   In distinguishing between types of available remedies, the Supreme Court has
utilized a dictionary definition of "remedy" as " 'something that corrects or
counteracts an evil: corrective, counteractive, reparation  ... . [T]he legal
means to recover a right or to prevent or obtain redress for a wrong. ...'
[Citation.]" (Dyna-Med, supra, 43 Cal.3d 1379, 1387.) In contrast, punitive
damages "are neither equitable nor corrective; punitive damages serve but one
purpose--to punish and through punishment, to deter. 'Punitive damages by
definition are not intended to compensate the injured party, but rather to
punish the tortfeasor whose wrongful action was intentional or malicious, and to
deter him and others from similar extreme conduct.' [Citations.]" (Id. at pp.
1387-1388.) Using these considerations, the accounting requested here, as well
as the transfer of property, were remedial in nature. The double damages were
punitive in nature. We find support for this conclusion in several sections of
California Trust and Probate Litigation (Cont.Ed.Bar 2007) section 13.46, pages
430 to 431, summarizing the use of punitive damages against trustees or personal
representatives (under § 10381), and including in the same section a discussion
of double damages under section 859, for bad faith taking of an estate's
property. Also, the same treatise, at section 15.19, pages 501 to 502, explains
that sureties are not subject to double liability under section 859, but only
for actual loss, and further explains, "[a] surety is liable for actual loss,
not for damages that punish a representative for intentional misconduct."
(Italics added.) The doubling of damages is a punitive measure. (Also see
comparable damages provisions in the antitrust and unfair competition fields,
Bus. & Prof. Code, §§ 16750, 17082.) 9

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -9   Business
and Professions Code section 16750, subdivision (a) allows a successful
antitrust plaintiff to recover three times the damages sustained by him or her,
as well as interest on actual damages, and injunctive relief, along with
attorney fees and costs of the suit. In Business and Professions Code section
17082, a successful plaintiff in an unfair competition action may recover three
times the amount of the actual damages, if any, sustained by the plaintiff, as
well as three times the actual damages, if any, sustained by any person who has
assigned to the plaintiff a claim for such damages. Proof of the underlying
damages can be made at the same time as the multiplier is applied. Our case is
different, because there was no apparent Estate entitlement to the property at
the outset of trial, and the Estate had to prove its entitlement to title before
it could adequately address the value of its damages claims.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In the annotations to Civil Code section 3294, defining exemplary damages,
many cross-references are given to other provisions that establish liability for
damages that are punitive in nature. Among these are the predecessor statute to
section 859, former section 9869 (as well as § 10381, establishing liability for
double damages for fraud in the sale of estate property). The fact that some
statutory damages provisions are punitive in nature does not itself establish
the proper procedure for adjudicating them. With respect to punitive damages
under Civil Code section 3294, there is an express provision for bifurcation
under that code's section 3295, which has  two major purposes: promoting
judicial efficiency in bifurcating liability and damages, and also allowing a
protective order for personal privacy in a defendant's financial affairs. The
order of bifurcation does not prohibit the introduction of prima facie evidence
to establish the underlying case for punitive damages. (Civ. Code, § 3295, subd.
(b).)

   In the case before us, the question is what prima facie evidence was required
to establish the case for double damages, and under section 859, a wrongful
taking had to be established first, and then an order to provide for recovery of
the property to the Estate. (§§ 856, 857.) Until that point, valuation of the
subject property was not  necessary, only an inquiry about title. The fact that
section 859 expressly provides that its remedy is in addition to other remedies
available also supports a bifurcation procedure. Here, the judicial economy
factor is paramount over any protective order function, since Objectors created
several layers of trusts with beneficial interests, such that their personal
financial involvement and condition could not be determined without a
preliminary investigation into the validity of the beneficial interests of the
trusts. These factors support a statutory reading of section 859 that the
Estate's right to title of the property should be established before any
subsequent consideration of damages, which in turn would defer the valuation
portion of the trial.

   A federal bankruptcy court has reached similar conclusions in In re Pereira
and Melo Dairy (Bankr. E.D.Cal. 2005) 325 B.R. 1, 4-5, dealing with a
conservatorship and the proper order of proceedings under section 850 et seq.
The court opined, "Once property is recovered under Section 850, it becomes
'property belonging to the estate of ... a conservatee' and a double recovery is
available if the court then finds that the property was wrongfully taken in bad
faith. The double recovery is not available in a vacuum. It requires that the
conservator first prevail under Section 850. 'Damages equal to twice the value
of any property allegedly "taken[,] concealed or disposed of" are recoverable in
§ 850 proceedings from the persons who in "bad faith" deprived the estate of
same.' [Citation.]" (italics added.) The bankruptcy court also noted that
"double recovery is unavailable until the court determines that the property is
recoverable under Section 850. For that to occur, the court must determine that
the transfers are somehow defective." (Ibid.)

   These distinctions are important because the Estate's petition sought a
number of different kinds of relief, some remedial and some punitive, and the
requirements for showing entitlement to those forms of relief differ, as well as
the timing for making such showings. Specifically, the language of section 859
requires a showing of bad faith taking of estate property before double damages
may be assessed. On a preliminary basis, we agree with the Estate's  position
that the plain language of section 859 contemplates that a showing of liability
should be made before the damages phase begins, because a finding of bad faith
taking of an estate's property is anticipated, along with adjudication of a
right to recovery of that property, before a damages assessment will be made of
liability "for twice the value of the property recovered by an action under this
part." The conditions set forth in sections 850 through 857 must be proven
before a damages entitlement under section 859 becomes operative and can be
adjudicated as to amount.

   It is admittedly difficult to apply the statutory language to this set of
facts, because any punitive effect upon Objectors must be filtered through the
elaborate trust structure that they set up. The liability determination had to
take all those factors into account, which provides another reason that
bifurcation would have been appropriate here. In any case, a plain reading of
the statutory language is not the end of the inquiry, and we next turn to the
rules regarding the discretionary power of the court to control the order of
proof, as well as the obligations of the parties to carry their respective
burdens at trial. We may then determine what result is in keeping with the
purpose of the statute.

C. Conduct of Trial; Discretion of Court

   Code of Civil Procedure section 598 allows a party to seek an order before
trial  "that the trial of any issue or any part thereof shall precede the trial
of any other issue or any part thereof in the case," where "the convenience of
witnesses, the ends of justice, or the economy and efficiency of handling the
litigation would be promoted thereby ... [disregarding special defenses, not
applicable here]." At any time, the trial court may make such an order, on its
own motion. In 7 Witkin, California Procedure (4th ed. 1997) Trial, section 168,
pages 195 to 197, the authors explain the purpose of bifurcation where both
liability and damages are contested: that "time spent in trying the issue of
damages is wasted if the verdict or finding is against liability." (Id. at p.
195.) Particularly where punitive damages are sought, "the defendant may request
preclusion of evidence as to financial condition until after actual damages are
awarded and the defendant is found guilty of malice, oppression, or fraud.
[Citations.]" (Id. at p. 196.)

   In Grappo v. Coventry Financial Corp. (1991) 235 Cal. App. 3d 496 [286 Cal.
Rptr. 714], the appellate court explained that bifurcation can be ordered when
liability and damages are both in dispute, even where no formal motion under
Code of Civil Procedure section 598 was brought. The trial court in that case
properly acted on its own motion, by exercising its discretion to regulate the
order of proof (Evid. Code, § 320), and to order separate trials of a cause of
action or issue (Code Civ. Proc., § 1048, subd. (b)). In that case,  the issue
was whether a party had any interest in the subject property, which was
preliminary to deciding a question of priority of the interests. (Grappo, supra,
at p. 504.)

   Likewise, in Rosenfeld, Meyer & Susman v. Cohen (1987) 191 Cal. App. 3d 1035,
1052 [237 Cal. Rptr. 14], the court acknowledged that trial courts have broad
discretion in deciding whether to reopen evidence. It found on the facts before
it that no such discretion had been abused when the trial court denied a motion
to reopen the trial for presentation of further evidence. The party requesting
to have the matter reopened was shown to have been on notice several months
before trial that it might have the burden of proof on the particular issue
involved, but it had done nothing. It was reasonable for the court to conclude
the party's approach was a strategic decision or informed choice of trial
tactics, that it took that chance, and for the court to deny relief accordingly.
(Id. at pp. 1052-1053.)

   Acknowledging that the trial court had the discretion to control the order of
proof and the proper organization of the issues before it, we next turn to the
role of the parties in making the appropriate requests of the court to exercise
an informed discretion. Here, there was major confusion at trial about the scope
of the issues in the petition, and the relationship of the requests for punitive
damages and double damages under section 859. Arguably, counsel for the Estate
made some unwarranted assumptions that he could "piggy-back" upon the motion for
bifurcation made by Objectors, regarding punitive damages. It is apparent that
counsel for the Estate did not adequately apprise the trial court of his
statutory interpretation of the method of proof for double damages required by
section 859, even though this court does not have a record of opening and
closing statements or the trial briefs. We are reluctant to criticize the trial
court for an abuse of discretion when there was no express request made to
bifurcate the issue of liability from the issue of double damages.

   Nevertheless, when the nature of those double damages is properly understood
as punitive in nature, the need for separate liability and damages phases
becomes  clear, and it was eventually made clear at trial, at least by the time
of the motion to reopen. Specifically, the major focus of the petition was to
regain title to the real property that had been transferred to the trusts,
pursuant to undue influence, fraud, and concealment. It is understandable that
the Estate's trial preparation here did not involve an appraisal of the land or
expert testimony about land value, when it was unclear whether title would be
regained. At the time, the Estate had no cash assets, only the claim to title to
real property. Moreover, it was admittedly difficult to prepare such valuation
opinions because of the complex set of transactions before the court that
purported to establish different beneficial interests in the land trusts and
the business trusts and alternately, the real property. Those transactions had
to be unwound before the issue of the property value could easily be addressed,
even by an owner of property, whoever that was. (Evid. Code, § 813, subd. (a)(2)
[an owner of property can give opinions as to its value]; see 1 Witkin, Cal.
Evidence (4th ed. 2000) Opinion Evidence, § 98 et seq., pp. 646-662.) This set
of circumstances amounted to good cause to reopen the matter for further
evidence of property value.

   In any case, when we analyze this statutory scheme, we must take into account
its evident purpose, to effectuate the intent of the decedent and to prevent
looting of estates. Here, considerations of judicial economy support treating a
request for double damages like a request for punitive damages, in which the
damages phase need not be processed unless there is an underlying finding of
liability. Without an immediate need to evaluate the property that was to be
returned to the proper owner, the Estate, but only if it prevailed, it would
have been risky for the Estate to incur the expenses of obtaining appraisals.
Although the trial court was concerned that the Estate could be allowed a
"second bite at the apple," if the proceedings were reopened on property value,
there is no procedural unfairness in requiring further proceedings to establish
the value of the real property, since that issue was never reached before, and
since an accounting is still anticipated to occur upon finality of this
liability portion of the litigation. The accounting will presumably be helpful
in establishing the value of the real property, because it will address whether
the property had income and expenses that shed light upon its value at the
relevant time periods.

   For all of these reasons, we determine that the trial court erred in its
statutory interpretation that an element of the Estate's claim under section 859
was proof of value of the subject real estate at the liability phase of
adjudicating the petition. Rather, the more appropriate approach was to
determine the merits of the petition to reestablish title to the real property
in the Estate, and then to defer the valuation process until the accounting
phase of the proceedings; it is not possible to double an amount without knowing
what it is. Further, double damages are punitive in nature, or a "species" of
punitive damages, and therefore section 859 should be read to allow these issues
to be addressed separately. At all times, bifurcation and the order of proof
remain in the discretion of the trial court, and we express no opinion on
whether these issues could sometimes be tried together, upon an appropriate
case. We decide only that under the circumstances of this case, the trial court
should have allowed the evidence to be reopened for the purpose of valuing the
property and then setting a double damages amount under section 859, since the
remainder of the requirements for such damages had previously been established.

 DISPOSITION

   The judgment is reversed for further proceedings consistent with the views
herein expressed, and the trial court is directed to modify the judgment to
permit appropriate proceedings to establish the value of the real property
taken, for the purpose of calculating double damages for which liability was
previously established; such further proceedings shall also resolve the
bankruptcy discharge issues as to Evans individually, and shall be held in
conjunction with the previously ordered accounting. In all other respects, the
judgment is affirmed. Objectors to pay all costs on appeal.

   McConnell, P. J., and O'Rourke, J., concurred.


                              36 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              RAYMOND JOHN ANDERSON, Plaintiff and Respondent, v.
          DEPARTMENT OF REAL ESTATE et al., Defendants and Appellants

                                 Civ. No. 54049

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division One

            93 Cal. App. 3d 696; 155 Cal. Rptr. 307; 1979 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1803


                                  May 11, 1979

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     As Modified May 23 and May 30, 1979.  Appellants'
Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court was Denied July 19, 1979.  Mosk, J.,
was of the Opinion that the Petition should be Granted.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Ventura County, No. SP 48412, Steven J.
Stone, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1) Brokers § 2 -- Definitions and Distinctions -- Advance Fee Rental Agent.
--A real estate broker, whose license was on inactive status, was an advance fee
rental agent within the meaning of Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10131.2, providing that
a real estate broker is also a person who collects an advance fee in connection
with the lease of real property by advertisement, and Cal. Admin. Code, tit. 10,
art. 17, § 2850, providing that an advance fee rental agent is a person who
furnishes rental information to prospective tenants for a fee in advance.  The
real estate broker obtained information from landlords and newspaper advertising
respecting residential property that was available for rent and compiled the
information into a list of available rentals which he sold to clients for a
subscription fee.

(2a) (2b) Brokers § 6 -- Regulation of Brokers -- Disciplinary Proceedings --
Constitutionality of Statute and Regulations Defining Advance Fee Rental Agents.
-- Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10131.2, providing that a real estate broker is also a
person who collects an advance fee for the lease of real property by
advertisement, and Cal. Admin. Code, tit. 10, art. 17, § 2850, providing that an
advance fee rental agent is a person who furnishes rental information to
prospective tenants for a fee in advance, are so overly broad as to violate the
constitutional protection of commercial speech, when applied to an activity
which involves no more than the ascertainment of available residential housing,
the publication of lists of available units, the solicitation of customers for
the lists, and the sale of the lists for a fee.  Thus, the trial court properly
issued a writ of administrative mandamus annulling a determination of the
Department of Real Estate revoking a real estate broker's inactive real estate
license for acting without an active license as required by the statute and
regulation. The record indicated the broker obtained information from landlords
and newspaper advertising respecting residential property that was available for
rent and compiled the information into a list of available rentals which he sold
to clients for a subscription price.

(3) Administrative Law § 83 -- Judicial Review and Relief -- Limitations on
Availability -- Preserving and Presenting Issues Before Agencies --
Constitutional Issue.  --Failure to raise a constitutional issue during an
administrative proceeding will not prevent a party from raising it in judicial
review proceedings of the agency's action.

(4) Constitutional Law § 55 -- First Amendment and Other Fundamental Rights of
Citizens -- Scope and Nature -- Freedom of Speech and Expression -- Commercial
Speech.  --Speech that does no more than propose a commercial transaction is not
removed from the protection of U.S. Const., First Amend.  In part, commercial
speech is afforded constitutional protection due to the listener-consumer's
concern for its free flow.  This protection extends to advertising. Some
limitation on commercial speech is permissible so long as the regulation is
written narrowly and explicitly, in furtherance of a legitimate police power
purpose.  Where the regulation takes the form of licensure, it must set forth
definite, objective guidelines for the issuance of the license which as a
minimum must bear a rational relationship to a valid governmental purpose.

COUNSEL: Evelle J. Younger and George Deukmejian, Attorneys General, Arthur C.
de Goede, Assistant Attorney General, and Richard W. Bakke, Deputy Attorney
General, for Defendants and Appellants.

Friedman & Warner, Daniel Friedman, Lascher & Wilner, Edward L. Lascher, Wendy
Cole Wilner and Robert N. Alt, Jr., for Plaintiff and Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Thompson, J., with Lillie, Acting P. J., concurring.
Concurring and dissenting opinion by Hanson J.

OPINION BY: THOMPSON

OPINION

     This appeal is from a judgment in administrative mandate ( Code Civ. Proc.,
§ 1094.5) which overturns a decision of appellant Department of Real Estate. In
addition to issues of applicability of and statutory authority for the
department's regulation 2850 (Cal. Admin. Code, tit. 10, art. 17, § 2850)
requiring licensure of "advance fee rental agents" as defined in the regulation,
the case at bench raises an apparently novel issue of the validity of the
regulation in light of First Amendment protection of commercial speech.

    We conclude that the regulation is authorized by statute and that it covers
respondent's activity.  We conclude also, however, that as applied by the
department to respondent's  activity, the key statute and regulation infringe
upon respondent's right to freedom of commercial speech by imposing overly
restrictive requirements for licensure. Accordingly, we affirm the action of the
trial court which annuls a department determination revoking respondent's
inactive real estate license for violation of the licensure requirement.

Facts

   As required in judicial review of administrative action affecting a
fundamental vested right (here the revocation of a real estate broker's
license), the trial court applied the independent judgment test in determining
the applicable facts.  ( Bixby v. Pierno (1971) 4 Cal.3d 130 [93 Cal.Rptr. 234,
481 P.2d 242].) Because neither the department nor respondent challenge the
findings of fact of the trial court, we summarize the facts as recorded in the
findings.

   Raymond John Anderson, doing business as Homefinders and Homefinder's Guide,
was licensed as a real estate broker by the Department of Real Estate. Effective
July 7, 1975, Anderson caused his license to be placed on inactive status.

   In the period from July 7, 1975 through February 29, 1976, Anderson conducted
a business under the name of Homefinders in which he obtained information from
landlords and newspaper advertising respecting residential property that was
available for rent and compiled the information into a list of available rentals
which he sold to clients for a subscription price.  In four separate instances,
people who answered Homefinders' newspaper ads offering houses for rent
contacted Homefinders and were solicited to come to a Homefinders' office where
each would be provided with rental information if he became a subscriber to the
Homefinders' service for the prescribed fee.

   Three of the four people so solicited after answering a Homefinders' ad paid
subscription fees of $ 25 or $ 30.  Each of them received a list of rental
properties and a "rental information contract." There were some inaccuracies in
the compilation.  None of the three or four persons succeeded in arranging a
rental of property from the lists furnished.  In two of the instances, the
registration fee was not refunded upon request.   In the third, it was.
Homefinders was not the owner of any of the properties listed as available for
rent by it.

   Concluding that Anderson's activity violated its regulation governing the
conduct of "advance fee rental agents" because it was conducted without the
imprimatur of an active real estate license, the department instituted
disciplinary proceedings against him.  After a hearing, the department found the
charges to be true and revoked Anderson's inactive real estate license.

   On judicial review of the administrative action, the trial court found the
facts as recited but concluded that the conduct was not a cause for discipline.
It entered its judgment in the form of a peremptory writ ordering the department
to annul its action revoking Anderson's license.

Regulatory Scheme

   The Real Estate Commissioner is empowered to control the issuance of licenses
to real estate brokers and real estate salesmen. Applicants for either license
may be required to establish their honesty and truthfulness and must pass an
examination.  ( Bus. & Prof. Code, §§ 10152, 10153, 10153.7.) They are examined
on "[appropriate] knowledge of the English language, including reading, writing
and spelling and of arithmetical computations common to real estate and business
opportunity practices.  [para. ] An understanding of the principles of real
estate and business opportunity conveyancing, the general purposes and general
legal effect of agency contracts, deposit receipts, deeds, mortgages, deeds of
trust, chattel mortgages, bills of sale, land contracts of sale and leases, and
of the principles of business and land economics and appraisals.  [para. ] A
general and fair understanding of the obligations between principal and agent .
. . and the cannons [sic] of business ethics pertaining [to real estate and
business opportunity practice]." ( Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10153.)

    It is unlawful for any person to engage in conduct requiring a real estate
broker's or salesman's license unless he is licensed.  ( Bus. & Prof. Code, §
10130.) In 1961, the traditional definition of activity of a real estate broker
was broadened.  Section 10131.2 was added to the Business and Professions Code
stating: "A real estate broker . . . is also a person who engages in the
business of claiming, demanding, charging, receiving, collecting or contracting
for the collection of an advance fee in connection with any employment
undertaken to promote the sale or lease of real property . . . by advance fee
listing, advertisement or other  offering to sell, lease, exchange or rent
property . . . or to obtain a loan or loans thereon." Read with the provisions
of Business and Professions Code section 10131, subdivision (b), which defines a
broker's activities to include solicitation "of places for rent, or . . . for
prospective tenants," section 10131.2 covers the activity of an "advance fee
rental agent," i.e., a person who "furnishes rental information to prospective
tenants whereby they are obligated to pay a fee in advance of services whether
or not a rental is obtained.  . . ." (Cal. Admin. Code, tit. 10, art. 17, §
2850; Review of Selected 1965 Code Legislation (Cont.Ed.Bar 1965) p. 14.) 1 The
commissioner's regulations provide that, "No real estate salesman shall act as
an 'advance fee rental agent' unless the salesman's employing broker . . . is
actively engaged in the real estate or rental business at the same office.  . .
." (Cal. Admin. Code, tit. 10, art. 17, § 2851.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   "Senate
Bill 269 [Stats. 1965, ch. 172, pp. 1134-1135] . . . clarifies that furnishing
of lists of rental vacancies to prospective tenants for compensation is an act
for which a real estate rental agency license is required."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Anderson's conduct meets the test of an "advance fee rental agent." ( Rees
v. Department of Real Estate (1977) 76 Cal.App.3d 286, 294 [142 Cal.Rptr. 789].)
If, therefore, the regulatory scheme satisfies constitutional standards as
applied to Anderson's activity, the department properly imposed discipline upon
him for acting without an active license. We thus turn to analysis of the
constitutionality of the regulatory scheme as applied in the case at bar.

   Constitutionality of Regulatory   Scheme

   The regulatory scheme applicable to "advance fee rental agents" engaging in
activity similar to Anderson's has previously been held not to violate the
constitutional guarantees of procedural due process and equal protection.  (
Rees v. Department of Real Estate, supra, 76 Cal.App.3d at pp. 298-301.)
Anderson mounts an attack upon the scheme not previously considered.   (See fn.
2.) He claims the statutes as construed by the regulations constitute an
unconstitutional infringement upon his freedom of commercial speech if applied
to his activity in distributing lists of available rentals for a fee. 2 That
claim has merit.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   The
department argues that Anderson's First Amendment argument is not available
because it was not raised at the administrative hearing.  "[Failure] to raise
[a] constitutional issue during an administrative proceeding will not prevent a
party from raising it in judicial review proceedings of the agency's action."
(Deering, Cal. Administrative Mandamus (Cont.Ed.Bar Supp. 1979) § 6.11A, p. 77.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      "[Speech] is not removed from the protection of the First Amendment simply
because it 'does "no more than propose a commercial transaction."'" ( Welton v.
City of Los Angeles (1976) 18 Cal.3d 497, 503-504 [134 Cal.Rptr. 668, 556 P.2d
1119], quoting Va. Pharmacy Bd. v. Va. Consumer Council (1976) 425 U.S. 748, 762
[48 L.Ed.2d 346, 358, 96 S.Ct. 1817].) In part, commercial speech is afforded
constitutional protection because of the listener-consumer's "concern for [its]
free flow." ( Bates v. State Bar of Arizona (1977) 433 U.S. 350, 364 [53 L.Ed.2d
810, 823, 97 S.Ct. 2691].) The protection extends to advertising. ( Va. Pharmacy
Bd. v. Va. Consumer Council, supra; Bates v. State Bar of Arizona, supra.)

   The focus of the case at bar is thus upon the validity of the licensure
requirements of the pertinent statutes and regulations of the Department of Real
Estate as applied to Anderson's constitutionally protected right of commercial
speech.

    Some limitation upon commercial speech is permissible so long as the
regulation is "written narrowly and explicitly, in furtherance of a legitimate
police power purpose." ( Welton v. City of Los Angeles, supra, 18 Cal.3d 497,
504; see also Goldberg v. Barger (1974) 37 Cal.App.3d 987, 997 [112 Cal.Rptr.
827].) Where the regulation takes the form of licensure, it must be exercised
setting forth "definite, objective guidelines for the issuance of [the license]"
which as a minimum must "bear a rational relationship to a valid governmental
purpose." ( Perrine v. Municipal Court (1971) 5 Cal.3d 656, 661, and 663 [97
Cal.Rptr. 320, 488 P.2d 648]; cert. den., 404 U.S. 1038 [30 L.Ed.2d 729, 92
S.Ct. 710].)

    Licensure of "advance fee rental agents" whose activity parallels that of
Anderson seems permissible.  In amending Business and Professions Code section
10131 in 1959 to bring advance fee loan solicitation within its sweep, the
Legislature noted that many persons and concerns engaged in advance fee
businesses embarked upon fraudulent practices including the collection in
advance of amounts to be charged against future commissions that might be
earned.  It said: "To protect . . . owners of property, as well as the general
public . . . it is necessary to subject the advance fee business to regulation
and to limit the persons or entities who engage in the advance fee business to
those of proven honesty and integrity, and to establish a fiduciary relationship
between the promoters and the owners by requiring that they be licensed as real
estate or business opportunity brokers and salesmen, and to require them to
account to their principals for the expenditure of the funds entrusted to them.
. . ." ( Tyrone v. Kelley (1973) 9 Cal.3d 1, 9-10, fn. 6 [106 Cal.Rptr.  761,
507 P.2d 65].) The Legislature has thus stated a necessary and legitimate
purpose for: (1) a licensure requirement of honesty and integrity of the
licensee; (2) a requirement that the "advance fee rental agent" licensee be
placed in a fiduciary relationship with his customer; and (3) accountability.

   The licensure requirements here involved are definite and objective.  There
remains the question, however, whether they bear at least a rational
relationship to the valid governmental purpose articulated by the Legislature.

   Clearly the good character requirements for licensure of real estate brokers
and salesmen bear that rational relationship.  So do the various provisions of
the statutes creating the fiduciary relationship of broker and salesman to
customer and for accountability.  The examination requirements for licensure of
real estate brokers and salesmen are another matter as is the requirement of the
regulations that an "advance fee rental agent" work for, and from the office of,
a licensed real estate broker.

   Anderson's activity consists of ascertaining available residential rental
units, compiling a list of them, advertising the lists for sale, and selling the
lists for a fee.  His knowledge of the principles of real estate and business
opportunity conveyancing, the law applicable to agency contracts, deposit
receipts, deeds of trust, chattel mortgages and the like, or of land economics
or appraisals, or even of the obligations between principal and agent is not
germane to that activity.

   The statutory purpose of fiduciary accountability can be fully served by
means short of requiring the "advance fee rental agent" to be an employee of a
licensed broker. In effect, the legislation and regulations, in order to achieve
the proper objectives of creating a fiduciary relationship between persons in
Anderson's class and their customers and that licensees be of good character,
require that they meet tests of qualification unrelated to the purpose.  The
tests, while relevant to persons who negotiate sales of real property, are not
germane to the actions of "advance fee rental agents" acting as does Anderson.
As to those agents who do no more than publish, promote, and sell lists of
available rental units, the scheme is thus overly strict in its licensure
requirement.  In light of the constitutional protection of commercial  speech,
the overly strict requirements of licensure cannot be saved by the
administrative convenience incident to including the "advance fee rental agents"
in existing license categories imposing the requisite fiduciary and related
duties so  long as licensure to those categories depends upon the licensee
meeting tests irrelevant to the "advance fee rental agents" activity.  The
Constitution requires that if necessary they be separately licensed subjected to
qualifications rationally related to the reason for licensure.

   The lack of a rational relationship between the manner in which an "advance
fee rental agent" may obtain licensure and the legislative purpose for the
license strikes at the heart of the reason for constitutional protection of
commercial speech. The protection exists in large part to preserve the
consumer's right to be informed.  ( Bates v. State Bar of Arizona, supra, 433
U.S. 350, 364 [53 L.Ed.2d 810, 823].) Here the statutes and regulations impose
both psychic and economic disincentives to the supply of information through the
medium of publication of lists of available rental properties useful to the
consumer in his search for housing.

   Real estate brokers and salesmen who qualify for licensure must meet the
standard of learning which the statutes and regulations prescribe for their
profession.  One who has met the standard of learning to qualify is necessarily
pulled toward putting the learning to use.  Given the choice of so acting or of
becoming a mere compiler of lists, the incentive is toward the use of the
learning.

   If the real estate broker or salesman structures his activity so that he acts
as a negotiator of rentals of residential property, he will be compensated by a
commission generally based upon a percentage of consideration received by the
lessor.  If he publishes a list of available rental units which he sells for a
fee of $ 25 or $ 30 as did Anderson, he gets no more than that.  Only if the
person sells lists at a multiple in excess of the difference between the price
of the list and his average commission can he be economically ahead.  There is
no indication in the record or briefs that absent significant activity to
promote the list device there will be such a demand that real estate brokers and
salesmen will find any economic advantage in competing with their own commission
business by publication.  So long as the group of persons who may publish the
lists is limited to those whose economic incentive seems to the contrary, the
promotional activity necessary to wide dissemination is at least significantly
inhibited.

   Thus psychic and economic disincentives to means by which the consumer may be
informed through a maximum number of channels are created by: (1) the
examination requirements of the statute which limit  the persons who may publish
lists of available rentals by requirements unrelated to legislative purpose; and
(2) the regulations which require that the publication be from the office of a
licensed broker.

   We therefore conclude that the licensure requirements for "advance fee rental
agents" as now drawn are so overly broad as to violate constitutional protection
of commercial speech when applied to activity such as that of Anderson which
involves no more than the ascertainment of available residential housing, the
publication of lists of available units, the solicitation of customers for the
lists, and the sale of the lists for a fee.

   Because the licensure requirement is overly broad as applied to his activity,
the trial court properly determined that Anderson was improperly disciplined for
acting without the license.

   The judgment is affirmed.

CONCUR BY: HANSON (In Part)

DISSENT BY: HANSON (In Part)

DISSENT

   HANSON, J., Concurring and Dissenting.  I concur in that portion of the
majority opinion which concludes that the manner in which petitioner/respondent
Raymond John Anderson (hereinafter Anderson)  carried on his activities as
briefly described in the majority opinion constituted conduct of an "advance
fee" rental agent as defined in California Administrative Code, title 10,
article 17, section 2850 1 (hereinafter section 2850), which requires a real
estate license. (See Rees v. Department of Real Estate (1977) 76 Cal.App.3d 286
[142 Cal.Rptr. 789].) 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Section
2850 defines advance fee rental agents as follows: "An 'advance fee rental
agent' is: (a) a real estate licensee who negotiates rentals or furnishes rental
information to prospective tenants whereby they are obligated to pay a fee in
advance of services whether or not a rental is obtained through such services,
(b) a real estate licensee who solicits or obtains rental listings from
landlords or managers in expectation of compensation by including them in
advance fee rental listings to be supplied prospective tenants."
2   In Rees, the petitioner (Rees) owned and operated a property rental data
service.  He sought a writ of mandate directing respondent, the Department of
Real Estate, to set aside and vacate its order compelling him to desist and
refrain from conducting his business activities which included the sale to
prospective tenants of information as to available rentals without first
obtaining a real estate broker's license. Following the hearing the trial court
rendered its findings and conclusions, which were similar to those on which
respondent Department of Real Estate based its administrative decision and
order, and denied the petition.

   The Court of Appeal affirmed, holding that the trial court properly exercised
its independent judgment on the evidence in making its decision and further held
that petitioner Rees was acting both as a real estate broker and as an advance
fee rental agent in conducting his business activities and hence was subject to
the applicable licensing statutes and administrative regulations, and that his
activities did not come within the finder's exception to such licensing
requirements.  The reviewing court also held that the licensing statutes and
regulations as applied to persons selling rental information to prospective
renters were in accordance with a valid state purpose and consequently did not
violate petitioner Rees' rights to due process and equal protection.

   The Rees court said at pages 297-298: "[As] found by the court below,
appellant's activities in furnishing rental information to a prospective tenant
for a fee payable in advance of services, falls within the separate licensee
classification of 'advance fee rental agent' as defined in section 2850,
subdivision (a), title 10 of the California Administrative Code (fn. 6, ante).
Given the legislative history concerning past abuses associated with advance fee
operators ( Tyrone v. Kelley, supra, 9 Cal.3d 1, 9-10, fn. 6 [106 Cal.Rptr. 761,
507 P.2d 65]), it seems equally clear that the intendment of the regulation was
to specifically supervise advance fee rental commerce in order to protect the
public from similar reprehensible practices of unlicensed operators that once
plagued the real estate lenders' and sellers' market." (Fn.  omitted.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     The evidence is uncontradicted, as alleged in the "Accusation" filed by the
Department of Real Estate, that Anderson caused his real estate license to be
placed on an inactive status prior to conducting the "advance fee" rental
business which is the subject of this action.  It is also uncontradicted that
Anderson willfully disregarded and violated Business and Professions Code
sections 10130 3 (which makes it unlawful for any person conducting the business
Anderson was engaged in to operate without a license), 10131 4 and 10143 5
(pertaining to  rentals by real estate licensees and the receipts for and
refunds of fees).  Therefore, disciplinary action has been clearly established.
Moreover, since it is also clear that Anderson had previously been disciplined
for violation of section 10143 and section 2856 of title 10 of the California
Administrative Code whereby his license was suspended for a 90-day period which
was stayed  for 3 years, 6 the order revoking his license in the instant case
did not constitute an abuse of discretion.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   All
references to code sections are to the Business and Professions Code except
section 2850 (see fn. 1, ante) unless otherwise designated.

   Section 10130 provides in pertinent part: "It is unlawful for any person to
engage in the business, act in the capacity of, advertise or assume to act as a
real estate broker or a real estate salesman within this state without first
obtaining a real estate license from the department.  . . ."
4   Section 10131 provides in relevant part: "A real estate broker within the
meaning of this part is a person who, for a compensation or in expectation of a
compensation, does or negotiates to do one or more of the following acts for
another or others: . . . (b) Leases or rents or offers to lease or rent, or
places for rent, or solicits listings of places for rent, or solicits for
prospective tenants, . . ." (Italics added.)
5   Section 10143 provides that "Every real estate licensee who attempts to
negotiate a rental or who furnishes rental information to a prospective tenant
for a fee paid by said prospective tenant shall give every such prospective
tenant a contract or receipt, and in such contract or receipt shall undertake to
repay any amount over and above the sum of ten dollars ($ 10) service charge to
the prospective tenant if the prospective tenant does not obtain a rental. A
demand from the prospective tenant for the return of the fee, or any part of it,
shall be made within 10 days following the final day on which the real estate
licensee has contracted to perform services to the prospective tenant. In the
event that rental information is not current or accurate in regard to the type
of rental desired, the full fee shall be repaid to the tenant. Such contract or
receipt shall also conform to the regulations adopted by the commissioner in
order to effect disclosure of material information regarding the service to be
provided to the prospective tenant."
6   The record on appeal shows that Anderson for several years before the prior
disciplinary action, "including the years of 1971, 1972, 1973 and up to
approximately July 7, 1975" operated an "advance fee" rental business as defined
by section 2850 and that Anderson and his agents "in at least eight instances
failed and refused to timely return the amounts in excess of the ten dollar
service fees to the clients.  In several cases these clients made repeated
efforts to obtain the refund due them.  Respondent [Anderson] failed to refund
the money due and also failed to provide these clients with any information
whatsoever."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Accordingly, by reason of the foregoing, I would reverse the superior court's
judgment which concluded as a matter of law, although its findings of fact
employing the independent judgment test were practically identical to those of
the administrative law judge, that Anderson's activities did not constitute an
"advance fee" rental business and as such did not require a real estate broker's
license.

   I PART COMPANY with the majority opinion when it concludes that the licensure
requirements for "advance fee rental agents" as now drawn are so overly broad as
to violate constitutional protection of commercial speech, "that as applied by
the department to respondent's [Anderson's] activity, the key statute and
regulation infringe upon respondent's [Anderson's] right to freedom of
commercial speech by imposing overly restrictive requirements for licensure,"
and affirms the superior court judgment on that ground. 7

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   This
issue was raised for the first time on appeal.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   While I am anything but indifferent to the fundamental societal value of our
free (private) enterprise system 8 or to the great importance of preserving
commercial speech under the umbrella of our First Amendment rights (see Board of
Medical Examiners v. Terminal-Hudson  Electronics, Inc. (1977) 73 Cal.App.3d 376
[140 Cal.Rptr. 757], opn. by Hanson, J., concurred in by Wood, P. J., and
Lillie, J.), I am not unaware of the fact that the Legislature has the authority
to enact reasonable business regulations to protect the consuming public against
abuses by "fast buck artists" who engage in "sharp practices" and overstep basic
rules of fair play in the market place.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -8   In an
opinion recently ordered depublished by the state Supreme Court, I said:
"Intrusions by any branch of government which inject socialization into the
internal workings of our free market banking system tend to kill the goose that
lays the golden egg.  The golden egg is human welfare.  The goose has been
proven to be the free market or private enterprise system which has afforded
Americans the highest standard of living of any system in the history of the
world."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In Board of Medical Examiners v. Terminal-Hudson Electronics, Inc., supra, 73
Cal.App.3d 376, this court held that statutes which prohibited advertising of
the stipulated price for furnishing a lens, lenses, glasses or frames and
fittings or other commodities by a registered dispensing optician were
unconstitutional as violating the free speech guaranteed by the First Amendment.
We pointed out that in recent years the trend of the decisions, which held that
commercial speech lay outside the pale of First Amendment protection, has been
reversed and commercial speech has been brought within the scope of First
Amendment protection and its dissemination is guaranteed in relation to such
enterprises as dispensing pharmaceutical preparations ( Va. Pharmacy Bd. v. Va.
Consumer Council (1976) 425 U.S. 748 [48 L.Ed.2d 346, 96 S.Ct. 1817]) and
offering legal services ( Bates v. State Bar of Arizona (1977) 433 U.S. 350 [53
L.Ed.2d 810, 97 S.Ct. 2691]). We pointed out that the United States Supreme
Court in Va. Pharmacy Bd. "emphasized that the consumer's interest in commercial
speech is substantial and that such speech often carries information of
significant societal import since in serving to inform the public of the
availability, nature and prices of products and services it performs an
indispensable role in the allocation of resources in a free enterprise system,
and it assures informed and reliable decisionmaking." ( Board of Medical
Examiners v. Terminal-Hudson Electronics, Inc., supra, 73 Cal.App.3d 376, 385.)

    Thus, in Va. Pharmacy  Bd., Bates and Board of Medical Examiners the focus
was on the consumers' interest in commercial speech and the indispensable role
it plays in the free enterprise system while in the instant case the focus is on
the reverse side of the coin -- consumer protection.

   It is well established that the basic purpose of the Real Estate Act in
general is to protect the buying and selling public from such practices by
insuring as far as possible that real estate brokers and salesmen will be
"'honest, truthful and of good reputation.'" ( Riley v. Chambers (1919) 181 Cal.
589, 591 [185 P. 855, 8 A.L.R. 418]; Buckley v. Savage (1960) 184 Cal.App.2d 18
[7 Cal.Rptr. 328]; Ferguson v. Schuenemann (1959) 167 Cal.App.2d 413 [334 P.2d
668]; Koeberle v. Hotchkiss (1935) 8 Cal.App.2d 634  [48 P.2d 104]; 18
Ops.Cal.Atty.Gen. 200 (1951).) This protection extends to the activities of real
estate rental agencies which require a broker's license as a condition to lawful
operation.  ( Grand v. Griesinger (1958) 160 Cal.App.2d 397 [325 P.2d 475].)

    Turning specifically to the "advance fee" rental business, the Supreme Court
in Tyrone v. Kelley (1973) 9 Cal.3d 1 [106 Cal.Rptr. 761, 507 P.2d 65], pointed
out in footnote 6 at pages 9-10, that the Legislature stated that it found it
necessary to enact legislation pertaining to "advance fee" deposits or retainers
in that since 1948 a number of individuals and corporate entities engaged in the
business of, amongst other things, making false and fraudulent
misrepresentations to the owners, lessees or renters of property for the purpose
of inducing them to entrust money to them for promised services.  Some of such
promoters often misrepresented that there would be no charge for the services
unless and until the service was produced.  Often the promises were made by the
promoters with no intent of making a bona fide effort to render such services or
with the intent to render merely token services and the effectiveness and
efficiency of their services were grossly misrepresented resulting in the loss
of millions of dollars by the consuming public.  By reason of the foregoing
practices the Legislature in Sacramento found it necessary "[to] protect . . .
the general public, and to insure the general welfare, . . . to subject the
advance fee business to regulation and to limit the persons or entities who
engage in the advance fee business to those of proven honesty and integrity, and
to establish a fiduciary relationship between the promoters and the owners by
requiring that they be licensed as real estate or business opportunity brokers
and salesmen, and to require them to account to their principals for the
expenditure of the funds entrusted to them.  . . ." ( Id., at p. 10, fn. 6.)

   In Rees v. Department of Real Estate, supra, 76 Cal.App.3d 286, the appellant
who conducted activities similar in many respects to those conducted by Anderson
in the instant case contended "that the licensing statutes as applied to his
activities are overbroad and violate the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments to the
federal Constitution.  While conceding the validity of the licensing statutes,
he argues there is no reasonable relationship between the skills required in the
conduct of his business and those subject to regulation under the real estate
licensing laws.  Focusing upon certain statutory qualifications for a real
estate license, he argues that to impose such irrelevant requirements upon him
is arbitrary and unduly burdensome and tantamount  to an unlawful taking of his
property without due process and a denial of equal protection of the law.  . .
." ( Id., at p. 298, fns. omitted.)

    The Rees court in a well reasoned opinion addressed the due process and the
equal protection challenge and held there was no such constitutional
infirmities.  Although Rees also asserted that his activities were protected
under the First Amendment, he did not argue or supply citations of authority in
his brief.  The Rees court treated the issue as waived but said at page 301:
"[In] any event, 'Reasonable business regulations are valid even though elements
of public expression are involved.' ( Varanelli v. Structural Pest Control
Board, supra, 1 Cal.App.3d 217, 225 [81 Cal.Rptr. 492].)"

   Sections 2850 through 2856 9 of the Administrative Code which pertain to
"advance  fee" rental agent transactions and which were promulgated by the
Commissioner of Real Estate under the authority of section 10080 as reasonably
necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of the licensing statutes are
set out in haec verba in footnote 9 below.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -9   Section
2850 provides: "An 'advance fee rental agent' is: (a) a real estate licensee who
negotiates rentals or furnishes rental information to prospective tenants
whereby they are obligated to pay a fee in advance of services whether or not a
rental is obtained through such services.  (b) a real estate licensee who
solicits or obtains rental listings from landlords or managers in expectation of
compensation by including them in advance fee rental listings to be supplied
prospective tenants."

   Section 2851 provides: "No real estate salesman shall act as an 'advance fee
rental agent' unless the salesman's employing broker (1) is actively engaged in
the real estate or rental business at the same office; (2) is aware of and
familiar with the operation and listing of all advance fee rentals in the
office; (3) conducts immediate and close supervision of said salesman; and (4)
approves all listings of places for rent and all listings of prospective
tenants."

   Section 2852 provides: "Prior to the acceptance of an advance rental fee from
a prospective tenant, an advance fee rental agent shall provide the prospective
tenant with a written contract which shall include at least the following:
[para. ] (1) Name and business address of the advance fee rental broker
licensee. [para. ] (2) Acknowledgment of receipt of advance fee. [para. ] (3) A
description of the service to be performed by the advance fee rental agent,
including significant conditions, restrictions and limitations where applicable.
[para. ] (4) The prospective tenant's specifications for the rental property,
including but not limited to: [para. ] (a) Type of structure, e.g., detached
single family, apartment, duplex, etc. [para. ] (b) Location by
commonly-accepted residential area name, by designation of boundary streets or
in any other manner affording a reasonable means of identifying acceptable
locations.  [para. ] (c) Furnished or unfurnished.  [para. ] (d) Number of
bedrooms.  [para. ] (e) Earliest occupancy date desired.  [para. ] (f) Maximum
acceptable monthly rental. [para. ] (5) Contract expiration date.  [para. ] (6)
Provisions which shall read as follows unless different language shall have been
approved in writing by the commissioner prior to use.  [para. ] (a) 'If the
prospective tenant has not obtained a rental through information supplied by
agent, the full amount remitted hereunder shall be repaid to the prospective
tenant upon presentation of evidence by the prospective tenant that the advance
fee rental agent supplied rental information that was not current or accurate.'
[para. ] (b) 'The amount of the fee paid to agent by prospective tenant over and
above the sum of a $ 10 service charge shall be returned to prospective tenant
if a rental is not obtained by him through the services of agent.  A demand for
a return of the fee over and above a $ 10 service charge shall be made by
prospective tenant within ten days following the expiration of this contract.
THIS CONTRACT EXPIRES ON (Full caps, bold face or italicize)    .' [para. ] (c)
'A demand for a refund referred to above may be made in person at     or by mail
directed to    .'"

   Section 2852.1 provides: "The form of contract proposed to be used by an
advance fee rental agent to effect compliance with Section 2852 shall be filed
with the Real Estate Commissioner prior to use.  Any modification of a form
previously filed with the commissioner, including a change in the name or
business address of the advance fee rental broker, shall also be filed with the
commissioner prior to use."

   Section 2852.2 provides: "If an advance fee rental agent proposes to move his
business office to a different location, he shall, prior to effecting the move,
give notice of the address of the new location and his telephone number, if new,
in a manner reasonably calculated to reach the prospective tenants with whom he
has outstanding contracts."

   Section 2852.3 provides: "A real estate broker who acts as an 'advance fee
rental agent' shall deposit the amount of each advance rental fee collected less
the amount thereof denominated 'service charge,' which shall not exceed $ 10 per
prospective tenant, into a trust fund account not later than the next business
day following receipt of the advance rental fee.  The funds deposited into the
trust account shall not be withdrawn therefrom earlier than ten days after the
expiration of the contract referred to in Section 2852 with the following
exceptions: [para. ] (1) The funds may be withdrawn from the trust fund account
at any time for the purpose of returning the funds to the payor thereof in
accordance with the terms of the contract referred to in Section 2852.  [para. ]
(2) The funds may be withdrawn from the trust fund account when and if the
broker reasonably believes from evidence available to him that the payor of the
funds has obtained a rental through information supplied by or on behalf of the
broker."

   Section 2853 provides: "An exact copy of said contract shall be furnished to
the prospective tenant and the original shall be retained by the broker for a
period of three years subject to the inspection of the commissioner and his
deputies."

   Section 2854 provides: "A list of all addresses given to said prospective
tenant shall be prepared in duplicate, and the list shall clearly indicate the
address of the property, a brief description thereof and the amount of the
monthly rental. Where subsequent addresses are furnished to said prospective
tenant by telephone or otherwise, said addresses shall be noted on the broker's
copy of said list.  Said list shall indicate by which broker or employee of the
broker said addresses were furnished and the broker's copy shall be retained by
him for a period of three years subject to examination by the commissioner and
his deputies."

   Section 2855 provides: "Any real estate broker who acts as an 'advance fee
rental agent' shall make a written registry of all advertisements published or
caused to be published by said licensee together with the address of the
property advertised, the name of the party who offered the property for rent and
his or her telephone number, if any.  Said register shall be retained by the
broker for a period of three years subject to inspection by the commissioner and
his deputies."

   Section 2856 provides: "No 'advance fee rental agent' shall furnish a
prospective tenant with the address of a prospective rental unless such licensee
has received specific authorization to offer said property for rent from the
owner or its authorized agent.  [para. ] An advance fee rental agent shall not
refer a prospective tenant to a rental listing unless the availability of the
listing has been verified within three business days of the referral."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     In my view the licensure requirements for "advance fee rental agents" and
the provisions of sections 2850 through 2856 as presently drafted are not overly
broad and do not violate constitutional protection of commercial speech and are
reasonable business regulations in view of the history of abuses in this field.

    Here, Anderson was free to advertise and engage in "commercial speech" in
his "advance fee" rental business provided he possessed an active real estate
broker's license. He is no less restricted in that respect than lawyers admitted
to practice who may now under Bates advertise and who are also required to pass
certain examinations and be "honest, truthful and of good reputation" before
"licensure." Moreover, the wisdom of the legislative enactments and regulations
in respect to "advance fee" rental business as described herein as a protection
to the consuming public is apparent in the case at bench.  In addition to the
finding by both the administrative law judge and the superior court that
Anderson did not possess an active real estate license were findings that some
of the rental lists supplied were not up-to-date and were inaccurate.  This must
inevitably lead to the unconscionable situation where many of Anderson's
customers were literally sent out on frustrating "wild goose chases" or "snipe
hunts" wasting their time, effort and money on telephone calls and gasoline.  In
one instance Anderson refused a refund as required by law and in another
instance refused to grant a "refund on the basis that the contract provided that
a refund would not be made for a period of two (2) years." 10

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -10
Following are some of the findings of fact made by the superior court which are
exemplars of Anderson's mode of operation:

   "During the period from July 7, 1975 through February 29, 1976, petitioner
herein conducted the business operation which consisted of procuring information
from landlords and newspaper advertising respecting property that was available
for rent and compiled this information into a list of available rentals which
list was sold to clients for a subscription price.

   "On or about November 19, 1975, Randolph L. Brendia, a Deputy Real Estate
Commissioner of the State of California, read an advertisement in the Huntington
Park Daily Signal which stated the following: '$ 65.00 Secluded Sgl cottage
Utils pd Choice area Homefinders 588-9104.' Said Brendia telephoned the number
advertised expressing his interest in becoming a tenant at that property in
response to which petitioner's employee solicited said Brendia by inviting him
to come to the office where he would be provided with rental information if he
became a subscriber for a subscription cost of $ 25.00.

   "In September 1975 one Bruce F. Paul read in a Santa Monica newspaper, the
Santa Monica Evening Outlook, an advertisement for a rental which invited
readers to contact Homefinder's Guide in Santa Monica, California.  Said Paul
telephoned petitioner's employee at this office inquiring about the advertised
rental and was invited to come into the Homefinder's Guide office.  Said Paul
went to the Homefinder's office on Santa Monica Boulevard and was advised he
must subscribe for a list of rentals and pay a subscription cost of $ 30.00.
Said Paul paid the subscription cost of $ 30.00 and received a list of rentals
as well as a rental information contract.  This contract provided for a refund
within ten (10) days after the expiration of the contract if said Paul did not
obtain a rental through the service.  Said Paul received approximately four
lists from Homefinder's Guide and upon investigation found that many had already
been rented but had not been deleted from the lists furnished to him.  In
October 1975 said Paul demanded a refund of his subscription cost which was
received by him on or about December 3, 1975.

   "In September 1975 one Stella Weber read an advertisement in the Long Beach
Press Telegram in Long Beach, California, advertising houses for rent and
referring the reader to Homefinder's Guide.  Said Weber telephoned petitioner's
employee at the Long Beach office and said employee invited Weber to come into
the office to subscribe to a list of rentals for a subscription cost.  Said
Weber went to Homefinder's office and paid $ 25.00 to petitioner's employee and
received a list of rentals and in connection therewith a rental information
contract.  Said contract provides for a refund within ten (10) days after
expiration of the contract if Weber failed to obtain a rental through the
service.  Said Weber did not obtain a rental through the lists furnished her by
petitioner's employee and found much of the information on the list to be
inaccurate.  Said Weber demanded a refund from the petitioner and petitioner
refused to grant said refund on the basis that the contract provided that a
refund would not be made for a period of two (2) years.

   "In October 1975 one Marie Miller read an advertisement in the Huntington
Park Signal Newspaper advertising houses for rent and referring the reader to
Homefinder's Guide.  Said Marie Miller went to Homefinder's Office on Gage
Avenue in Huntington Park.  Petitioner's employee advised said Marie Miller that
it would be necessary to subscribe for a list of rentals and pay a $ 25.00
subscription cost which was done by said Miller.  Mrs. Miller made inquiries of
rentals furnished her on the Homefinder's list and found substantially all of
the places had been rented.  Approximately a week later Marie Miller demanded an
additional list of information and was refused a new list by petitioner's
employee on the grounds that he had cancelled her contract.  A demand was then
made by said Marie Miller for the return of her money and was refused a refund."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     "'Before  a court may declare an act of the Legislature invalid of due
process or other constitutional conflict, "such conflict must be clear,
positive, and unquestionable." [Citations.]'" ( Rees v. Department of Real
Estate, supra, 76 Cal.App.3d 286, 299, italics added.) Neither Anderson's brief
on appeal nor the majority opinion has persuasively demonstrated that either the
legislative enactments or the administrative regulations adopted to implement
those enactments pertaining to activities of "advance fee" rental businesses are
in conflict with or infringe upon Anderson's right to freedom of commercial
speech by imposing overly restrictive requirements for licensure.

   In the case at bench the majority opinion wipes from the books the protection
afforded the general public needing and seeking rental housing in respect to
"advance fee" rental business operations.  It frustrates the clear legislative
intent forcing the Legislature back to the drawing board without any indication
whatsoever what specific "key statutes and regulations" it alludes to and
without giving any guidance on how such statutes or regulations could be
redrafted to pass constitutional muster.

   I would reverse the judgment of the superior court, thus affirming the
findings of fact and law of the administrative law judge as adopted by the
Department of Real Estate.


                              37 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            R. C. JONES et al., Appellants, v. JOSEPH C. ROBERTSON,
                                   Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 7352

            Court of Appeal of California, Third Appellate District

          79 Cal. App. 2d 813; 180 P.2d 929; 1947 Cal. App. LEXIS 903


                                  May 21, 1947

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Respondent's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court
was Denied July 17, 1947.  Carter, J., and Schauer, J., Voted for a Hearing.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Placer County.
A. L. Pierovich, Judge assigned.

   Action for declaratory relief.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Zoning--Ordinances--Construction.  --Under the rule of expressio unius est
exclusio alterius, a provision in a county ordinance that a temporary real
estate office may be maintained for a limited purpose and time implies the
exclusion in a residential district for any other purpose or time, since the
meaning of the maxim is that the express mention of a thing implies the
exclusion of another different thing.

(2) Brokers--Definition.  --One carrying on a real estate brokerage business is
not engaged in the practice of a profession.

(3) Zoning--Ordinances.  --In an action to secure a declaration of rights under
a county zoning ordinance, a finding that the conduct of a real estate brokerage
office in a home was incidental to and subordinate to the residential use of the
home could not be sustained in the absence of evidence that the use of a home as
a real estate office was customary, where that ordinance permitted uses
"customarily" incidental and subordinate to residential use.

(4) Judgments--Declaratory Judgments.  --A county zoning ordinance may be tested
by an action to secure a declaration of rights under Code Civ. Proc., § 1060.

(5) Id.--Declaratory Relief--Refusal of Relief.  --Before a court will decline
declaratory relief on the ground of the availability of mandamus, it must appear
that such remedy is available and that it is speedy and adequate or as well
suited to plaintiff's needs as declaratory relief.

COUNSEL: Howe & Finch and Avery J. Howe for Appellants.

F. H. Bowers for Respondent.

JUDGES: Adams, P. J.  Schottky, J. pro tem., and Thompson, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: ADAMS

OPINION

     Plaintiffs instituted this action in behalf of themselves and others having
a common or general interest, as provided by section 382 of the Code of Civil
Procedure. It was brought, pursuant to section 1060 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, to secure a declaration of the rights of the parties under a zoning
ordinance adopted by the Board of Supervisors of Placer County in April, 1940.
Said ordinance was adopted as part of a master plan designed eventually to cover
the whole county.  It provides for a division of areas into districts, which are
classified as residence, commercial and industrial.  Plaintiffs and defendant
are property owners within Zone District Area, Unit 6,  as delineated upon the
map of Brockway-Carnelian Bay Zone District Area, and their properties lie
within a residence district.  Plaintiffs alleged that defendant was maintaining
a real estate office in his home in said residential district in violation of
the ordinance, and that such use would reduce real estate values in said
district to plaintiffs' damage.

   Under section 5, subdivision 5.1, of the ordinance, uses permitted in such
residence districts -- insofar as is pertinent here -- are:

   "(2) Uses customarily incidental to and subordinate to residential use and
not involving the maintenance of a store, shop or commercial enterprise;
including home occupations  and professional offices and studios maintained
within dwellings, providing no name plate or sign exceeding three (3) square
feet in area shall be displayed in connection therewith.

   . . . .

   "(10) Temporary real estate offices for the sale of lands in the subdivision
upon which said office is located during the period when sales of said lands are
being actively conducted." (Italics added.)

   Under section 6, subdivision 6.1, uses permitted in commercial districts are
enumerated at length, and include a "real estate office." Defendant, in his
answer to plaintiffs' complaint, admits that he is a licensed real estate
broker, and that he maintains an office in his residence in a residential
district; and the only question presented on this appeal is whether, in so
doing, he is violating the provisions of the ordinance aforesaid.

   The trial court found that defendant was conducting his real estate office in
his home, but found that such "brokerage office is incidental to and subordinate
to residential use of said home, as defined by said ordinance." And as a
conclusion of law therefrom it was recited that defendant's real estate office
within his residence did not violate any of the provisions of the ordinance, and
that plaintiffs were not entitled to any relief.  From the judgment which
followed, this appeal was taken.

   Plaintiffs' contentions here are: That the ordinance clearly provides that
the maintenance of a general real estate office is a commercial use and
prohibited in a residential zone and that the trial court was in error in
holding that such use by defendant does not violate any provisions of the
ordinance.

   Respondent defends by asserting that the ordinance provides an exclusive
remedy for its enforcement, which remedy was not pursued by plaintiffs, and
that, anyhow, real estate brokerage is a profession and  that since defendant
was practicing such profession in his home his use was one permitted by the act.

     We agree with appellants' contention that the ordinance prohibits the
maintenance of a real estate office in a residential district, except a
temporary one for the sale of lands in a subdivision upon which said office is
located, and then only during the period when sales of said lands are being
actively conducted.  It is not contended that defendant's office is such a
temporary one as is permitted under  subdivision 10, supra.  Not only does the
ordinance fail to include the operation of a real estate office as a use
permitted in a residential zone, but under the rule of expressio unius est
exclusio alterius, the provision that a temporary real estate office may be
maintained for a limited purpose and time as provided by subdivision 10 implies
the exclusion of a real estate office for any other purpose or time, since the
meaning of the maxim is that the express mention of a thing implies the
exclusion of another different thing. ( Gilgert v. Stockton Port District, 7
Cal.2d 384, 387 [60 P.2d 847]; Martello v. Superior Court, 202 Cal. 400, 406
[261 P. 476]; Homestead Valley Sanitary District v. Donohue, 27 Cal.App.2d 548,
550 [81 P.2d 471]; Brintle v. Board of Education, 43 Cal.App.2d 84, 87 [110 P.2d
440]; Estate of Pardue, 22 Cal.App.2d 178, 180 [70 P.2d 678]; In re Peart, 5
Cal.App.2d 469, 472 [43 P.2d 334]; Merchants National Bank v. Continental
National Bank, 98 Cal.App. 523, 532 [277 P. 354]; 6 R.C.L. 49; 25 R.C.L.
981-982; 50 Am.Jur. 238-240; 23 Cal.Jur. 740; 10 Cal.Jur. 10-Yr.Supp. 396.) And
that real estate offices were intended to be excluded from residential districts
is also implied by the provision in section 6, subdivision 6.1, of the
ordinance, for the maintenance of such offices in a commercial district.

     As for respondent's contention that in the carrying on of the real estate
brokerage business he is engaged in the practice of a profession, and therefore
the maintenance of his office in his home in the residential district is
permitted under section 2 of the ordinance, such business is not one generally
considered as professional.  Respondent argues that an applicant for a real
estate broker's license must furnish evidence of good moral character; that he
must study and and learn real estate law, contracts, etc., and pass a written
examination; that he must pay a fee for a license, and that, after qualifying,
he is accountable to the state real estate commission.  For these reasons he
says that his occupation should be classed as professional.

   Similar contentions have been made in other cases, and overruled.  In Lavan
v. Menaker, 280 Pa. 591 [124 A. 743, 744], the conducting of a general real
estate office was held to be a "business" within the restrictions in a deed.

   In Cummings v. Pennsylvania Fire Insurance Co., 153 Iowa 579 [134 N.W. 79,
Ann.Cas. 1913E 235, 37 L.R.A.N.S. 1169], the court said at page 82 [134 N.W.]:
"One who operates  a real estate agency is not engaged in a professional
employment.  Pennock v. Fuller, 41 Mich. 153, 2 N.W. 176, 32 Am.Rep. 148, where
the court said: 'Professional employment can only relate to some of those
occupations universally classed as professions, the general duties and character
of which courts must be expected to understand judicially.  Real estate agencies
are no more professions than any other business agencies.'"

   In Bond v. Cooke, 237 App.Div. 229 [262 N.Y.S. 199], it was purposed to carry
on the business of undertaker from a residence in a residential zone. An
ordinance prohibited uses of residences in said zone except that the office or
studio of a physician, surgeon, dentist, lawyer, dressmaker, artist or musician,
and certain other uses were permitted in such residences.  Appellant contended
that an undertaker was not a business man, but was as much a professional person
as those mentioned.  The court said: "The contention that the undertaker is not
in business, but is a professional man, is not in harmony with the views long
held by the educated and thoughtful and the great seats of learning, touching
the fine arts and the learned professions. People v. Kelly, supra [(255 N.Y.
396), 175 N.E. 108, 109].  That the undertaker is not a businessman and does not
conduct a business, within the meaning of section 20 of the General City Law and
the  ordinance under consideration, is a contention that cannot be sustained."

   Also in Building Commissioner   of Town of Brookline v. McManus, 263 Mass.
270 [160 N.E. 887], the court held that undertaking is not a profession but a
business, and said: "The fact that before a person can lawfully engage in the
business of embalming he is required to submit to examination and be registered
does not change business into something else any more than the occupation of
others are changed by the requirement that they be licensed." To the same effect
see State v. Winneshiek Co-Operative Burial Association,    Iowa    [22 N.W.2d
800, 803]; In re Dawson, 136 Okla. 113 [277 P. 226].

   Also see Otis v. Graves, 20 N.Y.S.2d 426 (holding that insurance brokerage is
a business and not a profession); People ex rel. Tower v. State Tax Commission,
282 N.Y. 407 [26 N.E.2d 955, 957] (holding that a custom house broker is engaged
in business and not a profession); Recht v. Graves, 257 App.Div. 889 [12
N.Y.S.2d 158] (holding life insurance  agents to be engaged in business and not
a profession).  In Geiffert v. Mealey, 267 App.Div. 681 [48 N.Y.S.2d 475, 476],
a landscape artist was held to be engaged in business rather than a profession;
in De Vries v. Graves, 292 N.Y. 529 [54 N.E.2d 379], a similar holding was had
regarding a "furniture designer"; in People v. Maggi, 310 Ill. 101 [33 N.E.2d
925], a like determination was made as to beauty operators and barbers; and in
Kort v. City of Los Angeles, 52 Cal.App.2d 804 [127 P.2d 66], it was held that
defendant was properly restrained from carrying on the business of a public
accountant in his home in a residential district of the city, there being
nothing in the city ordinance allowing such business to be carried on there.
Also see Dvorine v. Castelberg, 170 Md. 661 [185 A. 562, 566]; Maryland Casualty
Co. v. Crazy Water Co. (Tex.Civ.App.), 160 S.W.2d 102, 104, distinguishing
business from professions.

     As for the trial court's finding that defendant's conduct of a real estate
brokerage office in his home is incidental to and subordinate to residential use
of said home, as defined in said ordinance, and its conclusion of law and
recitation in the judgment "That the defendant's real estate office within his
residence is incidental and subordinate to the residential use of said home and
does not violate any of the provisions of Placer County Ordinance 108, Series B,
and/or acts amendatory thereof," the conclusion stated does not follow from the
premise.  The ordinance does not provide merely that a use which is incidental
and subordinate to the residential use of a home in a given case is permissible
in a residential district; such use must be one customarily incidental and
subordinate to residential use and one not involving a "commercial enterprise."
So whether this defendant's use of his premises as a real estate office is
incidental to the use of same as a home, or his use of them as a home is
incidental and subordinate to his use of same as a real estate office, is
immaterial.  It is a matter of common knowledge that residences are not
customarily used as real estate offices though they are sometimes so used.
"Custom" is defined in Ballentine's Law Dictionary as "Something which has by
its universality and antiquity acquired the force and effect of law, in a
particular place or country, in respect to the subject matter to which it
relates; general practice, judicially noticed without proof."

   In Fuller Brush Co. v. Industrial Commission, 99 Utah 97 [104 P.2d 201, 203,
129 A.L.R.  511], "customarily" is defined as meaning "usually, habitually,
according to the customs,  general practice or usual order of things,
regularly."

   There is no evidence that the use of a home as a real estate office is
"customary," and, furthermore, under the authorities hereinbefore cited such use
involves a "commercial enterprise" within the prohibition of the ordinance.

     Regarding respondent's contention that the ordinance provides an exclusive
remedy for its enforcement and that, since under section 14 of same, any use of
premises contrary to its provisions constitutes a public nuisance subject to
abatement by the county upon order of the board of supervisors, and that anyone
who wilfully violates  such ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
subject to prosecution therefor, plaintiffs had no right to bring this action
for declaratory relief, even assuming that such contention is pertinent on this
appeal, the same section of said ordinance provides that the remedies provided
for therein are cumulative and independent.   Section 1062 of the Code of Civil
Procedure also provides that the remedy provided by way of an action for
declaratory relief is cumulative.  Innumerable cases might be cited in which
zoning ordinances have been tested by means of such actions.  Such was the case
of La Franchi v. City of Santa Rosa, 52 P.2d 558, 559, decided by this court
(reversed on other grounds in 8 Cal.2d 331 [65 P.2d 1301, 110 A.L.R. 639]). Also
see Andrews v. City of Piedmont, 100 Cal.App. 700 [281 P. 78]; Monahan v.
Department of Water & Power, 48 Cal.App.2d 746, 751 [120 P.2d 730]; Greenfield
v. Board of City Planning Commissioners, 6 Cal.App.2d 515, 518 [45 P.2d 219];
Hoyt v. Board of Civil Service Commissioners, 21 Cal.2d 399 [132 P.2d 804];
Wilkins v. City of San Bernardino, 29 Cal.2d 332 [175 P.2d 542].

     It is stated in 5 California Jurisprudence, Ten-Year Supplement (1944 Rev.)
page 118, that the remedy by way of declaratory relief does not affect any other
remedy; nor is it affected by the existence of another remedy; and, at page 125,
that declaratory relief extends to a determination of questions as to the
validity, construction, operation and effect of statutes and ordinances, and
that a zoning ordinance is, for example, a proper subject of a declaratory
judgment as to validity and construction of provisions.  And it is said in
Borchard's "Declaratory Judgments," second edition, pages 302-303, that "it is
wrong for courts to decline a declaration on the mere ground that another remedy
was available, for declaratory relief was not intended to be exclusive or
extraordinary, but  alternative and optional.  It is only where the court
believes that more effective relief can and should be obtained by another
procedure and that for that reason a declaration will not serve a useful
purpose, that it is justified in refusing a declaration because of the
availability of another remedy."

   Respondent says in his brief that plaintiffs should have resorted to mandamus
to compel the enforcement of the ordinance by the proper county authorities; but
as to the right of a party to resort to an action for declaratory relief though
other remedies may be available, the court said in Maguire v. Hibernia S. & L.
Soc., 23 Cal.2d 719, 732 [146 P.2d 673, 151 A.L.R. 1062], that before a court
may deny declaratory relief on the ground that other remedies exist, "it must
clearly appear that the asserted alternative remedies are available to the
plaintiff and that they are speedy and adequate or as well suited to plaintiff's
needs as declaratory relief." To the same effect is the opinion in Columbia
Pictures Corp. v. De Toth, 26 Cal.2d 753, 761 [161 P.2d 217, 162 A.L.R. 747].

   The judgment is reversed.


                              38 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            VERNA LEE PAYNE, Plaintiff and Appellant, v. WHITE HOUSE
                   PROPERTIES, INC., Defendant and Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 58085

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Three

            112 Cal. App. 3d 465; 169 Cal. Rptr. 373; 1980 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2471


                               November 21, 1980

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A petition for a rehearing was denied December 16, 1980,
and appellant's petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied January
28, 1981.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Los Angeles County, No. C 267953, J. Wesley
Reed, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1) Independent Contractors § 2 -- Definitions and Distinctions -- Real Estate
Salespersons. -- A real estate salesperson, insofar as his relationship with his
broker is concerned, may not be an independent contractor, and is an agent as a
matter of law.

(2a) (2b) Employer and Employee § 3 -- Existence of Relationship -- Broker and
Salesperson. -- In an action by a real estate salesperson to recover charges for
workers' compensation insurance paid by her through the licensed real estate
broker with which she had entered into a contract to sell real estate, the trial
court properly reversed an order of the labor commissioner allowing such
recovery, where, though the court incorrectly concluded that the salesperson was
an independent contractor, there was substantial evidence to support the
conclusion that the salesperson was not an employee for purposes of workers'
compensation insurance.

(3) Appellate Review § 149 -- Questions of Law and Fact -- Sufficiency of
Evidence -- Power of Court.  -- When a finding of fact is challenged on the
ground that there is no substantial evidence to sustain it, the power of an
appellate court begins and ends with the determination as to whether there is
any substantial evidence, contradicted or uncontradicted, which will support the
finding of fact.

COUNSEL: Laurence T. Emert for Plaintiff and Appellant.

Stanley P. Piser and Jeffrey E. Lieber for Defendant and Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Thomas (R. W.), J., * with Cobey, Acting P. J., and Potter,
J., concurring.

*   Assigned by the Chairperson of the Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: THOMAS

OPINION

     Statement of the Case

   Plaintiff and appellant, Verna Lee Payne (hereinafter appellant), appeals
from a judgment after trial de novo in the superior court reversing an order,
decision or award of the labor commissioner awarding to appellant, recovery of
charges made by defendant and respondent, White House Properties, Inc.
(hereinafter respondent), for worker's compensation insurance

   Judgment was entered in favor of respondent, holding appellant was an
independent contractor, not an employee, and not entitled to recovery of charges
for worker's compensation insurance.

   Facts

   Respondent White House Properties,  Inc. was a licensed real estate broker
and appellant Verna Lee Payne was a licensed real estate salesperson.
Approximately November 1, 1976, appellant entered into a contract with
respondent entitled Broker-Salesperson Contract whereby appellant received 100
percent commissions earned by her and paid a monthly desk rental fee and
expenses incurred by her on her own behalf.  This contract, along with
respondent's procedures manual, set forth the terms and conditions of
appellant's relationship with respondent.

   Under the Broker-Salesperson Contract, respondent had no authority or right
to direct or control appellant's actions except as specifically required by law.

   Respondent did not control the hours worked by appellant nor require caravan
to view property.  Respondent did not set the sales commissions.  Appellant was
encouraged, but not required, to call in daily.

   The procedures manual provided for an arbitration procedure to resolve
disputes among associates, of which appellant was one.  The  management had no
vote, and no approval of the decision by management was required.

   Respondent had no requirement as to how listings were to be obtained.  If a
client walked into the office, the client was assigned to an associate on a
rotation basis by agreement of the associates.

   Appellant's business cards were required to conform to respondent's accepted
style and were approved by her office manager. Sales meetings were utilized by
respondent's office manager to disseminate new information and to hand out new
forms.  Appellant was required to use respondent's forms on all of her sales
transactions, which forms were furnished by respondent to appellant at no cost.
Appellant was expected to wear business attire while at work.

   Where signs were needed, appellant was required to purchase signs from the
one company with which respondent did its sign business.  Appellant was required
to follow time deadlines established by respondent in canceling the placement of
signs on listed and sold property.

   If there was joint participation in deals with other associates, appellant
was required to follow the commission schedule set forth in the procedures
manual.

   Appellant and other associates were required to follow prescribed procedures
to assure the progress of a transaction through escrow.  Also, no transaction
appellant was involved in could become final until approved by appellant's
supervisor.

   Respondent provided a dental plan at the request of the associates.  The
dental plan representatives required that all payments be mailed to and be made
by the respondent company.  The company agreed to accept monthly billing by the
dental plan as an accommodation to the associates, and to collect the monthly
premiums from each associate.

   Respondent did not deduct social security or withhold income tax from the
commissions of the associates.

   The associates, themselves, asked to obtain worker's compensation. They also
asked to obtain errors and omissions insurance  protection.  Both were
accomplished through respondent with a premium paid by each associate, prorated
monthly.

    In the course of appellant's relationship with respondent, which began
approximately November 1, 1976, and ended approximately June 12, 1978, appellant
paid a total fee for worker's compensation in the sum of $ 321.75 which sum
appellant seeks to recover.

   Contentions

   1. A real estate salesperson is an employee of the real estate broker as a
matter of law.

   2. The evidence was insufficient to sustain the finding of the trial court.

   Discussion

   I

Relationship Between Real Estate Salesperson and Real Estate Broker as a Matter
of Law

   Appellant contends a real estate salesperson is an employee of the real
estate broker as a matter of law. Respondent contends the relationship between a
real estate salesperson and a real estate broker may be that of an independent
contractor.

   An "employer" is defined by Labor Code section 3300 as ". . . (c) Every
person including any public service corporation, which has any natural person in
service."

   An "employee" is defined by Labor Code section 3351 as ". . . every person in
the service of an employer under any appointment or contract of hire or
apprenticeship express or implied, oral or written, whether lawfully or
unlawfully employed . . . ."

   An "independent contractor" is defined in Labor Code section 3353 as "any
person who renders service for a specified recompense for a specified result,
under the control of his principal as to the result only and not as to the means
by which such result is accomplished." Labor Code section 3357 provides, "Any
person rendering service for another, other than as an independent contractor,
or unless expressly excluded herein, is presumed to be an employee."

    Within the context of these Labor Code sections, prior to the enactment in
1955 of Business and Professions Code section 10177, subdivision (h), the
determination of the relationship between the real estate salesperson and the
real estate broker depended upon the amount of control the broker exercised over
the salesperson. Whether or not a person was an independent contractor or an
employee for worker's compensation was an issue to be decided upon the facts of
each individual case.  Brown v. Industrial Accident Commission (1917) 174 Cal.
457, 460 [163 P. 664] states "In each case, the question is one of fact
depending for its determination solely upon those particular circumstances which
tend to show whether, at the precise time of the accident for which compensation
is sought, the petitioner had the power to exercise over the applicant such
personal control as to attribute to him the characteristic of an employee."
Royal Indemnity Co. v. Industrial Accident Commission (1930) 104 Cal.App. 290,
292 [285 P. 912]  states that an independent contractor is "one who renders
service in the course of an independent employment or occupation, following his
employer's desires only in the results of the work, and not the means whereby it
is to be accomplished." Royal further states at page 293 "The occupation of real
estate salesman is one that might come under the classification of employee, or
independent contractor, depending upon the facts of the particular case."

   In 1955 subdivision (h) of Business and Professions Code section 10177 was
added.  Section 10177 states in part "The commissioner may suspend or revoke the
license of any real estate licensee, or may deny the issuance of a license to an
applicant, who has done any of the following: . . . (h) If, as a broker
licensee, failed to exercise reasonable supervision over the activities of his
salesmen."

   The enactment of Business and Professions Code section 10177, subdivision (h)
raises the question of whether or not the real estate broker is now required to
exert  that degree of supervision and control over real estate salespersons so
that salespersons are employees for the purpose of worker's compensation as a
matter of law.

   The case of Gipson v. Davis Realty Co. (1963) 215 Cal.App.2d 190 [30
Cal.Rptr. 253], holding a real estate broker liable for accidental injuries
caused by a real estate salesman, held that as a matter of law, the salesman was
an agent of the broker, but not necessarily an employee.  Gipson states at page
206 "We are satisfied, accordingly, that while it  may be a question of fact
whether in each case a real estate salesman is an employee within the common law
definition of master and servant, the Legislature has, by virtue of statutory
enactment, made such a salesman an agent of the broker as a matter of law."

    Civil Code section 2295 defines an agent as ". . . one who represents
another, called the principal, in dealings with third persons."

    Gipson v. Davis Realty Co., supra, 215 Cal.App.2d 190, at page 205 states
"While one be both a servant and an agent, . . . the terms are not wholly
synonymous." Discussing the Unemployment Insurance Act and the Workmen's
Compensation Act the court stated at page 205 ". . . insofar as these acts are
concerned,  the common law definition of master and servant is the measure of
the relationship between the parties, and that the statutory definition of
salesman in the Real Estate Act does not make a real estate salesman an
'employee' within the meaning of these acts as a matter of law."

    Resnik v. Anderson & Miles (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 569 [167 Cal.Rptr. 340],
discussed the relationship between a real estate salesperson and a real estate
broker. The broker claimed the salesperson was an independent contractor and,
therefore, neither the labor commissioner nor the superior court had subject
matter jurisdiction over the salesperson's claim.

   Finding jurisdiction and relying on Gipson v. Davis Realty Co., supra, 215
Cal.App.2d 190, the Resnick court stated at page 572, "An analysis of the
statutory scheme relating to real estate salesmen compels the conclusion that
such a person is strictly the agent of the broker under whom he is licensed."
The court further stated at page 573, "We conclude, therefore, that a salesman,
insofar as his relationship with his broker is concerned, cannot be classified
as an independent contractor. Any contract which purports to change that
relationship is invalid as being contrary to the law . . . ."

   The conclusion is that a real estate salesperson may not be an independent
contractor, and is an agent as a matter of law. In most instances the real
estate salesperson would be an employee for the purposes of worker's
compensation, but that determination remains a question of fact.

    II

Sufficiency of the Evidence

    Appellant contends the evidence produced at the trial is insufficient to
support the finding of the trial court.

    When a finding of fact is challenged on the ground that there is no
substantial evidence to sustain it, "the power of an appellate court begins and
ends with the determination as to whether there is any substantial evidence,
contradicted or uncontradicted, which will support the finding of fact." (
Grainger v. Antoyan (1957) 48 Cal.2d 805, 807 [313 P.2d 848].)

    The trial court's conclusion of law that the salesperson was an independent
contractor is incorrect.  The record in this case discloses, however, that there
was substantial evidence presented to sustain the conclusion that appellant was
not an employee for purposes of worker's compensation insurance.

   The judgment is affirmed.


                              39 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              ROBERT W. KING, Appellant, v. TILDEN PARK ESTATES (a
                        Corporation) et al., Respondents

                                 Civ. No. 17582

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

            156 Cal. App. 2d 824; 320 P.2d 109; 1958 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      2491


                                January 20, 1958

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Contra Costa
County.  Norman A. Gregg, Judge.

   Action by real estate broker to recover compensation for services rendered
pursuant to an oral agreement.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Brokers -- Employment -- Written Authorization.  --An agreement for
compensation for obtaining the assignment of a contract right to purchase real
property is an "agreement authorizing or employing an agent or broker to
purchase or sell real estate for compensation or a commission" within the
language of the statute of frauds (Civ. Code, § 1624, subd. 5; Code Civ. Proc.,
§ 1973, subd. 5), and must be in writing.

(2) Id. -- Employment -- Written Authorization.  --In determining the nature of
services that will bring an employment contract within the statute of frauds,
the phrase "to sell or purchase" includes "to aid or assist in the purchase or
sale" of real estate.

(3) Id.--Employment--Written Authorization.  --The chief element required to be
shown in writing with respect to a broker's authority to buy or sell realty is
the fact of his employment to act for the principal in the transaction.

(4) Id. -- Employment -- Written Authorization.  -- A real estate broker is
presumed to know that contracts for real estate commissions are invalid and
unenforceable unless in writing.

(5) Id. -- Employment -- Written Authorization.  -- A real estate broker who
admitted that he had never signed an agreement with any of the persons from whom
he was attempting to collect a commission assumed the risk of relying on oral
promises and had no cause for complaint if his efforts went unrewarded.

(6) Id.--Employment--Written Authorization--Estoppel to Assert Statute.  --A
real estate broker who was relying on an oral promise in his action to collect a
commission alleged to be due from defendants could not urge that defendants were
estopped from asserting the statute of frauds as a defense where the facts
alleged did not contain the elements of estoppel and did not establish
plaintiff's reliance on the alleged agreement but only the usual conduct of real
estate brokers in obtaining purchasers and operating under a nonexclusive
listing agreement, and where it appeared that plaintiff was not bound to perform
the various services but was acting as a mere volunteer.

(7) Contracts--Consideration.  --The giving up of an unenforceable right is not
sufficient consideration for a new promise.

(8) Appeal--Objections.  --Where a real estate broker attempting to recover a
commission under an oral agreement failed to argue in the trial court that the
alleged agreement was severable, such contention could not be made for the first
time on appeal.

(9) Brokers--Compensation--Actions.  --In an action by a real estate broker,
first, on an oral agreement for compensation for certain services, second, in
quantum meruit for the reasonable value of services rendered, and third, for
expenses incurred in handling the transaction, plaintiff cannot enforce the
second and third causes of action indirectly where the contract is unenforceable
because of the statute of frauds.

COUNSEL: Byers, Howell & Fraser, Fred K. Howell, Jr., and Robert H. Kroninger
for Appellant.

Tinning & DeLap, J. Vance Porlier and Francis A. Watson, Jr., for Respondents.

JUDGES: Kaufman, P. J.  Dooling, J., and Draper, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: KAUFMAN

OPINION

     This is an appeal from a judgment of nonsuit in favor of respondents.  The
motion for a nonsuit as to respondent Pringle-Hurd and Company, Inc., was
granted at the conclusion of appellant's opening statement on the ground that
the terms of the agreement were not determined  at the time the respondent
agreed to pay the commission.  The motion for a nonsuit as to respondents
Gillett and Tilden Park Estates was granted at the close of appellant's case in
chief on the ground that the alleged agreement violated the Statute of Frauds.

   The amended complaint stated three alternative causes of action: the first on
an oral broker's agreement for compensation for obtaining the assignment of a
contract right to purchase real property; the second in quantum meruit for the
reasonable value of the services rendered by the appellant to the respondents in
the amount of $ 141,500; the third for the expenses incurred by the appellant in
handling this transaction for the respondents in the amount of $ 8,500.

   The facts as disclosed by the record are as follows: The plaintiff and
appellant, Robert W. King, has been a licensed real estate broker in California
since 1946.  Early in 1951 appellant received a brochure from the East Bay
Municipal Utility District stating that the 2,545-acre tract in Contra Costa
County known as the Wildcat Canyon Area was for sale.  In 1952 the district, by
a written contract of sale, agreed to sell the property to Phillip Ross who was
acting for a buying syndicate composed of Mr. Ross, Louis Navellier, Mr.
Weingard, Arnold Moore and others.

   Appellant contended that from May, 1953, until May, 1954, he had had an oral
agreement with Mr. Ross to find a purchaser for all of Ross' interest in the
Wildcat Canyon  Area in return for a 10 per cent commission.  Appellant
testified that his oral agreement was made over the telephone with Mr. Navellier
who represented Mr. Ross.  Mr. Ross denied the existence of this agreement and
stated that he met the appellant for the first time in December, 1953.

   In April, 1954, Phillip Ross and his syndicate assigned all of their interest
in the contract of sale with the Municipal Utility District to the defendant,
Tilden Park Estates, a corporation formed for this purpose on May 3, 1954, with
the defendant, Harry R. Gillett, as president.  This transaction is the basis of
this action.

   With the help of Jeff Branscom, a business associate of the appellant, and
the brother-in-law of respondent Gillett, the appellant on a vacation visit to
Las Vegas in November, 1953, met Gillett in Las Vegas and discussed the purchase
of the Wildcat Canyon property.  On December 3, 1953, Gillett came to Berkeley
to look at the property which was shown to him by one of the appellant's
salesmen, as the appellant  was in the hospital.  A week or so later Mr. Gillett
again came to Berkeley to more extensively look at the property with the
appellant and Mr. Navellier.  About December 20, 1953, the appellant, Mr. Ross,
and Mr. Navellier flew to Las Vegas for further negotiations relating to the
price of the property.  At that time the appellant discussed the matter of his
commission privately with Mr. Gillett, $ 25,000 plus a 4 per cent override. In
the latter part of December, 1953, the parties again met in Los Angeles, at
which time the appellant again discussed the commission with Mr. Gillett on the
same terms as before.  The appellant testified that he next saw Mr. Gillett in
Las Vegas in January, 1954, and at this time they discussed a commission of $
25,000 flat payment, with an interest in the construction, real estate and
insurance companies to be formed, but no definite terms were agreed upon.  The
appellant met Ross and Gillett again in the Bay Area in February, 1954.

   On April 28, 1954, another meeting was held in Los Angeles with the above
parties present as well as a representative of the respondents Pringle-Hurd, a
New York corporation which was to finance the transaction.

   Appellant testified that the conversations in regard to his commission at
that time were as follows: "Mr. Ross said that -- 'You understand, Mr. Hurd and
Mr. Gillett, that you are to pay Mr. King's commission,' and they understood.
They replied that they understood that." At that meeting Mr. Hurd made a $
25,000 deposit on the purchase price of the property.  At this time no definite
agreement pertaining to appellant's commission had been reached, except that the
purchaser was to pay appellant's commission.  It would appear then that until
April 28, 1954, appellant was looking to Ross, the seller, to pay his
commission.

   On May 10 and 11 the appellant met Mr. Gillett and his associate, Mr. Charley
Horsey, in Las Vegas, at which time they had the following conversation in
regard to appellant's commission: "At that time we discussed the twenty-five
thousand dollars -- Mr. Horsey was present -- the two per cent override -- he
said Pringle-Hurd wouldn't go for any more than that -- and an interest in the
insurance company to be formed, the real estate company to be formed, and the
construction company to be formed.  I asked him to put it in writing at that
time, give me a memo on it, and I was making my notes, and both he and Mr.
Horsey assured me that their word was good enough and it would be taken care of
after we got back to the Bay Area and after the ratification of the  contract
that had been drawn by their respective attorneys on ratification by the East
Bay MUD." Appellant further testified that he relied on Gillett's word and that
after this discussion Gillett stated he was going to send Pringle-Hurd a wire
verifying the 2 per cent override, to which the appellant consented and that
Gillett then asked him to find some customers for the property.

   Appellant testified that after May 10, 1954, he showed the property to
various contractors and other potential purchasers;  he arranged for the site
and remodelling of offices for Tilden Park Estates; he made speeches in front of
various groups on behalf of the defendants, generally spending 90-95 per cent of
his business time on these matters to the detriment of the rest of his real
estate business.

   Appellant admitted that he had never signed a written agreement for his
commission with Gillett or Tilden Park Estates.  The record shows that an
agreement was prepared by the defendants and submitted to the appellant.  After
consulting his attorney, Mr. Gray, appellant rejected the above agreement and
had Mr. Gray draft another agreement.  This agreement, Plaintiff's Exhibit
Number 7, varies materially from appellant's complaint and oral testimony in
that it proposes a flat figure of $ 22,000 (instead of the $ 25,000 alleged) and
a two per cent override and makes no mention of any interests in an insurance or
construction company to be formed.  This second agreement was forwarded to
defendant's counsel, Mr. DeLap, who prepared and returned another draft to the
appellant which the appellant never signed.  Shortly thereafter all negotiations
between the parties collapsed, and this action was filed.

   Appellant contends on appeal that the trial court erred in granting the
motion of nonsuit as to the defendants Harry Gillett and Tilden Park Estates.
Appellant contends that the evidence discloses an oral broker's agreement for
procuring the assignment of a contract right to purchase real property, which is
not an interest in real property and therefore not violative of the statute of
frauds; that this agreement is supported by adequate consideration as appellant
gave up his rights under the oral agreement with Ross; that even if the statute
of frauds is applicable, an estoppel operates in his favor because of the
statements made by Mr. Gillett on May 10; that the agreement, even if illegal
and in violation of the statute of frauds, was severable as to the provisions
for the commission and the provisions for appellant's interest in  the various
corporations to be formed for the development of the property.  We see no merit
in any of these contentions.

     Viewing the evidence more favorably to the appellant, i.e., that it does
show that an agreement was reached, we turn to appellant's first contention that
the agreement is not an "agreement authorizing or employing an agent or broker
to purchase or sell real estate for compensation or a commission," within the
language of Civil Code, section 1624, subdivision 5, and Code of Civil
Procedure, section 1973, subdivision 5, because a contract right is not "real
property." We think the agreement alleged by the appellant perfectly fits the
language of the above statutes.  In Pacific etc. Dev. Corp. v. Western Pac. R.
R. Co., 47 Cal.2d 62 [301 P.2d 825], appellant's point as to the nature of the
interest was squarely refuted in the court's holding that the plaintiff, a
licensed real estate broker, could not recover compensation for alleged services
rendered in connection with defendant's procurement of an option to purchase
real property, as the agreement was not in writing.   The court stated at 67 and
68: "In determining the nature of the services which will bring an employment
contract within the statute, the phrase 'to sell or purchase' includes 'to aid
or assist in the purchase or sale' of real estate. ( Hooper v. Mayfield, 114
Cal.App.2d 802, 806 [251 P.2d 330]; Duckworth v. Schumacher, 135 Cal.App. 661,
666 [27 P.2d 919].) Such broad construction of the term conforms with one of the
primary purposes of the statute, the protection of real estate owners from the
assertion of false claims by brokers and agents.  ( Toomy v. Dunphy, 86 Cal.
639, 642 [25 P. 130]; also Gorham v. Heiman, 90 Cal. 346, 358 [27 P. 289];
Hooper v. Mayfield, supra, 114 Cal.App.2d 802, 807.) Likewise, the procurement
of an option agreement for the purchase of real property is a contract that aids
or assists in the purchase or sale of real property, and properly comes within
the provisions of the statute.  Accordingly, a contract employing a broker to
obtain an option for the purchase of real property, like a contract  employing a
broker to purchase or sell real property ( Steiner v. Rowley, 35 Cal.2d 713, 717
[221 P.2d 9]; Marks v. Walter G. McCarty Corp. supra [33 Cal.2d 814 (205 P.2d
1025)]), comes within the statute and must be in writing.  To hold otherwise
would open the door to the assertion of unfounded claims by brokers and others
on the pretense of oral employment in real estate transactions relative to
options, and so frustrate the purpose of the statute. . . .

     "The chief element required to be shown in writing is the fact of
employment of the broker to act for the principal in the transaction.  (9
Cal.Jur.2d § 40, p. 185; Toomy v. Dunphy, supra, 86 Cal. 639, 642 [25 P. 130];
Hooper v. Mayfield, supra, 114 Cal.App.2d 802, 807; Moore v. Brogfeldt, 96
Cal.App. 306, 309-310 [273 P. 1114].)" and at 70: "The fact that plaintiff
rendered services and conducted unsuccessful negotiations with Lenfest does not
constitute a change of position to plaintiff's detriment, nor does the fact that
defendant refused to pay plaintiff a real estate commission upon an option which
defendant later procured through direct negotiations with Lenfest constitute an
unjust enrichment within the meaning of the estoppel doctrine.  To hold
otherwise,  in the absence of any showing of fraud, would defeat the purpose of
the statute of frauds in relation to real estate transactions.  ( Hicks v. Post,
154 Cal. 22, 28 [96 P. 878]; Augustine v. Trucco, 124 Cal.App.2d 229, 241-244
[268 P.2d 780]; Hooper v. Mayfield, supra, 114 Cal.App.2d 802, 809; Colburn v.
Sessin, supra, 94 Cal.App.2d 4, 6 [209 P.2d 989].)" Dabney v. Edwards, 5 Cal.2d
1 [53 P.2d 962, 103 A.L.R. 822], cited by the appellant held only that a lease
for a definite term of years is not real property under Civil Code, section 1624
, subdivision 5, while a lease to continue so long as gas and oil are produced
is real property within the above section.  In Belieu v. Power, 54 Cal.App. 244
[201 P. 620], the court was faced with the entirely different question of
whether a judgment lien attaches to the vendee's interest under a sales contract
and based its holding on the different wording in the statutes relating to
execution and those relating to judgment liens.

     It has long been held in this state that a real estate broker is presumed
to know that contracts for real estate commissions are invalid and unenforceable
unless put in writing.  ( Steiner v. Rowley, 35 Cal.2d 713 [221 P.2d 9]; Marks
v. Walter G. McCarty Corp., 33 Cal.2d 814 [205 P.2d 1025]; Kroger v. Baur, 46
Cal.App.2d 801 [117 P.2d 50].)   The appellant here admitted that he had never
signed an agreement with any of the respondents.  He therefore assumed the risk
of relying on oral promises and has no cause for complaint if his efforts go
unrewarded.  ( Augustine v. Trucco, 124 Cal.App.2d 229 [268 P.2d 780].)

     Nor, as pointed out in Sweeley v. Gordon, 47 Cal.App.2d 381, at 383-384
[118 P.2d 14], can one in appellant's position invoke the equity powers of the
court to urge that the judgment of nonsuit be reversed under the doctrine of
estoppel. The general rule as to estoppel to rely on the statute of frauds is
stated in 12 California Jurisprudence, page 934, as follows: "§ 103.
Circumstances Creating Estoppel in General.  -- Equity is bound by the statute
of frauds, and, in general, will give relief against it only in two classes of
cases; first, where to allow the statute to be set up would be to secure to the
party relying upon it the fruits of actual fraud; and, second, where to allow
the statute to be set up would place the party resisting it in an inequitable
position, it appearing further that there is evidence just as good as a writing
of the agreement between the parties.  To create an estoppel to assert the
statute, the party relying on it must be able to show clearly, not only the
terms of the contract, but also such acts and conduct of the opposite party as
amount to a representation that he will not avail himself of the statute to
escape his agreement, and, further, that the party asserting the estoppel has,
in reliance on such representation and in pursuance of the contract, so far
altered his position as to incur an unjust and unconscionable injury and loss,
if the statute  be allowed to be set up.  If no such loss or injury is shown the
reason for the estoppel fails.  Changes in the position of a party, not made as
a necessary consequence of an oral contract within the statute, and not induced
by or known to the opposite party when the contract was made, do not estop the
latter from setting up the statute."

   The facts alleged here do not contain the elements of estoppel. The facts do
not establish appellant's reliance on the alleged agreement but only the usual
conduct of real estate brokers in obtaining purchasers and operating under a
nonexclusive listing agreement. Nor does it appear that the appellant was bound
to perform the various services.  He was acting as a mere volunteer.

    Le Blond v. Wolfe, 83 Cal.App.2d 282 [188 P.2d 278], cited by the appellant,
is easily distinguishable.  In that case, the plaintiff real estate broker had a
written contract obligating the seller to pay him a commission.  The broker
released the seller from this obligation in reliance on the oral promise of the
defendant purchaser to pay the commission.  The appellate court affirmed the
judgment for the plaintiff, holding that the doctrine of estoppel applied as the
plaintiff had immediately changed his position to his detriment by releasing the
seller. In the instant case, the appellant alleged an oral agreement with the
seller Ross (the existence of which Ross denied), which appellant allegedly gave
up in return  for the respondent's oral promise.  It is elementary that the
giving up of an unenforceable right is not sufficient consideration for a new
promise.

     Appellant's argument that the alleged agreement was severable was not
raised below and cannot be urged for the first time on appeal.  ( Estate of
Raphael, 115 Cal.App.2d 525 [252 P.2d 979].)   Nor can the appellant enforce his
second and third causes of action indirectly where the contract was
unenforceable because of the statute of frauds.  ( White v. Hirschman, 54
Cal.App.2d 573 [129 P.2d 430]; Ford v. Palisades Corp., 101 Cal.App.2d 491 [225
P.2d 545]; Jamison v. Hyde, 141 Cal. 109 [74 P. 695].)

   As there is no legal or equitable basis for sustaining appellant's action,
the trial court was correct in entering the judgment of nonsuit.

   Judgment affirmed.


                              40 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           MKB MANAGEMENT, INC., Plaintiff and Appellant, v. ANDRE O.
              MELIKIAN, Individually and as Trustee, etc., et al.,
                          Defendants and Respondents.

                                    B213479

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SECOND APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION THREE

          184 Cal. App. 4th 796; 108 Cal. Rptr. 3d 899; 2010 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 679


                              May 13, 2010, Filed

PRIOR-HISTORY:
   APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles County, No.
SC098336, Allan J. Goodman, Judge.
MKB Management, Inc. v. Andre O. Melikian, 2010 Cal. App. LEXIS 639 (Cal. App.
2d Dist., Apr. 22, 2010)

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(5) Brokers § 16--Compensation of Brokers--License as Necessity for Action--
Exceptions.--California's real estate licensing statutes prohibit a person from
acting as a real estate broker without a real estate license (Bus. & Prof. Code,
§ 10130). The statutes go further by expressly prohibiting an unlicensed real
estate broker from maintaining an action to recover compensation for the
performance of acts for which a license was required (Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10136
). The real estate licensing statutes, however, do not state that an unlicensed
real estate broker cannot maintain an action to recover compensation for acts
for which no license was required, and there is no indication that the
Legislature intended to preclude the recovery of compensation for such services
or to repudiate the generally applicable doctrine of severability. The trial
court thus erred in concluding as a matter of law, based on a property owner's
complaint alone, that all of the services provided by an unlicensed real estate
broker under a property management agreement were dependent upon, or
inextricably related to, the acts for which a real estate broker license was
required.

   [Cal. Real Estate Law & Practice (2010) ch. 64, § 64.05; Cal. Forms of
Pleading and Practice (2010) ch. 103, Brokers, § 103.20; 3 Witkin, Summary of
Cal. Law (10th ed. 2005) Agency and Employment, § 77; 1 Witkin, Summary of Cal.
Law (10th ed. 2005) Contracts, §§ 436, 495.]

COUNSEL: Pariser & Pariser and Wayne D. Pariser for Plaintiff and Appellant.

Law Offices of Steven J. Haber and Steven J. Haber for Defendants and
Respondents.

JUDGES: Opinion by Croskey, Acting P. J., with Kitching and Aldrich, JJ.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: Croskey

OPINION

    CROSKEY, Acting P. J.--MKB Management, Inc. (MKB), appeals a judgment of
dismissal following the sustaining of a demurrer to its complaint without leave
to amend. MKB alleges that Andre O. Melikian and several related companies
failed to pay amounts due to MKB as the manager of rental properties under a
property management agreement. The trial court concluded that the principal
object of the agreement was the performance of acts for which a real estate
broker license was required and that MKB could not enforce any part of the
agreement or recover any compensation because it did not possess such a license.

   MKB contends it is entitled to maintain this action to recover compensation
for services for which no real estate broker license was required regardless of
whether other services that it provided required such a license. We conclude
that the sustaining of the demurrer to the counts for breach of contract based
on the absence of a real estate broker license was error and that the trial
court must exercise its discretion to determine whether the doctrine of
severability applies so as to allow the recovery of compensation for services
for which no such license was required. We also conclude that the sustaining of
the demurrer to the common counts was error and that the judgment cannot be
affirmed based on the absence of a contractor's license. We therefore will
reverse the judgment.

FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

1. Property Management Agreement

   MKB and Melikian entered into a new management agreement dated January 1,
2007, in which Melikian as owner granted MKB "the exclusive right to rent,
lease, operate and manage" several apartment buildings. Melikian granted MKB the
authority to advertise rentals; sign, renew, and cancel leases; collect rents
and other charges; terminate tenancies and sign notices on behalf of the owner;
prosecute unlawful detainer actions; cause  repairs and alterations to be made;
decorate the premises; purchase supplies; hire and supervise employees to
operate and maintain the premises; and contract with others for services on
behalf of the owner. MKB agreed to deposit in Melikian's account at a financial
institution all receipts less disbursements. Melikian agreed to pay any expenses
in excess of the receipts and also agreed to pay a management fee of the greater
of $ 2,000 per month or 4 percent of the gross rents.

2. Complaint, Demurrer, and First Amended Complaint

   MKB filed a complaint in June 2008 against Melikian, individually and as
trustee of the Andre O. Melikian 2003 Trust; 228 S. Mariposa LLC; 452 S.
Mariposa LLC; 470 S. Mariposa LLC; 5030-5032 Maplewood LLC; and 4122 W. 2nd LLC.
MKB alleged that defendants failed to pay amounts due under the property
management agreement and failed to pay for services rendered and money paid by
MKB at defendants' request. A copy of the property management agreement was
attached to the complaint. MKB alleged that Melikian was a party to the written
agreement and that the other defendants had orally agreed to pay amounts due
under the agreement. MKB alleged  counts for (1) breach of a written contract,
against Melikian; (2) breach of an oral contract, against the other defendants;
and (3) common counts for quantum meruit and money paid, against all defendants.

   Defendants jointly demurred to the complaint, arguing that MKB failed to
allege possession of a real estate broker license. They argued that such a
license was required for the services described in the property management
agreement and that absent an allegation of licensure MKB could not recover
payment for the alleged services.

   MKB filed a first amended complaint in August 2008, before the scheduled
hearing on the demurrer, alleging the same three counts against the same
defendants. MKB also alleges that it was exempt from the real estate broker
license requirement because any services for which such a license was required
were of the types described in Business and Professions Code section 10131.01,
subdivision (a)(3), and it performed those services under the supervision and
control of Melikian, a licensed real estate broker. MKB alleges further that it
was exempt from the contractor's license requirement pursuant to Business and
Professions Code section 7048 because the charges for any services for which
such a license otherwise might be required were less than $ 500 per undertaking
or project. MKB seeks damages in the amount of not less than $ 37,919.63 on each
count.

3. Demurrer to First Amended Complaint

   Defendants jointly demurred to the complaint, repeating the same arguments
from their original demurrer. They also argued that the exemption of Business
and Professions Code section 10131.01, subdivision (a)(3) was inapplicable
because Melikian was not an employee of MKB and because the services rendered
under the property management agreement were beyond the scope of those specified
in the statute. Defendants argued further that a contractor's license was
required for some of the services provided under the contract, that the
exemption for projects under $ 500 was inapplicable, and that MKB could not
recover payment for those services.

   MKB argued in opposition to the demurrer that some of the services provided
did not require either a real estate broker license or a contractor's license
and that it was entitled to recover payment for those services even if it could
not recover payment for other services for which it did not have the required
license. MKB also argued that it was exempt from the real estate broker license
requirement with respect to some of the services provided, that the agreement
was severable as to those services, and that it was entitled to recover payment
for those services. MKB argued further that it was exempt from the contractor's
license requirement.

   The trial court concluded that the property management agreement was unlawful
because its "principal object" was for MKB, which admittedly possessed no real
estate broker license, to provide services for which a real estate broker
license was required. The court concluded that the exemption under Business and
Professions Code section 10131.01, subdivision (a)(3) was inapplicable. The
court stated further that the courts will not enforce illegal contracts as a
matter of law or lend assistance to parties seeking compensation for illegal
acts, and that to sever the illegal parts and enforce the rest of such an
agreement would undermine the real estate licensing laws. 1 The court therefore
sustained the  demurrer without leave to amend and entered a judgment of
dismissal.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   The court
stated: "It is well settled that a party to an illegal contract cannot come into
a court of law and ask to have his illegal objects carried out; courts will not
enforce an illegal bargain or lend their assistance to a party who seeks
compensation for an illegal act. Yoo v. Jho (2007) 147 Cal.App.4th 1249, 1255
[55 Cal. Rptr. 3d 243]. Any possible injustice to the parties is outweighed by
the importance of deterring illegal conduct. Id. [¶] Nor has plaintiff cited any
authority that contracts governed by the real estate licensing statutes can be
severed and the not-illegal portions enforced. To permit such action would
appear to be contrary to the object of this licensing law."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

CONTENTIONS

   MKB contends (1) the lack of a real estate broker license does not preclude
its recovery for services for which no such license was required;  (2) it was
statutorily exempt from the real estate broker license requirement pursuant to
Business and Professions Code section 10131.01, subdivision (a)(3); (3) the lack
of a contractor's license does not preclude its recovery for services for which
no such license was required; and (4) it was statutorily exempt from the
contractor's license requirement pursuant to Business and Professions Code
section 7048.

DISCUSSION

1. Standard of Review

   A demurrer tests the legal sufficiency of the factual allegations in a
complaint. We independently review the sustaining of a demurrer and determine de
novo whether the complaint alleges facts sufficient to state a cause of action.
(McCall v. PacifiCare of Cal., Inc. (2001) 25 Cal.4th 412, 415 [106 Cal. Rptr.
2d 271, 21 P.3d 1189].) We assume the truth of the properly pleaded factual
allegations, facts that reasonably can be inferred from those expressly pleaded,
and matters of which judicial notice has been taken. (Schifando v. City of Los
Angeles (2003) 31 Cal.4th 1074, 1081 [6 Cal. Rptr. 3d 457, 79 P.3d 569].) We
construe the pleading in a reasonable manner and read the allegations in
context. (Ibid.) We affirm the judgment if it is correct for any reason,
regardless of the trial court's stated reasons. (Aubry v. Tri-City Hospital Dist
. (1992) 2 Cal.4th 962, 967 [9 Cal. Rptr. 2d 92, 831 P.2d 317].)

2. The Sustaining of the Demurrer Based on the Absence of a Real Estate Broker
License Was Error

a. Real Estate License Requirement

   A plaintiff seeking to recover compensation for acts for which a real estate
license was required must allege that he or she possessed the required license
at the time the cause of action arose. (Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10136.) 2 Section
10136, however, does not prevent a plaintiff from seeking compensation for acts
for which no real estate license was required. Some of the services provided
under the property management agreement required a real estate broker license,
but others did not. A broker's license was required for offering for lease and
leasing apartment units and collecting rents (id., § 10131, subd. (b)), but was
not required for other management duties such as causing repairs to made,
decorating, and general maintenance.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   "No
person engaged in the business or acting in the capacity of a real estate broker
or a real estate salesman within this State shall bring or maintain any action
in the courts of this State for the collection of compensation for the
performance of any of the acts mentioned in this article without alleging and
proving that he was a duly licensed real estate broker or real estate salesman
at the time the alleged cause of action arose." (Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10136.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

 b. Breach of Contract Counts

   The extent to which the property management agreement and the alleged oral
agreement to pay amounts due under that agreement may be enforceable depends on
the doctrine of severability. "Where a contract has several distinct objects, of
which one at least is lawful, and one at least is unlawful, in whole or in part,
the contract is void as to the latter and valid as to the rest." (Civ. Code, §
1599.) The doctrine of severability, codified in Civil Code section 1599,
"preserves and enforces any lawful portion of a parties' contract that feasibly
may be severed." (Marathon Entertainment, Inc. v. Blasi (2008) 42 Cal.4th 974,
991 [70 Cal. Rptr. 3d 727, 174 P.3d 741] (Marathon).) If, on the other hand, a
contract has only a single object and that object is unlawful, in whole or in
part, the entire contract is void. (Civ. Code, § 1598.) 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   "Where a
contract has but a single object, and such object is unlawful, whether in whole
or in part, or wholly impossible of performance, or so vaguely expressed as to
be wholly unascertainable, the entire contract is void." (Civ. Code, § 1598.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   "'Courts are to look to the various purposes of the contract. If the central
purpose of the contract is tainted with illegality, then the contract as a whole
cannot be enforced. If the illegality is collateral to the main purpose of the
contract, and the illegal provision can be extirpated from the contract by means
of severance or restriction, then such severance and restriction are
appropriate.' [Citations.]" (Marathon, supra, 42 Cal.4th at p. 996, quoting
Armendariz v. Foundation Health Psychcare Services, Inc. (2000) 24 Cal.4th 83,
124 [99 Cal. Rptr. 2d 745, 6 P.3d 669] (Armendariz).)

   A contract that does not allocate consideration between lawful and unlawful
services but instead provides for a single, undifferentiated payment for all
services provided does not necessarily preclude severance. Severance may be
available if some of the services provided are wholly independent of the
unlawful object. (Marathon, supra, 42 Cal.4th at p. 997 & fn. 15; see Civ. Code,
§ 1608. 4) In those circumstances, the court may determine the value of the
lawful services and apportion the consideration accordingly. (42 Cal.4th at p.
997.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   "If any
part of a single consideration for one or more objects, or of several
considerations for a single object, is unlawful, the entire contract is void." (
Civ. Code, § 1608.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   If a contract is capable of severance, the decision whether to sever the
illegal portions and enforce the remainder is a discretionary decision for the
trial court to make based on equitable considerations. (Marathon, supra, 42
Cal.4th at pp. 992, 996, 998.)

   "Two reasons for severing or restricting illegal terms rather than voiding
the entire contract appear implicit in case law. The first is to prevent parties
from gaining undeserved benefit or suffering undeserved detriment as a result of
voiding the entire agreement--particularly when there has been full or partial
performance of the contract. [Citations.] Second, more generally, the doctrine
of severance attempts to conserve a contractual relationship if to do so would
not be condoning an illegal scheme. [Citations.] The overarching inquiry is
whether '"the interests of justice ... would be furthered"' by severance.
[Citation.]" (Armendariz, supra, 24 Cal.4th at pp. 123-124.)

    The trial court here concluded that the property management agreement could
not be severed as a matter of law because to do so would undermine the real
estate licensing statutes. The California Supreme Court rejected a similar
argument in Marathon, supra, 42 Cal.4th 974, relating to the Talent Agencies Act
(Lab. Code, § 1700 et seq.). The plaintiff in Marathon was a personal manager
that had acted as a talent agency without the required license. (Marathon, supra
, at p. 990.) The Talent Agencies Act provided that such conduct was illegal but
was silent as to the remedy for such a violation. (Marathon, supra, at p. 991.)
The Marathon court found nothing in the Talent Agencies Act to repudiate the
generally applicable rule of severability and no indication that the Legislature
intended the doctrine of severability to be inapplicable to disputes under the
act. (42 Cal.4th at pp. 991-994.) 5 The court therefore concluded that there was
no conflict between Civil Code section 1599 and the Talent Agencies Act and that
severability was available, but not mandatory. (Marathon, supra, at pp. 991, 996
.) Marathon concluded that the trial court erred by deciding as a matter of law
on a summary judgment motion that the plaintiff was not entitled to recover any
compensation for services provided, affirmed the judgment by the Court of Appeal
reversing the summary judgment, and stated that the Labor Commissioner and the
trial court should exercise their discretion in the first instance to determine
whether to sever the contract and award compensation for services legally
provided without a license. (Id. at pp. 982, 998-999.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   Marathon,
supra, 42 Cal.4th at pages 993-994, cited several opinions supporting the
general proposition that severance may apply to contracts involving unlicensed
services so as to allow the recovery of compensation for services that did not
require a license. The cited opinions included Broffman v. Newman (1989) 213
Cal.App.3d 252, 261-262 [261 Cal. Rptr. 532], which involved a property manager
acting in part as an unlicensed real estate broker, and Lindenstadt v. Staff
Builders, Inc. (1997) 55 Cal.App.4th 882, 894 [64 Cal. Rptr. 2d 484], which
involved a business acquisition finder acting in part as an unlicensed real
estate broker.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Similarly here, the real estate licensing statutes prohibit a person from
acting as a real estate broker without a real estate license. (Bus. & Prof.
Code, § 10130.) The statutes here go further by expressly prohibiting an
unlicensed real estate broker from maintaining an action to recover compensation
for the performance of acts for which a license was required. (Id., § 10136.)
The real estate licensing statutes, however, do not state that an unlicensed
real estate broker cannot maintain an action to recover compensation for acts
for which  no license was required, and there is no indication that the
Legislature intended to preclude the recovery of compensation for such services
or to repudiate the generally applicable doctrine of severability. Moreover, we
cannot conclude as a matter of law based on the complaint alone that all of the
services provided under the property management agreement were dependent upon or
inextricably related to the acts for which a real estate broker license was
required.

   Yoo v. Jho, supra, 147 Cal.App.4th 1249, cited by the trial court, involved
an action for rescission of a contract for the purchase of a business dealing in
counterfeit goods. The trial court had awarded a partial rescission after a
nonjury trial, ordering the return of the defunct business to the seller and
ordering the  seller to return only $ 125,000 of the $ 400,000 purchase price to
the buyer. (Id. at pp. 1253-1254.) On appeal, we concluded that because
counterfeit goods accounted for a substantial portion of the sales receipts, the
object of the purchase agreement was illegal. (Id. at p. 1255.) We therefore
concluded that the entire contract was void under Civil Code section 1608 and
that the trial court could not enforce the illegal bargain by awarding a partial
rescission. (Yoo, supra, at pp. 1255-1256.) Here, in contrast, we cannot
conclude, based on the complaint alone, that the property management agreement
had a single, unlawful object or that the violation of the real estate licensing
statutes so permeated the entire agreement as to render the entire agreement
void.

   We therefore conclude that the doctrine of severability may apply, in the
discretion of the trial court. The trial court's conclusion that the property
management agreement could not be severed as a matter of law because to do so
would undermine the real estate licensing statutes was not correct, and the
sustaining of the demurrer to the counts for breach of contract based on the
absence of a real estate broker license was therefore erroneous.

c. Common Counts

   Recovery in quantum meruit or for money paid at the defendant's request does
not require the existence of an enforceable contract. (Huskinson & Brown v. Wolf
(2004) 32 Cal.4th 453, 458 [9 Cal. Rptr. 3d 693, 84 P.3d 379] [quantum meruit];
see Rains v. Arnett (1961) 189 Cal.App.2d 337, 344 [11 Cal. Rptr. 299] [money
paid].) Even if the entire contract was illegal and unenforceable, a plaintiff
may recover the reasonable value of services rendered provided that those
particular services were not legally prohibited. (Selten v. Hyon (2007) 152
Cal.App.4th 463, 471-473 [60 Cal. Rptr. 3d 896].) Similarly, we conclude that a
plaintiff may recover money paid for the benefit of the defendant and at the
defendant's request provided that the particular expenditure was not legally
prohibited. Some of the services provided under the property management
agreement did not require a real estate broker license, as we have stated, and
the complaint on its face does not show that the expenditures made at
defendants' request were legally prohibited. Accordingly, we conclude that the
sustaining of the demurrer to the common counts based on the absence of a real
estate broker license was also erroneous.

3. The Sustaining of the Demurrer Cannot Be Affirmed Based on the Absence of a
Contractor's License

   A plaintiff seeking to recover compensation for acts for which a contractor's
license was required must allege that he or she possessed the required license
at the time the acts were performed. (Bus. & Prof. Code, § 7031, subd. (a).)
Section 7031, however, does not prevent a plaintiff from seeking compensation
for acts for which no contractor's license was required. Some of the services
provided under the property management agreement might have required a
contractor's license, but others did not. 6

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6
"'Contractor,' for the purposes of this chapter, is synonymous with 'builder'
and, within the meaning of this chapter, a contractor is any person who
undertakes to or offers to undertake to, or purports to have the capacity to
undertake to, or submits a bid to, or does himself or herself or by or through
others, construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or
demolish any building, highway, road, parking facility, railroad, excavation or
other structure, project, development or improvement, or to do any part thereof,
including the erection of scaffolding or other structures or works in connection
therewith, or the cleaning of grounds or structures in connection therewith ...
." (Bus. & Prof. Code, § 7026.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The absence of a contractor's license may preclude the recovery of
compensation for particular acts, but does not necessarily preclude the recovery
of compensation for acts for which no contractor's license was required for the
same reasons we have stated with respect to the absence of a real estate broker
license. (See, e.g., Executive Landscape Corp. v. San Vicente Country Villas IV
Assn. (1983) 145 Cal.App.3d 496, 500-501 [193 Cal. Rptr. 377].) We conclude that
the sustaining of the demurrer cannot be affirmed as to any count based on the
absence of a contractor's license.

4. Other Contentions

   In light of our conclusion that the absence of a real estate broker license
or a contractor's license does not necessarily preclude the recovery of payment
for those services for which no license was required, the judgment must be
reversed and we need not decide whether MKB was statutorily exempt from license
requirements pursuant to Business and Professions Code sections 10131.01,
subdivision (a)(3) and 7048.

DISPOSITION

   The judgment is reversed. MKB is entitled to recover its costs on appeal.

   Kitching, J., and Aldrich, J., concurred.


                              41 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              C. B. CALLAHAN, Respondent, v. FRANK MARTIN et al.,
                                   Appellants

                                L. A. No. 12569

                          Supreme Court of California

          3 Cal. 2d 110; 43 P.2d 788; 1935 Cal. LEXIS 404; 101 A.L.R.
                                      871


                                 April 2, 1935

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Rehearing denied.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  James L. Allen, Judge Presiding.

COUNSEL: C. E. McDowell and W. M. Greathouse for Appellants.

Pease & Dolley and Roy P. Dolley for Respondent.

JUDGES: In Bank.

OPINION BY: THE COURT

OPINION

     Plaintiff C. B. Callahan, as the owner in fee of real property in the
county of Los Angeles, brought this action to quiet his title to said real
property and "to oil, gas and other hydro-carbon substances and/or minerals in
place within said land and to be produced, extracted and saved on or from said
land".  Defendants Frank Martin and Stella Meyer Martin, his wife, claim an
interest in said oil and other substances by virtue of an assignment to them of
three per cent of all oil, gas and other hydro-carbon substances produced on
said property, which assignment was executed by Jose Gonzales, through whom
plaintiff deraigns title to the fee by mesne conveyances. The trial court
entered  judgment for Callahan.  The appeal presents the question whether the
assignment to defendants Martin made by Gonzales while he was the owner in fee
of the land vested in said defendants oil rights which survived the conveyance
of the land by Gonzales.

   The facts may be stated briefly: On July 28, 1922, Jose Gonzales, a minor,
through his guardian, executed an oil and gas lease covering said property,
reserving to himself a one-sixth landowner's royalty in the oil and other
substances to be produced, the oil royalty to be paid in money or in kind at the
lessor's option.  The lessees also agreed to pay a cash rental of $ 60 a month,
to continue until the royalty agreed to be paid should equal or exceed that sum.
The lease was for a term of twenty years, and so long thereafter as oil should
be produced in paying quantities, unless sooner terminated or forfeited.  It
contained provisions for forfeiture for failure to perform the covenants and
conditions of the lease.

   On July 31, 1928, while said lease was in full force and effect, Gonzales and
wife executed the instrument which forms the basis of defendants' claim herein.
It is as follows:

   "CONVEYANCE AND ASSIGNMENT OF ROYALTY INTEREST

   "Know all men by these presents: That Jose Gonzales and Eulalia Gonzales, his
wife, of Downey, California, hereinafter designated  as the sellers, for and in
consideration of the sum of Ten Dollars ($ 10.00) and other valuable
consideration to them in hand paid by Frank Martin and Stella Meyer Martin,
husband and wife, of Whittier, California, hereinafter designated as the buyers:

   "Do hereby grant, bargain, sell, convey, transfer, assign and set over unto
said Frank Martin and Stella Meyer Martin, husband and wife, as joint tenants,
three per cent (3%) landowner's royalty, being three per cent (3%) of all oil,
gas and other hydro-carbon substances and/or minerals produced, extracted and
saved on the following described real property located in the County of Los
Angeles, State of California, to-wit:

   [Description of property]

   "To have and to hold unto the said buyers or the survivor of them, their
heirs and assigns forever.

    "In Witness Whereof, the said sellers have hereunto signed their names this
31st day of July, 1928.

   "Jose V. Gonzales

   "Eulalia L. Gonzales"

   Thereafter, on May 29, 1929, Gonzales and wife executed a deed conveying the
fee in said real property, "subject to conditions, restrictions, reservations,
easements, rights and rights of way of record", to John F. Tracey, and Tracey,
by deed dated June 6, 1929, conveyed to C. B. Callahan, plaintiff herein.  This
conveyance was made subject to "conditions, restrictions, reservations, rights,
rights of way and easements of record".  The holder of the lease executed a
quitclaim deed, dated May 28, 1929, to Gonzales and wife, with the object of
terminating said lease. Callahan subsequently entered into a new lease after the
conveyance to him from Tracey.  All instruments, including the assignment to
defendants Martin by Gonzales, were recorded within a few days after execution.
A well was drilled on the property in 1922, and continued in production until
about June 10, 1929.  It does not appear from the record whether oil has been
produced under the new lease executed by Callahan.

     We are of the view that an assignment made by an owner in fee transferring
an undivided interest in oil rights in his land is an assignment of an interest
in real property, and enforceable against a grantee of the fee in the general
estate. It follows that recordation of such an assignment of oil rights imparts
constructive notice to a subsequent grantee of the fee in the general estate. In
the case herein Callahan procured a guaranty of title, which described title as
vested in him, but listed the assignment to the Martins as an encumbrance.  It
was stipulated at the trial that this guaranty "was received by Mr. Callahan at
the time of the delivery of the deed by Tracey [Callahan's grantor] to
Callahan".  Since the Tracey-Callahan deed is dated June 6, 1929, and recorded
June 24, 1929, and the guaranty is dated June 27, 1929, it is to be inferred
that the guaranty of title was not delivered to Callahan until after the
recordation of the deed to him.  While it is probable that he had actual notice
of the assignment to the Martins, prior to recordation of the deed to him, in
the absence of any evidence on the point except this stipulation, we prefer to
rest  our conclusion on the premise that recordation of said assignment charged
him with constructive notice thereof.

   The situation presented in the instant case is a usual one in the development
of oil lands.  At the time of the landowner's assignment of a three per cent
royalty interest to the Martins, the land was subject to a lease for the
production of oil and gas, under which the operating lessees were entitled to
retain five-sixths of all oil and other hydro-carbon substances produced,
rendering to the lessor-owner one-sixth, as a return for the privileges granted
by the lease. It was not contemplated that the rights assigned to the Martins
should in any way infringe upon the rights of the operating and producing
lessee. The percentage assigned to the Martins was less than the percentage
returnable to the landowner as his royalty, and was deductible from the
landowner's share.  To the lessee was given the exclusive right to prospect and
drill for oil and gas for a period of twenty years, and for so long thereafter
as oil and other hydro-carbon substances should be produced in paying
quantities, with the right to such possession of the surface as was necessary
and incidental to its oil operations.  The persons to whom the landowner
transfers varying percentages in oil to be produced on his land by royalty
instruments are not equipped ordinarily to operate oil wells, but are investors,
who desire to share in the profits from the development and sale of oil. The
assignment of a royalty interest to the Martins herein was not limited to oil
produced during the continuance of the lease, or during a fixed period of years,
but was designed to transfer to them a perpetual interest in oil and other
hydro-carbon substances to be produced from the land.  It expressly provides
that the assignment shall run to the "buyers, or the survivor of them, their
heirs and assigns forever".  Thus, the case  involves the rights of an assignee
of oil royalty under an assignment unlimited as to duration, not the rights of
an assignee under an assignment limited to royalty to be realized from a
designated lease.

   The question to be determined in the instant case is as to the nature of the
rights of the purchaser of the oil royalty interest.  At the time of the
transfer of the royalty interest to the Martins, on July 31, 1928, the lease was
in full force and effect.  Thereafter the lessees executed to the lessor,
Gonzales, and to his wife, a quitclaim deed, dated May 28, 1929, with the object
of terminating the lease, and the well on the property ceased production on June
10, 1929.  Callahan did not become the owner of the fee in the land until some
time after June 6, 1929, probably after June 10th, when the well ceased
production.  The Martins did not claim in the court below that the termination
of the lease without their concurrence was ineffective, or pray that it be
reinstated, but, rather, seem to acquiesce in the acts of the lessor and lessees
as an effectual termination. For the purposes of the instant case, we accept the
termination of said lease as an established fact.

   The nature of the interest of an assignee to whom an owner of land transfers
a percentage interest in oil rights has been the subject of consideration in
several recent cases in this state, to be noticed hereinafter, but so far has
not been precisely defined.  It is the contention of respondent Callahan herein
that such a transfer is merely the personal contract of the owner of the land,
at most a contract for the sale of oil brought to the surface and reduced to
possession as personal property, and that it creates in the assignee no rights
in oil produced after his assignor has transferred the fee in the land.  The
theory that assignees of percentage interests in oil rights have no enforceable
rights in oil produced after a transfer by the assignor of the fee in the land
is widely repudiated.  The difficulty experienced in defining with exactitude
the nature of the assignee's rights is due in part to the fact that the oil
industry is of very recent development, while in this country, by statute and
judicial precedent, our classification of property as realty or personalty is
based on common-law definitions which crystallized in a time when oil interests
were not the subject of judicial cognizance.

   Some jurisdictions adhere to the theory that the owner of land has an estate
in oil and gas beneath the surface in like manner as he has an estate in the
surface; that oil and gas in place beneath the surface of land constitute a part
of the land, and as such are real property, may be granted separate and apart
from the surface, and when so granted vest in the assignee an estate in definite
corporeal real property. This theory cannot be better enlarged upon than by the
following  quotation from Texas Co. v. Daugherty, 107 Tex. 226, [176 S. W. 717,
L. R. A. 1917F, 989]:

   "It is no longer doubted that oil and gas within the ground are minerals.
They have peculiar attributes not common to other minerals because of their
fugitive nature or vagrant habit -- the disposition to wander or percolate, and
the possibility of their escape from beneath one part of the surface of the
earth to another.  Nevertheless, they are to be classed as minerals. [Citing
authorities.] In place, they lie within the strata of the earth, and necessarily
are a part of the realty. Being a part of the realty while in place, it would
seem to logically follow that, whenever they are conveyed while in that
condition or possessing that status, a conveyance of an interest in the realty
results.  It is generally conceded that, for the purpose of ownership and
conveyance of solid minerals, the earth may be divided horizontally as well as
vertically, and that title to the surface may rest in one person and title to
the strata beneath the surface containing such minerals in another.

   . . . .

   ". . . if they are in place beneath the tract, they are essentially a part of
the realty, and their grant, therefore, while in that condition, if effectual at
all, is a grant of an interest in the realty . . . their conveyance while in
place, if the instrument be given any effect, is consequently the conveyance of
an interest in the realty." (176 S. W. 719, 720; see, also, Stephens v.
Mid-Kansas Oil & Gas Co., 113 Tex. 160 [254 S. W. 290, 29 A. L. R. 566, note
586]; Leonard  v. Prater, (Tex. Com. App.) 36 S. W. (2d) 216, 86 A. L. R. 499.)

   Under this theory, the possibility of the escape of oil and gas beneath the
surface of the assignor's land at the time of the conveyance of an interest in
oil and gas in place, as by being drawn off through wells on other lands, is
recognized, and gives rise to statements that the owner of the surface, or his
assignee of oil rights in the event of a severance of surface and oil rights,
has a defeasible fee in the minerals, an estate subject to being defeated
through the escape of oil and gas to other lands.  But as a development of a
logical theory appropriate to the facts, the oil and gas in place doctrine,
which in terms describes a grant of an interest  in oil rights which is
unlimited as to duration as a  present transfer of a defeasible fee in definite
corporeal real property, seems not to take into account the circumstance that
the oil actually brought to the surface, and to which the assignee's rights
attach, may be not only the oil and gas in place beneath the surface of the
assignor's land at the time of the assignment, but also oil drawn off from
beneath the surface of other lands.  There is a further difficulty in applying
the oil and gas in place theory, which implies a present transfer of definite
corporeal real property, when the operating oil lease is not of unlimited
duration, or for so long as oil shall be produced in paying quantities, but for
a fixed period of years which may not exhaust the oil, or when the assignment of
landowner's royalty is to extend only to oil produced during a fixed period of
years.

   By reason of these anomalies, as the law relating to oil and gas has
developed during recent years, and the relationships arising from dealings in
this type of property have been analyzed more closely by the courts, the oil in
place doctrine has been rejected by a large number of jurisdictions, and other
theories developed, which give due recognition to the fugacious, vagrant nature
of oil and other hydro-carbon substances, yet in their logical application
protect oil interests as estates in real property. There are intimations of
approval of the oil and gas in place doctrine in some of the decisions in this
state.  ( Graciosa Oil Co. v. Santa Barbara, 155 Cal. 140, 144 [99 Pac. 483, 20
L. R. A. (N. S.) 211]; Chandler v. Hart, 161 Cal. 405, 414 [119 Pac. 516, Ann.
Cas. 1913B, 1094]; Black v. Solano Co., 114 Cal. App. 170, 174 [299 Pac. 843];
Stone v. City of Los Angeles, 114 Cal. App. 192 [299 Pac. 838].) But other cases
unequivocally declare that the owner of land does not have an absolute title to
oil and gas in place as corporeal real property, but, rather, the exclusive
right on his premises to drill for oil and gas, and to retain as his property
all substances brought to the surface on his land.  ( People v. Associated Oil
Co., 211 Cal. 93, 101 [294 Pac. 717]; Western Oil & Refining Co. v. Venago Oil
Corp., 218 Cal. 733, 741 [24 Pac. (2d) 971, 88 A. L. R. 1271]; Bandini Petroleum
Co. v. Superior Court, 110 Cal. App. 123 [293 Pac. 899]; see, also, Champlin
Refining Co. v. Corporation Commissioner of Oklahoma, 286 U.S. 210 [52 Sup. Ct.
559, 76 L. Ed. 1062, 86 A. L. R. 403, 412]; McCoy v. Arkansas National Gas Co.,
175 La. 487  [143 So. 383, 85 A. L. R. 1147]; Rich v. Donaghey, 71 Okl. 204 [177
Pac. 86, 3 A. L. R. 352], with note.)

     Giving full weight to this statement of the nature of the landowner's
rights in oil and gas, we are of the view that an operating lessee under a lease
for a term of years, or for a term of years and so long as oil shall be produced
in paying quantities, has an interest or estate in real property in the nature
of a profit a prendre, which is an incorporeal hereditament, and that the
assignee of a royalty interest in oil rights under an assignment by the
landowner also has an interest or estate in real property in the nature of an
incorporeal hereditament.

   "Real property" is defined by section 14, subdivision 2, Civil Code, as
"coextensive with lands, tenements, and hereditaments", to which Blackstone
gives the appellation "things real".  (Cooley's Blackstone, vol. 1, 4th ed., p.
443.) At this point it is appropriate to note that the word "property" is
commonly used in two different senses.  First, it is applied to those external
things which are the objects of rights or estates, to those things which, in the
language of Blackstone, are objects of dominion or property.  (Cooley's
Blackstone, supra, p. 443.) It is also applied to the rights or estates which a
man may acquire in and to things.  (Cooley's Blackstone, supra, p. 433,
including footnote 2.) Thus land, as the object of rights, is described as a
thing real, or as real property. The rights or estate which the owner in fee or
for life has in land are also described as real property, but those rights which
the owner of a leasehold interest has in and to the land or real property, as
the object of rights, are not real property, or real estate, but a chattel real,
which is personalty.  ( Sec. 765, Civ. Code; Jeffers v. Easton, Eldridge Co.,
113 Cal. 345, 352 [45 Pac. 680]; Summerville v. Stockton Mill. Co., 142 Cal.
529, 537, 540 [76 Pac. 243]; First Nat. Bank v. Brashear, 200 Cal. 389 [253 Pac.
143]; Prairie Oil & Gas Co. v. Jordan, 151 Okl. 147 [3 Pac. (2d) 170, 79 A. L.
R. 492]; First Nat. Bank v. Dunlap, 122 Okl. 288 [254 Pac. 729, 52 A. L. R. 126,
129, with note, 135]; 22 Cal. Jur. 416.) Although not real property or real
estate, a leasehold is nevertheless an estate in land, an estate in real
property. ( Sec. 761, Civ. Code; Chandler v. Hart, 161 Cal. 405, 413 [119 Pac.
516, Ann. Cas. 1913B, 1094]; Taylor v. Hamilton, 194 Cal. 768  [230 Pac. 656];
Harvey v. Weisbaum, 159 Cal. 265, 267 [113 Pac. 656, Ann. Cas. 1912B, 1115, 33
L. R. A. (N. S.) 540]; German American Sav. Bank v. Gollmer, 155 Cal. 683, 686
[102 Pac. 932, 24 L. R. A. (N. S.) 1066]; Estate of White, 53 Cal. 19; Guy v.
Brennen, 60 Cal. App. 452 [213 Pac. 265]; Cooley's Blackstone, vol. 1, supra, p.
740.) This duality of  meaning should be borne in mind in determining the nature
of oil leases and royalty assignments.

   The common law included, in addition to lands and tenements, in the category
of things real, hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal, and section 14,
subdivision 2 of the Civil Code, noted above, preserves this classification.  A
hereditament, as defined by Blackstone, included not only lands and tenements,
but whatsoever passed to the heirs at law, rather than to personal
representatives, "be it corporeal or incorporeal".  (Cooley's Blackstone, supra,
p. 444.) Blackstone lists ten sorts of incorporeal hereditaments: advowsons,
tithes, commons, ways, offices, dignities, franchises, corodies or pensions,
annuities and rents. Not all are rights in or pertaining to land.  The annuity,
for instance, is "chargeable only upon the person of the grantor", and "yet a
man may have a real estate in it, though his security is merely personal".
(Cooley's Blackstone, supra, p. 467.) Of the ancient incorporeal hereditaments
listed by Blackstone, several either are not recognized at all in this country,
or, if they do not involve rights in or to land, are not classed as things real.
But a number of the common-law incorporeal hereditaments which involve rights
connected with or pertaining to land persist, and are recognized generally as a
species of interest in land, or estate in real property. ( Appeal of North Beach
& M. R. R. Co., 32 Cal. 499, 506, 510, 511; Smith v. Cooley, 65 Cal. 46 [2 Pac.
880]; Patchett v. Pacific Coast Ry. Co., 100 Cal. 505 [35 Pac. 73]; Corea v.
Higuera, 153 Cal. 451 [95 Pac. 882, 17 L. R. A. (N. S.) 1018]; Painter v.
Pasadena L. & W. Co., 91 Cal. 74, 81, 84 [27 Pac. 539]; Parsons v.  Clarke, 24
Fed. (2d) 338; O'Sullivan v. Griffith, 153 Cal. 502, 505 [95 Pac. 873, 96 Pac.
323]; Zlozower v. Lindenbaum, 100 Cal. App. 766 [281 Pac. 102]; Hoyt v. Hart,
149 Cal. 722, 730 [87 Pac. 569]; Eastman v. Piper, 68 Cal. App. 554 [229 Pac.
1002]; 1 Tiffany, Landlord and Tenant, pp. 1111, 1112; 9 Cal. Jur. 944.)

    The incorporeal hereditament of common is defined by Blackstone as "being a
profit which a man hath in the land of another; as to feed his beasts, to catch
fish, to dig turf, to cut wood, or the like".  (Cooley's Blackstone, supra, p.
455.) These are the rights which are described as profits a prendre, and they
may be several as well as in common.  (See discussion, 2 Tiffany, Real Property,
1394.)

   Jurists writing since Blackstone's time have remarked that his inclusion of
incorporeal hereditaments, together with lands and tenements, as "things", or
objects in which dominion or property may be had is somewhat misleading.  (See 1
Tiffany, Real Property, 2d ed., p. 9, note 27, citing Austin, Jurisprudence, 3d
ed., 371, 804; Digby, History Real Property, 4th ed., 304, note; Hohfeld, 23
Yale Law Journal, p. 23; Salmond, Jurisprudence, 4th ed., 220.) Where the
incorporeal hereditament relates or pertains to land, it is, rather, a
designation of a certain class of rights in and to land, just as an estate in
fee-simple absolute is the designation applied to the rights and interests of
the person who has the fullest and most absolute estate in lands known to the
law.  That rights in and to land, though they are embraced within the definition
of an incorporeal hereditament, constitute a limited interest or estate in land,
is generally recognized.  (See cases cited second paragraph above.) Where this
limited interest is to endure in perpetuity or for life, it is a freehold
interest, and real property or real estate, as well as an estate in real
property. But where it is for years, although an interest in land or in real
estate, it is not real estate, but a chattel real, in like manner as a lease for
years.  Thus in the early case of Smith v. Cooley, 65 Cal. 46, this court said,
in consideration of a grant of mining rights: "This particular estate or
incorporeal hereditament is what is known in law as a servitude 'in gross', or a
personal servitude, imposed upon land for the benefit of the person or persons
owning the right, irrespective of the ownership of the land.  The right is
usufructuary in its nature and character, and entitles the owner to the use of
the land for the profits which may be derived from its rents, or from quarrying
and digging it for ores, or from harvesting its fruits, crops, vintages, etc.  (
Secs. 802- 806, Civ. Code.) As an incorporeal hereditament, it is subject to the
general rules which govern the enjoyment of real property,  and to the law of
descent, devolution and transfer by act of law, according to the freehold or
chattel interest acquired in it. . . ."

   As noted above, the definition of "real property" given in section 14,
subdivision 2 of the Civil Code, corresponds to Blackstone's definition of
"things real" -- lands, tenements and hereditaments. Section 801 of the Civil
Code lists as "land burdens or servitudes upon land", which "may be attached to
other land as incidents or appurtenances", and which "are then called
easements", many of the common-law incorporeal hereditaments, including the
"right of taking water, wood, minerals, and other things".  (Subd. 5.)  The land
to which the easement is attached is called the "dominant tenement".  Section
802 of the Civil Code lists land burdens or servitudes upon land in gross, which
"may be granted and held though not attached to land", and includes the
common-law incorporeal hereditaments of "taking water, wood, minerals, or other
things" (subd.  6), and "the right of taking rents and tolls" (subd. 4).   There
seems to have been some question at common law as to the assignability of
servitudes in gross, other than profits a prendre.  ( Painter v. Pasadena L. &
W. Co., 91 Cal. 74, 84 [27 Pac. 539].) But under our code, section 1044 of the
Civil Code, such servitudes are assignable unless they are expressly or by
necessary implication made personal to a particular individual.  ( Fudickar v.
East Riverside Irr. Dist., 109 Cal. 29 [41 Pac. 1024].) And at common law a
profit a prendre if granted in gross was capable of being transferred in gross.
( Painter v. Pasadena L. & W. Co., supra; 2 Tiffany, Real Property, p. 1392; see
Cooley's Blackstone, vol. 1, p. 456, common in gross.) Incorporeal hereditaments
in gross have been recognized as a species of estate in real property in many
decisions in this state, of which we cite a few: Appeal of North Beach & M. R.
R. Co., 32 Cal. 499, 506, 510, 511; Stockton Gas etc. Co. v. San Joaquin County,
148 Cal. 313 [83 Pac. 54, 7 Ann. Cas. 511, 5 L. R. A. (N. S.) 174]; Graciosa Oil
Co. v. Santa Barbara, 155 Cal. 140 [99 Pac. 483, 20 L. R.  A. (N. S.) 211];
Smith v. Cooley, 65 Cal. 46 [2 Pac. 880]; Painter v. Pasadena L. & W. Co., 91
Cal. 74, 84 [27 Pac. 539]; Arkley v. Union Sugar Co., 147 Cal. 195 [81 Pac. 509]
; Richfield Oil Co. v. Hercules Gasoline Co., 112 Cal. App. 431 [297 Pac. 73];
O'Sullivan v. Griffith, 153 Cal. 502, 505  [95 Pac. 873, 96 Pac. 323].  In view
of the decisions and the provisions of sections 14, subdivision 2, 802 and 1044
of the Civil Code, it cannot be held that the provisions of sections 658 and 662
of the Civil Code limit incorporeal hereditaments in this state to those only
which are appurtenant to a dominant tenement. Section 658 lists land as a
species of real property, but it does not attempt to enumerate the various
estates which may exist in land, of which an incorporeal hereditament in gross
is one.

     Under the usual oil and gas lease the owner-lessor transfers to his lessee
his right to drill for and produce oil and other substances.  The rights of the
lessee present a clear case of a profit a prendre in gross, a right to remove a
part of the substance of the land.  If the oil and gas lessee is not granted
exclusive possession of the surface by the terms of the lease, he has
nevertheless a right to such possession as is necessary and convenient for the
exercise of the profit, which, in fact, may preclude any other surface
possession.  This profit a prendre vests in the lessee an incorporeal
hereditament, a present estate, an interest in the land, which is a chattel real
if it is to endure for years.  ( Smith v. Cooley, supra; Jones v. Pier, 124 Cal.
App. 444, 449 [12 Pac. (2d) 646]; Beam v. Dugan, 132 Cal. App. 546 [23 Pac. (2d)
58]; Merrill v. California Petroleum Corp., 105 Cal. App. 737 [288 Pac. 721];
Chandler v. Hart, 161 Cal. 405 [119 Pac. 516, Ann. Cas. 1913B, 1094]; Taylor v.
Hamilton, 194 Cal. 768 [230 Pac. 656]; Jameson v. Chanslor-Canfield M. Oil Co.,
176 Cal. 1 [167 Pac. 369]; Graciosa Oil Co. v. Santa Barbara, 155 Cal. 140 [99
Pac. 483, 20 L. R. A. (N. S.) 211]; Richfield Oil Co. v. Hercules Gasoline Co.,
112 Cal. App. 431 [297 Pac. 73]; Stone v. City of Los Angeles, 114 Cal. App. 192
[299 Pac. 838]; Bartholomae Oil Corp. v. Delaney, 112 Cal. App. 314 [296 Pac.
690]; Ewert v. Robinson , 289 Fed. 740 [35 A. L. R. 219, note p. 234]; Rich v.
Donaghey, 71 Okl. 204 [177 Pac. 86, 3 A. L. R. 352, note 378]; see, also, note
59 A. L. R. 701.)

   That the lessee has a vested estate in the land prior to production of oil,
and although the lease contains provisions for forfeiture upon failure to
discover oil, or for breach of covenants of the lease, and although the rights
granted are in consideration of rent and royalty to accrue, rather than  upon a
cash consideration paid in advance, is established by the above-cited cases.
(See note, 3 A. L. R. 378, as to effect of surrender clauses.) Under an ordinary
lease of surface rights, with provision for rentals to accrue, a leasehold
estate vests in the lessee although the lease contains provision for forfeiture
upon conditions subsequent.  In Brookshire Oil Co. v. Casmalia etc. Co., 156
Cal. 211 [103 Pac. 927], it was stated that prior to discovery of gas and oil,
the rights of the lessee are inchoate and no estate vests in him, and this
decision has been cited in several cases.  However, this qualification was not
recognized in a number of the cases cited in the preceding paragraph, and in
Taylor  v. Hamilton, 194 Cal. 768 [230 Pac. 656], it was expressly repudiated,
as follows: "Appellants contend that prior to the discovery and production of
oil the lease carried only a naked and exclusive privilege to enter upon the
premises for that purpose, that is to say, the 'lease' was a mere option to
enter the  demised premises for the purpose of exploring for oil and is not the
lease of an interest in property, but a license.  Respondents argue that
although the rule in other jurisdictions is that a lease of oil land is a mere
license, in California the interest of the lessee under an oil lease is an
estate for years and a present interest and estate in land ( Jameson v.
Chanslor-Canfield M. Oil Co., supra; Chandler v. Hart, supra).

   "These authorities support this contention. . . ."

     The royalty return which the lessee renders to his lessor for this estate
in the land is rent, or so closely analogous to rent as to partake of the
incidents thereof.  In the lease in the instant case, executed by Gonzales
through his guardian, the lessor's oil royalty is referred to as "rent or
royalty".  In discussing the nature of landowner's royalties, the Supreme Court
of the United States said in United States v. Noble, 237 U.S. 74, 80 [35 Sup.
Ct. 532, 59 L. Ed. 844]: "The rents and royalties were profit issuing out of the
land.  When they accrued, they became personal property; but rents and royalties
to accrue were a part of the estate remaining in the lessor. As such they would
pass to his heirs, and not to his personal representatives. . . .

   "It is said that the leases contemplated the payment of sums of money, equal
to the agreed percentage of the market value of the minerals, and thus that the
assignment was of  these moneys; but the fact that rent is to be paid in money
does not make it any the less a profit issuing out of the land."

   That the right to receive future rents and oil royalties is an incorporeal
hereditament, an interest in land, is recognized in the following cases: Schmid
v. Baum's Home of Flowers, 162 Tenn. 439 [37 S. W. (2d) 105, 75 A. L. R. 261,
note 270]; Winnisimmet Trust, Inc., v. Libby, 232 Mass. 491 [122 N. E. 575];
McMenamy Invest. & Real Estate Co. v. Dawley, 183 Mo. App. 1 [165 S. W. 829];
Arrington v. United Royalty Co., 188 Ark. 270 [65 S. W. (2d) 36,  90 A. L. R.
765]; State v. Royal Mineral Assn., 132 Minn. 232 [156 N. W. 128, Ann. Cas.
1918A, 145, with note, 148]; Roberson v. Pioneer Gas Co., 173 La. 313, 314 [137
So. 46, 82 A. L. R. 1264, 1268]; McIntire v. Bond, 227 Ky. 607 [13 S. W. (2d)
772, 64 A. L. R. 630]. In Schmid v. Baum's Home of Flowers, supra, the court had
under consideration the question whether an assignment of rents, in that case a
money rental upon a building lease, rather than an oil lease, was subject to
recordation. The court held that such assignments were subject to the
registration laws, except that as a lease for a period of three years or less
was not required to be recorded, a like exemption should be implied as to
assignments of rent for a similar period.  In several recent decisions in this
state oil royalties have been treated as rents. ( Beam v. Dugan, 132 Cal. App.
546 [23 Pac. (2d) 58]; Kern Sunset Oil Co. v. Good Roads Oil Co., 214 Cal. 435
[6 Pac. (2d) 71, 80 A. L. R. 453, with note, 461]; Adams v. Petroleum Midway Co
., 205 Cal. 221 [270 Pac. 668]; Clark v. Richfield Oil Co., 127 Cal. App. 495
[16 Pac. (2d) 162].)

      Thus, the recognition of oil royalties as rents affords a basis for
sustaining an assignment of oil royalty by a landowner as a transfer of an
interest in real property. But where an assignment by the landowner of an
interest in his oil rights is not limited to oil to be produced under a
particular lease, but is in perpetuity, as is the assignment to the Martins in
the instant case, with the intent that the interest shall survive a forfeiture
or other termination of the lease, there is more than a transfer of rent or
royalty to be rendered under a lease in effect at the time of the assignment and
under future leases. In Jones v. Pier, 124 Cal. App. 444  [12 Pac. (2d) 646], in
which a petition for hearing in this court was denied, the appellate court held
that under an assignment of oil royalty limited to the duration of a particular
lease, the operating lease cannot be terminated by agreement between the lessors
and operating lessee without the consent of the assignee of an oil interest.
This decision was recognized with approval in Metzler & Co. of California v.
Stevenson, 217 Cal. 236 [18 Pac. (2d) 330], and in Beam v. Dugan, supra, in
which this court denied a petition for hearing.

   In Beam v. Dugan, supra, it was held that the rights of the assignee of oil
royalty to share in oil produced extend not only to the lease in effect at the
time the assignment is made, but to all future leases where the assignment of
oil rights is unlimited in duration. In Jones v. Pier, supra, it was held that
where the assignee's rights are limited to a particular lease, said lease cannot
be terminated without the assignee's consent.  Where, under the assignment of
oil rights, the assignee's rights are not limited to a particular lease, but are
in perpetuity, under the  rule of Beam v. Dugan, supra, that the assignee's
rights extend to oil produced under all leases, it must be held that such future
leases cannot be terminated without the assignee's consent.  It must follow, if
such assignee must be a party to any lawful termination of leases, that he must
have a right to participate in entering into new leases for production of oil
upon the premises.  We are of the view that an assignee of a royalty interest
becomes in effect a tenant in common with his assignor who retains an interest
in the oil rights,  and with other assignees of percentage interests, in the
right which the assignor had, by virtue of his ownership of the fee in the land,
to drill for and produce oil. A several right of the owner becomes a right
exercisable by him jointly with others.  We are not here holding that the lease
which Callahan entered into after the conveyance to him, and in which the
Martins presumably did not participate, is invalid as to them.  All the
circumstances connected with said lease are not before us.  For all that here
appears, the Martins acquiesce in said lease and claim only oil rights as to
three per cent of oil produced thereunder.

   What we have said here implies a right of entry for the production of oil in
assignees of oil rights equally with the  lessor-owner who retains a partial
interest in oil to be produced.  Of course, we are not to be understood as here
holding that an assignee of oil rights may exercise a right of entry while a
valid operating lease is in effect which confers an exclusive right to enter,
drill for and produce oil on the lessee thereunder.  The assignee of oil rights
takes subject to existing leases of which he has notice, actual or constructive.
In this analysis, the assignee of an oil royalty not limited to the duration of
a particular lease has a right in the nature of a profit a prendre in the land,
and this right constitutes an interest in said land, an estate in real property.
Of course, it is not to be contemplated from the circumstance that tenants in
common in oil rights have coequal rights of entry, that a large number of
investors holding assignments of small percentages in oil rights will wish, each
for himself, to undertake the production of oil. It is not necessary for us here
to determine in detail the rights inter se of those who as tenants in common are
jointly interested in oil rights in land.  The question is the subject of two
recent annotations in American Law Reports, in which decisions are cited which
recognize that a tenancy in common may exist in oil rights independently of
surface rights, even though the oil and gas in place theory is rejected.  (40 A.
L. R. 1400, note to Prairie Oil & Gas Co. v. Allen, 2 Fed. (2d) 566 [40 A. L. R.
1389]; 91 A. L. R. 205, note to Earp v. Mid-Continent Petroleum Corp., 167 Okl.
86 [27 Pac. (2d) 855, 91 A. L. R. 188].) If numerous holders of oil rights in a
single parcel of land are unable to agree upon an operating lessee or upon the
terms of an oil lease, we are inclined to think that the powers of a court of
equity may be invoked to formulate a just and reasonable plan for the
development and production of oil upon the land, and to settle the controversy
in accordance therewith.  But this can be determined as the question may arise
in future litigation.  The rules of law should be sufficiently adaptable to
reach a desirable result in this developing field of the law.

   What we have said here applies although the assignment of the undivided
interest in oil rights is silent, as in the instant case, as to any right of
entry in the assignee. The right exists by virtue of the unqualified grant to
the assignee of an interest in oil to be produced from the land, in like manner
as certain rights follow without express enumeration  from an ordinary deed
absolute of real property. One who grants a thing is presumed to grant also
whatever is essential to its use.  ( Sec. 3522, Civ. Code; Smith v. Cooley, 65
Cal. 46 [2 Pac. 880]; Cave v. Crafts, 53 Cal. 135, 140; Sulloway v. Sulloway,
160 Cal. 508, 513 [117 Pac. 522]; Davison v. Reynolds, 150 Ga. 182 [103 S. E.
248].) The right of entry is an incident to the grant of an estate in the
mineral rights.

   In support of their contention that a right of entry cannot be implied under
such circumstances as we have outlined above, respondent relies earnestly on
Morgan v. McGee, 117 Okl. 212 [245 Pac. 888]. In that case the owner of land
granted to another all oil and other minerals beneath the land.  It was held
that this assignment conferred no rights against the subsequent grantee of the
fee, as a right of entry could not be implied.  The court made a distinction
between the situation where the owner of land conveys to another, reserving
ownership of the oil and other minerals in himself, in which case a right of
entry is implied ( Newbern v. Gould, 162 Okl. 82 [19 Pac. (2d) 157]), and the
case where he assigns the oil and minerals to another, retaining ownership of
the general estate in the land, in which case the right of entry must be
expressed.  We are of the view that  this distinction is not supported by
reason, and that the basis of the court's holding that a right of entry is
implied upon a reservation by the landowner of oil and minerals to himself --
that equity will not permit a right to fail for want of a remedy to enforce it
-- applies with equal force to a grant of such mineral rights.  The decision of
the Oklahoma court is probably in conflict with its decision in McKernon v.
Josey Oil Co., 106 Okl. 100 [233 Pac. 451], decided the preceding year, and we
have found no subsequent Oklahoma case where Morgan v. McGee, supra, has been
relied on to defeat an assignee of mineral rights.  Such a rule would be at
variance with the principle, supported by Metzler & Co. of California v.
Stevenson, supra, Jones v. Pier, supra, and Beam v. Dugan, supra, that the
holders of oil royalty interest have a right to participate in the termination
of existing leases, and the principle which follows therefrom, that they have
coequal rights as to executing new leases. These rules imply coequal rights of
entry.  The holders of oil interests under a landowner's assignments  have
rights of profit a prendre, which are estates in real property, and are properly
described as real property, or real estate, where, as in the instant case, they
are to endure in perpetuity.

   It is unnecessary here to determine the effect of our decision in the instant
case on the nature of royalty interests created by an operating lessee, rather
than by the landowner-lessor, as in the instant case.  This question was
involved in such cases as Western Oil etc. Co. v. Venago Oil Corp., 218 Cal. 733
[24 Pac. (2d) 971, 88 A. L. R. 1271]; Black v. Solano Co., 114 Cal. App. 170
[299 Pac. 843]; Merrill v. California Petroleum Corp., 105 Cal. App. 737 [288
Pac. 721]. In these cases the doctrine of potential possession of personalty --
the oil severed from the land and brought to the surface -- was applied.  This
doctrine has since been abolished by the adoption of section 5 of the Uniform
Sales Act, section 1725 of the Civil Code.

   The assignments of oil royalty to the defendants Martin herein, by plaintiff
Callahan's predecessor in ownership of the general estate in the land, vested in
the Martins an estate in real property described in plaintiff's complaint, and
the recordation of the assignment charged plaintiff with constructive notice
thereof.

   The judgment is reversed.


                              42 of 100 DOCUMENTS

                                ESTATE OF CROSBY

                                   No. 5,908

                  SUPREME COURT OF CALIFORNIA, DEPARTMENT ONE

                        55 Cal. 574; 1880 Cal. LEXIS 326


                                   July, 1880

PRIOR-HISTORY:      Appeal by the widow and heir of deceased, from an order of
sale of real estate in the Probate Court of the County of Santa Clara. Payne, J.

COUNSEL: S. F. Leib, for Appellants.

No assignment of the judgment was made by Elliot Reed. It could only be
presented in his name. (Marsh v. Dooley, April Term, 1877.) The judgment should
have been authenticated either by the judgment itself or a certified copy.
(Probate Act, § 141.)

A claim against an estate must be deemed stale after it becomes seventeen years
old, and no excuse is shown why it was not enforced earlier. (Beckett v. Selover
, 7 Cal. 240.)

A judgment against a living person can only be enforced after five years. By
analogy the time should not exceed that time in any case. (Ricard v. Williams, 7
Wheat. 119.) The decisions are uniform that such a delay is unreasonable, and
such claims are deemed stale, and enforcement refused. (Mooers v. White, 6
Johns. Ch. 360; Scott v. Hancock, 13 Mass. 162; Ex parte Allen, 15 id. 58; Boyle
v. Forbes, 9 Tex. 41; Fisk v. Norvell, id. 14; Blair v. Cisneros, 10 id. 45;
Chandler v. Hudson, 11 id. 37; Hurt  v. Horton, 12 id. 285; McGreal v.  Jones,
36 id. 673; Woolfolk v. Beatly, 18 Ga. 520; Gilchrist v. Rea, 9 Paige Ch. 73;
Estate of Godfrey, 4 Mich. 308; Ferguson v. Broome, 1 Bradf. 20; McCrary v.
Tasker, 41 Iowa, 255; Wolf v. Ogden, 66 Ill. 224; Hall v. Woodman, 49 N. H. 295;
Roper on Jud. Sales, 99.) It was proper for the Court to make findings. (Coveny
v. Hale, 49 Cal. 555.)

Houghton & Reynolds, for Respondent.

No finding of facts are authorized in this proceeding, (Code, § 1518) and if the
petition is sufficient it will be affirmed, unless attacked by a statement or
bill of exceptions. (Wetherbee v. Carrol, 33 Cal. 549.) No claim can become
stale while it is pending in Court. (Estate of Schroeder, 46 Cal. 304.) The
cases cited by appellant's attorney were decided in States whose statutes are
materially different from those of this State. E. R. Reed was the equitable
owner of the judgment.

JUDGES: McKinstry, J. Ross, J., and McKee, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: McKINSTRY

OPINION

    This is an appeal by the widow and child of the deceased from an "order of
sale of real estate" of the late Probate Court for Santa Clara. We think when
"issues of fact" were tried by the Probate Court, "findings" were proper. ( Code
Civ. Proc. §§ 1713, 1714, 1715, 1716.)

   It is urged by appellants that the allowance by the Probate Judge of the
claim presented by Edward P. Reed was improper, in so far as that claim included
an alleged judgment in favor of Elliott Reed against Samuel J. Crosby, the
decedent, for the following reasons: First, no assignment had been made by
Elliott to Edward P. Reed; second, the judgment was not properly authenticated.
The finding on the subject is as follows:

   "On the 28th day of September, 1859, the said Edward P. Reed presented to the
Probate Judge of said county for allowance a claim against said estate, which
was based upon a promissory note made by said Samuel J. Crosby to said Reed on
the 1st day of November, A. D. 1857, for $ 950, payable one day after date, with
interest thereon from date until paid at the rate of two and one-half per cent.
per month, and also upon a judgment rendered March 23d, A. D. 1858,  in favor of
Elliott Reed, and against the said Samuel J. Crosby, in the District Court of
the Third Judicial District in and for the County of Santa Clara, for the sum of
$ 2,587.50, with interest thereon from the date of its rendition until paid at
the rate of two and one-half per cent. per month, together with all costs
incurred by said Reed. Said claim was allowed by the Probate Judge the day on
which it was presented, and a copy of which, with the indorsement thereon, is
hereto annexed, marked Exhibit A, and made a part hereof

    "Exhibit A. The estate of Samuel J. Crosby to E. P. Reed, Dr. To a note of
hand of which the following is a copy:

   "'$ 950.00. One day after date, for value received, I promise to pay Edward
P. Reed or order, the sum of nine hundred and fifty dollars, with interest on
the same from date until paid, at the rate of two and one-half per cent. per
month.

   "'(Signed)   Samuel J. Crosby.

   "'San Jose, November 1st, 1857.'

   "Also to a judgment rendered March 23d, 1858, in favor of Elliott Reed, and
against Samuel J. Crosby, for the sum of $ 2,587.50, with interest thereon at
the rate of two and one-half per cent. per month from the 23rd of March,  1858,
until paid, together with all costs accrued by said Reed.

   "Said judgment being rendered in the District Court, in the County of Santa
Clara.

   "State of California, County of Santa Clara, ss.--I, Edward H. Reed, do
solemnly swear, that the note above referred to of nine hundred and fifty
dollars, together with the interest thereon, and the judgment above referred to
of twenty-five hundred and eighty-seven dollars and fifty cents, together with
the interest thereon, are justly due to me from the estate of Samuel J. Crosby,
deceased; that no payments have been made thereon, and that there are no offsets
to the same to my knowledge.

   "Edward P. Reed.

   "Subscribed and sworn to this 28th day of September, 1859.

   "John H. Moore, County Judge.

   "State of California, County of Santa Clara, ss.--The within claim of Edward
P. Reed against the estate of Samuel J. Crosby was presented to John H. Moore,
Esq., Probate Judge for the County of Santa Clara, for his allowance this, the
28th day of September, 1859, and allowed by me.

   "John H. Moore, Probate Judge.

   "Indorsed: Filed December 5th, 1859.

   "John B. Hewson, County Clerk."

   Other findings show that the judgment referred to was, in fact,  rendered,
but do not show that the original record of any transcript thereof was presented
to the Probate Judge. It is also found that the judgment was rendered upon a
promissory note executed by Samuel J. Crosby to Elliott Reed; that the money
for which said note was given was the money of E. P. Reed, and no "assignment"
of said judgment was ever made by Elliott Reed to E. P. Reed.

   If E. P. Reed, the administrator, had an equitable interest in the judgment,
the propriety of its presentation to the Probate Judge, and not to him, is
manifest. No man should be a judge in his own cause. The allowance was of the
judgment in favor of Elliott Reed. That the claim was presented by E. P. Reed,
even as a portion of one "claim," which included the judgment, and also a note
from deceased to E. P. Reed, does not change the effect of the allowance. Nor is
it changed by the circumstance that in the affidavit of E. P. Reed, which
accompanied the claim, the latter swore that the amount of the judgment was
"justly due" to him. The statute did not require the claim based on the judgment
to be verified. Elliott Reed ought not to be deprived of the benefit of the
allowance by any of these circumstances. In Marsh v. Dooley, 52 Cal. 232, the
note and mortgage were payable to Darling, or order, who was a resident of the
county in which the letters of administration were issued; the note and mortgage
remained in his possession, unassigned, until after the expiration of the time
specified in the notice to creditors for the presentation of claims, without
presentation. It was held that one who claimed an equitable interest in the note
and mortgage could not subsequently present them. The difference between that
case and the present is apparent. Here the claim, if properly presented at all,
was presented within the time fixed by the notice, and presented by one whose
authority to present is not contested by Elliott Reed--the fact of presentation
being for his benefit.

   Was the judgment ever presented as required by law? In the "objections" or
answer of Evelyne C. Crosby, the widow, to the petition for the sale of the real
estate, it is alleged: "Said judgment never was a legal charge or legally
allowed against said estate, because, among other reasons, neither it, nor a
certified nor any copy thereof was ever presented to the administrator of said
estate, or to the Probate Judge of said county, or at all."

   As the law stood when the claim was presented by E. P. Reed to the Probate
Judge, in 1859, while it was required that "necessary  vouchers" should be
exhibited to the administrator when the claim was presented, it was not
requisite, if the claim was founded on a bond, bill, note or other instrument in
writing, that the original should be presented and the allowance or rejection
indorsed thereon or attached thereto. (Probate Act of 1851, § 131, Laws 1851, p.
464.) Nor was it necessary when a judgment had been rendered against the
testator or intestate in his lifetime, that a certified copy of the judgment
should be presented to the executor or administrator as part of the claim,
although, doubtless, it was the duty of the executor or administrator to require
evidence or vouchers sufficient to establish to his satisfaction the justice of
every claim. (Id. § 141.) The requirements that original written obligations and
certified copies of judgment should constitute the claims presented, or portions
of them, are first found in subsequent amendments of the Probate Act. (Hittell's
Gen. L. pp. 881, 2, 3,  and 4.) When, therefore, the claim was presented to the
Probate Judge, the portion of it relating to the judgment might properly consist
only of a statement of the material parts of the judgment. It was the duty of
the Judge to require proper and sufficient evidence of the existence of the
judgment, and it must be presumed that he did. If he had erred by allowing the
claim upon insufficient evidence, this would not have deprived his allowance of
its prima facie quality as evidence of the validity of the claim. He was
intrusted by law with the discretion of ascertaining, in the first instance,
whether a claim was well founded. The claim, allowed or disallowed, constituted
the record of his judicial action. The hearing with respect to the validity of a
claim, (allowed by the administrator or Probate Judge) at a subsequent stage of
the proceedings, when the heirs for the first time became parties, was not in
the nature of a review upon appeal of the action of the administrator or Probate
Judge. The final recognition of a claim as valid in no way depended upon the
question whether the administrator or Probate Judge allowed it upon insufficient
evidence. The law simply made the allowance evidence prima facie of the claim,
and cast the onus of proof upon the heir contesting the claim; in other respects
the investigation at the return of the application for an order of sale was an
original trial, in which the heir first had a standing in Court. It follows
from what has been said that it is immaterial whether the original judgment in
favor of Elliott Reed, (if that could be possible) or a copy of it, was
presented to the Probate Judge when he allowed the claim based on that judgment.

   The question which remains is, whether the Probate Court erred in granting
the "order of sale" seventeen years after the claims were allowed by the Probate
Judge. And herein is to be considered the question whether the Court had a
discretion to reject the petition because of an unreasonable delay in presenting
it.

   In Mooers v. White, 6 Johns. Ch. 375, Chancellor Kent said, with reference to
applications by executors and administrators for the sale of real estate under
the law of New York: "I am not prepared to admit that the executor or
administrator can at any time, in his discretion, apply for, and be entitled to
an order for the sale of the real estate." * * * "The statute (1 N. R. L.
450-53,) declares that the executor or administrator, when he shall discover or
suspect that the personal estate is insufficient to pay the debts, shall, 'as
soon as conveniently may be,' make a just and true account of the personal
estate and debts, * * and shall deliver such account to the judge of probate or
surrogate of the county, and request his aid in the premises. The judge is then
to make an order directing, by due public notice, 'all persons interested in the
estate,' to appear and show cause why so much of the real estate, whereof the
testator or intestate died seized, should not be sold, as will be sufficient to
pay the debts. He is then, at the time and place appointed, to 'hear and
determine the allegations and proofs of the executor or administrator, and of
all other persons interested in the estate,' who make or offer any." * * * "And
if, 'upon the examination,' he shall find the personal estate not sufficient to
pay the debts, he shall direct the whole or part of the real estate to be sold.'
* * * * "This is the substance of the provisions of the act upon the subject,
and I infer from them that the law intended that the executor or administrator
should make his application with due diligence, and in reasonable time, and if
he does not, the judge or surrogate has from the nature of his judicial trust a
discretion to reject the application. What is a reasonable time may be another
question. All I mean at  present to say is, that the judge of probates or
surrogate must be entitled to determine, in sound discretion, what is a
reasonable time under the circumstances of the case, and to determine when the
executor did first discover, or had ground to suspect, the insufficiency of the
personal estate, and whether, as soon as conveniently might have been, he had
made out an account and filed an inventory, and applied the assets in hand
according to the requisitions of the statute. If he had been guilty of gross
negligence or palpable laches on these points, he is clearly not in season
within the meaning of the act, and the judge or surrogate ought not to permit
him, or the creditor who prompts him, by this summary proceeding to sweep away
the real estate of the heir. Other provisions of the law show the like necessity
of diligence in the settlement of the estate of the testator or intestate. The
executor and administrator are required to file their inventory within six
months after they have assumed their trust; and after the expiration of one year
and not before, they may be called on to pay legacies, and make distribution
among the next of kin. The law presumes that by that time they have ascertained
the amount of the debts and of the assets, and have made due provision for the
creditors, and are in a condition to distribute the surplus. The legatees and
next of kin are then entitled to sue; and, perhaps, it would not be going too
far to say, that, under the sound construction of the statute, and the pressing
diligence which the provisions I have referred to evidently inculcate, the
executor or administrator ought to be ready to apply, and ought to make his
application within one year after he has entered upon the trust; and that every
subsequent application, unless under peculiar circumstances and with some
reasonable cause for delay, may, consistently with sound discretion and the
spirit and policy of the act, be adjudged out of season and rejected." * * * *
"All the analogous cases in the law show that these public trusts, created for
the benefit of creditors, are to be executed promptly," etc.

   The statute of this State, in operation when the "claims" to satisfy which
the sale of real estate was ordered in the case before us were allowed,
contemplated a prompt settlement and distribution of the estates of deceased
persons. Section 73 of the "Probate Act" provided that the penalty of the bond
of the administrator  should be for twice the probable value of the annual
rents, profits, and issues of the real property belonging to an estate. Section
128 required that the administrator should, "immediately after his appointment,"
cause to be published a notice requiring all persons having claims against the
deceased to exhibit them to the administrator "within ten months after the first
publication of the notice." Section 228, that the administrator should render a
full account and report of his administration "upon the expiration of one year
from the date of his appointment." Section 243, that on the settlement of such
account the court should make an order for the payment of the debts, or, in case
there were not sufficient funds in the hands of the administrator, that the
decree should specify the sum to be paid to each creditor. Section 247, that if
the whole of the debts should have been provided for by the order last
mentioned, and paid, the court should proceed to direct the payment of legacies,
and distribution of the estate among the heirs, legatees, and other persons
entitled; but if there should be debts remaining unpaid, the court should give
such extension of time as might be "reasonable" for a final settlement of the
estate. Contingent, disputed, and immature claims were provided for, so as not
to prevent a speedy settlement. (§§ 244-6.) Section 154 provided, "when," (that
is to say, in view of the plainly indicated policy and intent of the system, "so
soon as it shall appear that") the personal estate was insufficient to pay the
allowance to the family, and all the debts and charges of the administration,
the administrator should sell real estate upon the order of the judge. It
appears also that, if the executor or administrator neglected to apply for an
order of sale when it was necessary, "any person interested in the estate" might
make application therefor "in the same manner as the executor or
administrator"--notice being given the executor or administrator. This language
clearly includes the creditors. (§ 164.) Ever since Beckett v. Selover, 7 Cal.
215, it has been held that on an application to sell the real estate, the heir
may dispute the validity of the claims on which the petition is based, although
they have been allowed by the executor or administrator and Probate Judge; and
that, under our system, the petition to sell real estate is a substitute for an
action against the  heir, who must be cited, and has a right to be heard. As we
have seen, the heir then first has his day in court, and except that, by a
statutory rule of evidence, the "allowance" proves the validity of the claim
prima facie, the proceeding is in its nature an original proceeding. It is
manifest that the administrator or creditor ought not to delay an unreasonable
time, since every consideration arising from the probable loss of evidence by
reason of lapse of time, is applicable to a long delay preceding the petition
for the sale of real estate, which is applicable with respect to laches in any
other legal proceeding.

   The Supreme Court of Michigan, in the Matter of the Estate of Gabriel
Godfrey, deceased , 4 Mich. 314-15, after considering the question of delay in
connection with peculiar provisions of the statute of the State, quote from the
opinion of the Chancellor of New York in Mooers v. White, and add: "Applying the
rule contained in the above citation--and its soundness, we think, cannot be
controverted--we find no difficulty in dismissing the application (for the sale
of real estate) on the sole ground of laches, without reference to the
interests, claims, or liabilities of either the creditors or the different
persons who, at different times, have represented the interests of the estate."
In the same case it is said: "The power of the court to grant license to sell
real estate, in cases of this character, is always discretionary, and it will
never be exercised in any case when, by so doing, substantial injustice will be
done, or, more properly, when substantial justice does not require it; and the
application should be made within a reasonable time." It would be the extreme of
hardship, if not of injustice, to allow, at this late day, the heirs and their
grantees to be disturbed in the quiet and peaceable possession of the property
in question. If the Statute of Limitations does not apply in this case,
nevertheless, in the exercise of this discretionary power, we are not to
overlook the evident intention of the law. By the statutes above cited, it
clearly appears that the intention of the Legislature was to compel the executor
or administrator, when it became necessary, to resort to these means to settle
up an estate, to move at his earliest convenient opportunity."

   Under our law, no action can be maintained against the heir for any debt of
the ancestor, whether specialty or otherwise,  and every claim against an estate
must be presented to the executor or administrator, as required by the Code of
Civil Procedure, or it is forever barred. (Sec. 1493.) And such has been the law
since the adoption of the Probate Act of 1851. When the liability of the heir to
an ordinary suit by the creditor has continued, inasmuch as the heir has the
right to set up the Statute of Limitations as against an action brought directly
against him, he retains the right to assert the bar of the statute against an
application by an executor or administrator for the sale of real estate in the
Probate Court--since the "allowance" by the executor or administrator does not
convert a simple promise into a specialty, nor amount to an admission on the
part of the heir such as will take the claim out of the Statute of Limitations,
nor in any other way affect the rights of the heir, beyond making the allowance
prima facie evidence of the validity of the claim. ( Ferguson v. Broome, 1 Brad.
19.) But while, under our system, the Statute of Limitations may not apply,
every consideration arising from the evident intention of the statute that
proceedings for the settlement of the estate should progress with all reasonable
dispatch, and that the Probate Judge should employ a discretionary power to deny
a petition for the sale of real estate where unreasonable delay has occurred,
should have full force and vigor. These considerations should have the same
influence--whatever the machinery provided by statute--whenever the intent
referred to is made manifest by the language of the law. When from the statute
it appears to be the duty of the executor, or administrator, or creditor, to
apply as soon as conveniently may be, for the sale of real property--no specific
period being prescribed within which the application must be made--the Probate
Court, from the very nature of the trust confided to it, must determine the
question of reasonable time. "So far as the express letter of the law stood, the
proceeding might be commenced at any time. It was evident, therefore, that
unless some equitable restriction was imposed upon the exercise of so broad a
discretion, the power of the creditor, through the medium of the personal
representative (or directly) to reach the real estate, constituted, in the
vigorous language of Chancellor Kent, a 'hidden and tremendous lien' of the most
dangerous character." ( Ferguson  v. Broome, supra.) Fourteen years was declared
to be "an unreasonable length of time" to delay making the application. (
Jackson v. Robinson, 4 Wend. 442.) It would appear that the limitation of three
years, within which an application must be made, provided by the Revised
Statutes of New York, was imposed "in conformity to the suggestion of Chancellor
Kent, in 6 John. Ch. 360." (Ferguson v. Broome, citing reviser's notes.)

   It may be freely admitted that purchasers of real property from the heirs of
a decedent, under our system in California, always have the opportunity (when
the estate has not been finally closed) of ascertaining the existence of every
claim which may be made a lien upon the real estate, and collected by a sale
thereof. As every claim not presented and allowed by the executor, or
administrator, or judge of probates, is barred, the purchaser may know by
reference to the records of the Probate Court the condition of the estate in
that regard. But while this is true, the pressing urgency of the provisions of
the statute to which we have referred, and which is indicated by the whole
scheme established for the settlement of estates of decedents, calls for a
construction which as clearly requires the application for the sale of real
estate to be made "as soon as conveniently may be," as if those terms had been
employed in the law. Nor does the fact that the heirs do not call for an
accounting in the Probate Court, and for sale of real estate if necessary,
constitute any excuse for the delay of the administrator or creditor. The
proceeding for the sale of real property is hostile to the heirs, and there is
no principle which makes it their duty to initiate a suit adversely to
themselves,  the failure to commence which by the proper party may result to
their benefit.

   The laws of Iowa provide that claims not filed and proved within one year and
a half of the giving of notice of the appointment of an executor, were forever
barred, unless the claim was pending in court, or unless certain circumstances
entitled the claimant to equitable relief. The Supreme Court of Iowa held, that,
as a general rule in that State, an application of the executor to sell real
estate of the decedent for the payment of debts would not be sustained unless
made within eighteen months  from the time the executor gave notice of his
appointment, unless the peculiar circumstances of the case are of such character
as to make it the duty of a Court of Equity to depart from this general rule,
and that, under such circumstances, the application must be made within a
reasonable time. The Court added: "If we could even hold that the circumstances
are such as would justify the extension of the time for making the application
beyond the lapse of eighteen months, still we are of the opinion that the delay
of eleven and one-half years, without excuse or explanation, is unreasonable." (
McCrary v. Tasker, 41 Iowa, 255.) By the Supreme Court of Illinois, it was held,
that, while there was no statute of limitations barring proceedings by
administrators for the sale of lands to pay debts, yet the right to sell the
real estate of a deceased person for such purpose would be barred after the
lapse of seven years, unless the delay could be satisfactorily explained; and in
this respect each case must rest upon its own peculiar facts. ( Wolf v. Ogden,
66 Ill. 224.)

   A full examination of the foregoing and other cases, in which it was admitted
that the Statute of Limitations did not apply, will show it to have been held,
nevertheless, from the very nature of the proceedings and the character of the
duties imposed upon courts where the estates of deceased persons are
administered, as well as from the various provisions of the statutes of
different States, which--however they may differ in detail--are all impressed
with an evident legislative intent that the proceedings shall be promptly
inaugurated and continuously prosecuted, without unnecessary delay; that the
courts of probate retain the power, and it is their duty, to refuse an order
granting leave to sell, when the delay amounts to  laches.

   We can see nothing in the facts appearing in the findings which can be held
to excuse the delay of seventeen years which occurred in this case. In respect
to all the claims allowed, except the judgment in favor of Elliott Reed, no
reason whatever appears why, if the personal property was insufficient, an
application should not have been made many years ago for the sale of real
property. In respect to the judgment, it is found that on the 21st of March,
1861, about seventeen months after the allowance by the Probate Judge, E. P.
Reed, after first obtaining  leave of the Probate Court so to do, caused a writ
of execution to be issued out of the District Court upon the judgment in favor
of Elliott Reed, directed to the Sheriff of San Diego County. Under and by
virtue thereof, and on the 10th day of May, 1861, said Sheriff sold, to satisfy
said execution, interest, and costs, all of the undivided third of the Cuyamaca
Rancho--said Reed becoming the purchaser; that he bid the full amount of the
judgment, interest, and costs due at the time of sale; and the Sheriff returned
the execution fully satisfied. That afterward, September 10th, 1862, the Sheriff
executed and delivered to E. P. Reed, as such purchaser, a sheriff's deed
therefor. That doubts having arisen as to the validity of the execution and sale
thereunder, the present administrator, and E. P. Reed, in August, 1876,
submitted an agreed case to the Twentieth District Court, which Court on the 6th
day of October, 1877, adjudged and decreed that said execution was issued
without authority of law, and that the sale thereunder was void.

   It would seem that the circumstances which can excuse a delay, otherwise
unreasonable, must be such as arise out of the peculiar condition of the
administration, and such as have prevented the executor or administrator from
moving more expeditiously. Here the fact alleged, that the agent of the creditor
mistook, for several years, the law of the land as to his right to proceed by
execution upon the judgment of the District Court, can by possibility constitute
no excuse for his failure to proceed in the Probate Court. It is a matter which
has no connection with the progress of the administration, and his error as to
the law may have coexisted, and did coexist for at least sixteen years, with the
full power and opportunity to petition for a sale of the real property in the
Probate Court. In any event we cannot conceive of a case in which a delay to
petition for more than seventeen years after qualification of an administrator
could be held to be reasonable.

   We have not found it necessary to inquire whether any provision of our
Statute of Limitations is applicable, in terms, to a proceeding of the character
we have been considering. Neither of the counsel has claimed this; but on the
contrary it was assumed by both that the statute did not apply. Since, however,
it has been decided that a proceeding in the Probate Court is in  the nature of
an original proceeding against the heirs, and such proceeding is simply
statutory, and is not analogous to an action conducted according to the course
of the common law, it may be perhaps "a special proceeding of a civil nature,"
and as such, subject to an appropriate section of the title of the Code of Civil
Procedure which treats of limitations. ( Code Civ. Proc. § 363.) It is not
necessary to determine the question, however, and we content ourselves with
saying that the delay preceding the filing of the petition was so great, in the
absence of any satisfactory explanation, that the Probate Court ought to have
dismissed the application or denied the order prayed for, and it was error to
entertain the petition and to grant the order.

   The order directing the sale of real estate, of the 24th day of November,
1877, is reversed, and the Court below is directed to enter an order dismissing
the petition for the sale, or denying the order therein prayed for.


                              43 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             HELEN A. ALHINO, Individually and as Executrix, etc.,
              Plaintiff and Appellant, v. MARVIN D. STARR et al.,
           Defendants and Respondents.  HELEN A. ALHINO, Individually
              and as Executrix, etc., Plaintiff and Appellant, v.
            MASON-McDUFFIE COMPANY et al., Defendants and Appellants

                                 Civ. No. 46801

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

            112 Cal. App. 3d 158; 169 Cal. Rptr. 136; 1980 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2443


                               November 17, 1980

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Petitions for a rehearing were denied December 17, 1980,
and the petitions of plaintiff and appellant and defendants and appellants for a
hearing by the Supreme Court were denied February 11, 1981.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Alameda County, Nos. 489908-8, 474594-1,
Gordon L. Minder, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1a) (1b) (1c) (1d) Judgments § 83 -- Res Judicata -- Collateral Estoppel --
Identity of Issues.  -- An action for fraud by a seller against a real estate
broker for fraudulent misrepresentation as to the buyer's security and assets
was not barred by waiver and estoppel as the result of the settlement and
dismissal of a previous fraud action against the buyer after a promissory note
had been reformed to include omitted provisions for attorney fees and
acceleration, where the reformation conformed the transaction to the original
agreement, where the seller's action against the broker was based on breach of
fiduciary duties, wrongs independent and separate from those perpetrated by the
buyer and where, because the liability of the broker did not depend on the
buyer's conduct, the seller's action against the broker did not involve the same
subject matter as the previous action against the buyer. The only fraud
allegation in the action against the seller referred to his misrepresentation of
his wealth, while the complaint against the real estate broker alleged
fraudulent misrepresentation and concealment of other matters.

(2) Brokers § 21 -- Duties and Liabilities of Brokers -- Fiduciary Duties --
Real Estate Agent. -- The law imposes on a real estate agent the same obligation
of undivided service and loyalty that it imposes on a trustee in favor of his
beneficiary.  This relationship not only imposes on him the duty of acting in
the highest good faith toward his principal but precludes the agent from
obtaining any advantage over the principal in any transaction had by virtue of
his agency.  A real estate licensee is charged with the duty of fullest
disclosure of all material facts concerning the transaction that might affect
the principal's decision.

(3a) (3b) Judgments § 81 -- Res Judicata -- Collateral Estoppel -- Requirements.
-- One not a party to a prior action must fulfill three requirements before
claiming the benefit of the collateral estoppel doctrine.  The issue decided in
the prior adjudication must be identical with the one presented by the action in
question, a final judgment on the merits must have been entered in the prior
action, and the party against whom the doctrine is asserted must have been in
privity with a party in the prior action.  Under the doctrine, once an issue is
litigated and determined, it is binding in a subsequent action notwithstanding
that a party may have omitted to raise a matter for or against it which, if
asserted, might have produced a different outcome.

(4a) (4b) Brokers § 24 -- Duties and Liabilities of Brokers -- Actions Against
Brokers -- Evidence -- Fraud.  -- In an action by a seller of real estate
against a broker, there was substantial evidence of fraudulent misrepresentation
and concealment by the real estate broker, where the broker's employee handling
the transaction was acting as the seller's agent, where the agent represented to
the seller that the buyer was wealthy even though he knew that some of the
representations concerning the buyer's financial statements were false, where,
based on his representations of the buyer's wealth, the agent encouraged the
seller to accept an unsecured note rather than a note secured by a first deed of
trust, where he did not reveal to the seller the omission of standard attorney
fees and acceleration clauses, or that the omission had been made at the
insistence of the buyer, where the seller was never informed that the buyer had
to borrow the full down payment and had to make use of the broker's bank
connection to obtain the loan, such borrowing being a fact that a real estate
agent is obligated to disclose to his principal, and where all of the agent's
acts were either approved or subsequently ratified by the broker, as
demonstrated by the fact that the agent was defended at the trial by the
broker's attorney.

(5) Employer and Employee § 28 -- Liability to Third Persons -- Scope of
Employment and Ratification -- Torts -- Ratification. -- A determination as to
whether an employee committed a tort during the course of his employment turns
on whether or not the act performed was either required or incident to his
duties, or the employee's misconduct could be reasonably foreseen by the
employer.  The employer's liability under the doctrine of respondeat superior
extends to malicious acts and other intentional torts of an employee committed
within the scope of his employment.

(6) Agency § 31 -- Rights, Duties and Liabilities -- Liability of Principal for
Torts of Agent.  -- A principal or employer who is not at fault directly for
tortious conduct of his employee or agent in the commission of a fraud may
become liable based on imputed knowledge where the principal actually or
apparently authorizes representations about a matter related to the agent's
duties, and the agent has knowledge of their falsity; such knowledge may be
imputed to the principal even though the agent is acting adversely.  If the
principal places the agent in a position to defraud, and the third person relies
on his apparent authority to make the representations, the principal is liable
even though the agent is acting for his own purposes.

(7) Dismissal and Nonsuit § 51 --Nonsuit and Motion for Entry of Judgment ( Code
Civ. Proc., §§ 581c and 631.8)-- Appeal and Review -- Directed Verdict.  -- On
appeal from a judgment entered on a directed verdict, an appellate court views
the evidence as on an appeal from a nonsuit.

(8) Torts § 9 -- Persons Liable -- Joint and Several Tortfeasors.  --
Independent tortfeasors who do not act in concert are not jointly liable even
though their acts have united to produce one injury; each is responsible only
for the part of the damage resulting from his own acts.

(9) Attorneys at Law § 21 -- Attorney-client Relationship -- Liability of
Attorneys -- Nature and Basis of Malpractice Actions -- Elements.  -- The
elements of legal malpractice, like those of any other action for negligence,
are the duty of the professional to use such skill, prudence and diligence as
other members of his profession commonly possess and exercise; a breach of that
duty; a proximate causal connection between the negligent conduct and the
resulting injury, and actual loss or damage resulting from the professional's
negligence.  If the allegedly negligent conduct does not cause damage, it
generates no cause of action in tort.  The mere breach of a professional duty,
causing only nominal damages, speculative harm or the threat of future harm,
does not suffice to create a cause of action for negligence.  Thus, until the
client suffers appreciable harm as a consequence of his attorney's negligence,
the client cannot establish a cause of action for malpractice.

(10) Attorneys at Law § 22 -- Attorney-client Relationship -- Liability of
Attorneys -- Acts Constituting Malpractice. -- In an action for malpractice
against attorneys by a seller of real estate, arising out of the attorneys'
settlement and dismissal of the seller's fraud action against the buyer who
misrepresented his security and assets, which was joined with an action for
fraud against the real estate broker handling the transaction, the trial court
properly gave the jury an instruction directing a verdict in favor of the
attorneys if the jury found that the real estate broker was liable to the
seller, where the seller adduced no evidence of aggravated damages over and
above those for which the real estate broker was liable as a result of the
conduct of the attorneys.

(11) Damages § 27 -- Exemplary or Punitive Damages -- Review.  -- An appellate
court may reverse an award of punitive damages only when the award appears
excessive as a matter of law, or where the recovery is so grossly
disproportionate as to raise a presumption that it was the result of passion or
prejudice.  One factor to be considered is the particular nature of defendant's
acts in light of the whole record; different acts may be of varying degrees of
reprehensibility, and the more reprehensible the act, the greater the
appropriate punishment, assuming all other factors are equal.  Another factor is
the amount of compensatory damages awarded; generally even an act of
considerable reprehensibility will not justify a proportionately high amount of
punitive damages if the actual harm suffered thereby is small.  The wealth of
the defendant is to be considered, as the function of deterrence will not be
served if the defendant's wealth allows him to absorb the award with little or
no discomfort.  How much in punitive damages will suffice in a particular case
is not susceptible of mathematical definition.

(12) Damages § 22 -- Exemplary or Punitive Damages -- Deterrence.  -- Since the
purpose of punitive damages is to punish defendant and make an example of him,
the wealthier the defendant, the larger the award of exemplary damages must be
in order to accomplish the statutory objective, from which it also follows that
the poorer the wrongdoing defendant the smaller the award of punitive damages
need be in order to accomplish the statutory objective.  Due consideration must
be given to the importance of the public policy embodied in the statutory
provisions the violation of which was the basis of plaintiff's claim, and the
magnitude of defendant's violation of such policy.

COUNSEL: Harry Gonick and Brian McCarthy for Plaintiff and Appellant.

Cresswell, Terreo, Davis & Lamborn, David Terreo, Ronald D. Echeguren, Wendel,
Lawlor, Rosen & Black, Eugene K. Lawlor, Richard G. Logan and Bruce A. Lieberman
for Defendants and Respondents and for Defendants and Appellants.

JUDGES: Opinion by Taylor, P. J., with Miller and Smith, JJ., concurring.

OPINION BY:  TAYLOR

OPINION

     In these two matters consolidated for trial, Mason-McDuffie Co. and Senjo
(collectively, real estate defendants), appeal from that part of a judgment
entered on a jury verdict in favor of Alhino 1 for general damages of $ 145,905
and punitive damages of $ 150,000, in the 1976 action against them for
fraudulent misrepresentation as to the security and assets of Ranker, the
insolvent buyer of a parcel of real property from Alhino in 1972; Alhino
cross-appeals from the conditional order granting the real estate defendants a
new trial on grounds of excessive damages.  Alhino also appeals from the part of
the judgment entered on the verdict in favor of Starr et al. (collectively,
attorney defendants), 2 in a 1976 malpractice action against them for the
settlement and dismissal of the 1974 Alhino action against Ranker.  The major
issues on appeal are: 1) whether Alhino's action against the real estate
defendants was barred by waiver or collateral estoppel, as the result  of the
settlement and dismissal of the 1974 action against Ranker; 2) the sufficiency
of the evidence as to each of the defendants; 3) the propriety of the court's
instruction directing a verdict in favor of the attorney defendants if the real
estate defendants were found liable; and 4) the validity of the conditional new
trial order, which contained no written specification of reasons, as required by
Code of Civil Procedure  section 657.  For the reasons set forth below, we have
concluded that: 1) the void conditional new trial order must be reversed; 2) the
judgment on the verdict in favor of Alhino, et al. must be reinstated and
affirmed, but remanded for a redetermination of the amount of punitive damages;
and 3) the judgment on the verdict in favor of the attorney defendants must also
be affirmed.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Mrs.
Alhino's appearances are individually and as executrix of the will of her
husband, collectively Alhino.
2   Alhino subsequently dismissed her appeal as to one of the attorney
defendants, B. M. Gallagher.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Viewing the record most strongly in favor of the judgment and verdict, as we
must, the following pertinent facts appear: Alhino owned two parcels of
contiguous improved real property in Oakland, comprised of an apartment and
commercial units.  In 1971, Mason-McDuffie and its employee, Robert Senjo, in
cooperation with another salesman from Mason-McDuffie, had been the real estate
agents in an attempt by Alhino to sell that building.  No sale took place at
that time and the property was taken off the market because of Mrs. Alhino's
health.

   Subsequently, Senjo learned from another Mason-McDuffie salesman that the
property was for sale again.  Senjo contacted Alhino by telephone to verify the
pertinent financial information, including rents and expenses.  They discussed
the price ($ 189,000) 3 and other terms of sale, including Alhino's willingness
to carry back a loan after a $ 35,000 downpayment.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   This
figure included Senjo's commission of $ 10,000.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   About a month later, Senjo contacted Dr. Ranker, an Oakland ophthalmologist,
to whom he had sold other properties.  After Senjo showed Ranker the Alhino
property, Ranker informed Senjo that he would buy the property if Alhino agreed
to carry back the loan on an unsecured promissory note. Ranker told Senjo that
he wanted to acquire the Alhino property without encumbrances as: 1) he wanted
to trade it for a larger parcel; and 2) he wanted to be good and late on the
payments without taking a risk.

   Senjo prepared a deposit receipt for the sale of the property to Ranker and
presented it to Alhino who signed it after a brief discussion and  two minor
changes.  The deposit receipt stated that the Alhinos had employed Senjo and
agreed to pay the $ 10,000 commission.  Alhino believed that Senjo was their
agent.  When Senjo presented the deposit receipt to Alhino, he told them that
Ranker was a very wealthy man and they were better off taking an unsecured
promissory note from Ranker.  He indicated that with an unsecured note, they
would get money in case of a default while with a secured note, they would only
get the property which might then be in bad shape.  He also submitted Ranker's
financial statement, which indicated that Ranker owned real properties with a
net worth in excess of $ 5 million.  Senjo also told Alhino that he had personal
knowledge of some of the real estate holdings listed on Ranker's financial
statement. Senjo then obtained Ranker's approval.

   Senjo prepared the promissory note for $ 154,000, the balance of the purchase
price, payable at the rate of $ 1,200 per month, including interest of 7 percent
per annum.  The note contained neither of the customary clauses for attorney
fees and acceleration. Senjo had intentionally omitted these clauses at Ranker's
direction.  Alhino did not know about the omission of these customary clauses or
their legal effect.

   Prior to the close of escrow, Ranker informed Senjo that he wanted to borrow
the amount of the commission ($ 10,000) from Mason-McDuffie.  Senjo submitted
this request to his supervisor, who approved it.  Ranker then signed a
promissory note in favor of Mason-McDuffie for $ 10,000.  Ranker also told Senjo
he wanted to borrow the remaining $ 25,000 of the downpayment. Senjo introduced
Ranker to a loan officer at Wells Fargo Bank, where Mason-McDuffie was a "well
known account." Wells Fargo loaned Ranker the sum of $ 25,000 that he needed to
complete the downpayment. 4  Senjo did not inform Alhino of either of these
loans.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   Ranker
defaulted on his obligation to repay this loan in 90 days.  He subsequently paid
it under pressure and was refused another loan on the basis of a financial
statement purporting to show his assets as of June 1972.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The evening before the close of escrow, Senjo brought the closing papers to
Alhino's home for signature.  In a conversation which included Alhino's son,
Senjo expounded on Ranker's wealth. Senjo stated that Ranker's financial
statement conclusively demonstrated Ranker's ability to pay and that Ranker's
fortune was based on possession of assets that were not listed in the financial
statement, such as gold certificates.   Senjo also reiterated that he had
personally sold some of the properties on the list to Ranker.

   Escrow closed in July of 1972.  Thirty days later, Ranker mortgaged the
property for $ 98,500.  After the first few months Ranker developed a pattern of
late monthly payments.  Alhino, on May 1, 1973, consulted a lawyer, Marvin B.
Starr, a partner in the firm of Miller, Starr & Regalia.  Starr reviewed the
papers and was startled when he discovered that the note failed to contain the
usual attorney fees and acceleration clauses.  Alhino was shocked and surprised
also.

   Starr called in Barry Gallagher, an attorney employed by his firm, who had
handled several cases in which Ranker was a defendant, for Dr. Marshall, another
client of the firm.  On May 21, 1973, Starr drafted and sent a letter to Ranker,
to Senjo and to Mason-McDuffie.  By the time of this letter, Senjo was no longer
employed by Mason-McDuffie.  Starr accused all three of fraudulent and negligent
conduct in connection with the sale of the Alhino property and demanded a
meeting that never took place.  Instead, Starr heard from Ranker's attorney,
William Kenney, who said he would advise Ranker to revise the note to include
the missing attorney fees and acceleration provisions.

   Shortly thereafter, Starr talked to Lee Kaufthiel (a partner in
Mason-McDuffie and also its counsel) and informed him that Senjo had provided
the original promissory note without the attorney fees and acceleration clauses.
Senjo had turned over the entire file to his supervisor, Mr. Valentine (another
partner in Mason-McDuffie), and told Valentine everything he knew about the
Alhino transaction.

   By January of 1974, Ranker still had not provided the reformed promissory
note, as promised.  Accordingly, in January 1974, the attorney defendants, on
behalf of Alhino, filed suit against Ranker and Does I-X in Alameda County
Superior Court, action No. 444948-3 (hereafter referred to as the 1974
Alhino-Ranker action),  alleging fraud and breach of oral contract by Ranker,
who had induced Alhino to enter into an unsecured transaction and misrepresented
his wealth. The complaint in the 1974 Alhino-Ranker action sought general and
punitive damages for fraud, reformation of the note by including the missing
clauses, declaratory relief and quiet title; a first amended complaint filed
February 6, 1974, added a cause of action for rescission.

    In March, the 1974 Alhino-Ranker action was dismissed with prejudice in
exchange for a reformed promissory note including the two missing clauses.  At
the same time, Alhino deeded to Ranker a portion of the Fruitvale property
(Harold Street), which had been inadvertently left out of the original
transaction by the title company.  In May 1974, Ranker sold the property.

   Ranker continued to be late with his payments.  In July 1974, Gallagher
prepared another action against Ranker on behalf of Alhino.  However, Gallagher
became convinced this action was ill-advised and it was never filed.

   On August 8, 1974, Mr. Alhino died suddenly of a heart attack.  After his
death, Ranker made no more payments on the note.  By December 1974, Ranker was
several months behind on the payments.  On December 11, 1974, Starr wrote a
letter demanding that Ranker pay the past due installments and threatened legal
action.  On December 18, 1974, Ranker committed suicide.  After Ranker's death,
the attorney defendants filed a claim against Ranker's estate on behalf of
Alhino for the amount  of the outstanding balance on the note.  The claim was
approved in full by Ranker's estate.  However, early in 1975, the attorney
defendants were advised that Ranker's estate was insolvent and would be paying
creditors approximately 25 cents on the dollar.  After receiving this
information, Alhino asked Starr for representation in an action against the real
estate defendants.  Starr indicated that Alhino would have to seek other
counsel, as in July 1974, his firm had begun to represent Mason-McDuffie on a
regular basis.

   Alhino filed the instant actions against the real estate defendants in
January 1976, alleging fraud and misrepresentation in the Ranker transaction,
particularly as to the terms of the note and truthfulness of his financial
statement. The answer of the real estate defendants alleged five affirmative
defenses, as follows: 1) estoppel as a result of the 1974 action against Ranker;
2) Alhino's knowledge that the note was unsecured and subsequent receipt of the
reformed note; 3) assumption of risk; 4) laches; and 5) unclean hands.  In
December 1976, Alhino filed the action against the attorney defendants for
malpractice. Both actions were consolidated for trial and tried to a jury, which
made a special finding that Senjo was Alhino's agent in the Ranker transaction
and rendered a verdict: 1) in favor of Alhino on the fraud counts against the
real estate defendants for general damages of $ 145,000 and punitive  damages of
$ 150,000; and 2) in favor of the attorney defendants on the malpractice counts.

   The court then conditionally granted the real estate defendants a new trial
on the issue of damages unless Alhino agreed to: 1) a reduction of the punitive
damages to $ 25,000; and 2) assignment of all interest in the Ranker estate to
them on satisfaction of the judgment.  These appeals and cross-appeals ensued.
This court granted Senjo's motion for permission to file a separate brief on the
issue of ratification and Alhino's motion to the advance the appeal.

   We turn first to the issues raised by the real estate defendants.   They
first contend that as a matter of law 5 Alhino's instant action against them was
barred by waiver and collateral estoppel, as a result of the settlement and
dismissal of the 1974 action against Ranker.  The real estate defendants rely on
the general rule that one who, after a discovery of a fraud that induced him to
enter into a contract, subsequently enters into a new agreement or modification,
waives his right to damages for fraud under the original transaction ( Schied v.
Bodinson Mfg. Co. (1947) 79 Cal.App.2d 134 [179 P.2d 380]).

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   In this
context, we need not consider Alhino's contention that waiver was not pled
properly or that the real estate defendants are precluded from raising the issue
on appeal by their subsequent withdrawal of a jury instruction.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The argument of the real estate defendants is predicated on the theory that
the reformed note constituted a new agreement between Alhino and Ranker.  The
deposit receipt did not indicate whether the note was to contain the usual and
customary acceleration and attorney fees clauses.  Alhino adduced uncontroverted
evidence that in this state, the omission of these clauses is so unusual that a
note without them is unacceptable.  Thus, the 1974 Alhino-Ranker action sought
reformation to include the missing clauses to conform to the agreement of the
parties.  To do what one is already obliged to do is not a valid consideration (
Civ. Code, § 1605; Capitelli v. Sawamura (1954) 123 Cal.App.2d 169, 174 [266
P.2d 939]). The reformed note bore the same date as the original and was not
supported by additional consideration.  The transfer of the Harold Street
property to Ranker also was a part of the original transaction.  Thus, the
documents executed in 1974 merely conformed the transaction to the original
agreement.  With the substitution of the reformed note, the reformation count of
the 1974 Alhino-Ranker action became moot.  The dismissal of the remaining
causes of action, including the fraud count, was gratuitous and without
consideration.

    Even assuming that there was a new agreement, there would be no automatic
waiver of the fraud.  Further, there can be no waiver in the absence of an
intentional relinquishment of a known right ( Lawson v. Town & Country Shops,
Inc. (1958) 159 Cal.App.2d 196, 201 [323 P.2d 843]).

   More importantly, a careful scrutiny of the pleadings and proof reveals that
the fraud and misrepresentation allegations in Alhino's instant action against
the real estate defendants were separate and independent torts from that alleged
in the 1974 Alhino-Ranker action.  Alhino's only fraud allegation in the 1974
complaint referred to Ranker's misrepresentation of his wealth. While that is
one of the acts alleged also as to the real estate defendants in the instant
action, the torts were different.  The significant factor is the harm suffered;
that the same facts are involved in both actions is not conclusive ( Agarwal v.
Johnson (1979) 25 Cal.3d 932, 954-955 [160 Cal.Rptr. 141, 603 P.2d 58]). At the
time of the real estate defendants' motion for a nonsuit, Alhino had adduced
substantial evidence that Senjo was their agent in the Ranker transaction.

   The general principles of agency ( Civ. Code, §§ 2228 and 2322 ) combine with
the statutory duties created by the Real Estate Law ( Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10176
). 6 "'The  law imposes on a real estate agent "the same obligation of undivided
service and loyalty that it imposes on a trustee in favor of his beneficiary."
[Citations.] This relationship not only imposes upon him the duty of acting in
the highest good faith toward his principal but precludes the agent from
obtaining any advantage over the principal in any transaction had by virtue of
his agency.  [Citation.]' ( Batson v. Strehlow (1968) 68 Cal.2d 662, 674-675 [68
Cal.Rptr. 589, 411 P.2d 101].) A real estate licensee is 'charged with the duty
of fullest disclosure of all material facts concerning the transaction that
might affect the principal's decision.  [Citations.]' [Citations.]" ( Wyatt v.
Union Mortgage Co. (1979) 24 Cal.3d 773, 782 [157 Cal.Rptr. 392, 598 P.2d 45].)
Alhino's action against the  real estate defendants was based on breach of
fiduciary duties, wrongs independent of, and separate from, those perpetrated by
Ranker.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   So far as
pertinent, the statute provides that the grounds for suspension or revocation of
a real estate license include any of the following: "(a) Making any substantial
misrepresentation.

   "(b) Making any false promises of a character likely to influence, persuade
or induce.

   "(c) A continued and flagrant course of misrepresentation or making of false
promises through real estate agents or salesmen.

   "(d) Acting for more than one party in a transaction without the knowledge or
consent of all parties thereto."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    In addition, the instant complaint also alleged the fraudulent
misrepresentation and concealment by the real estate defendants of other matters
than Ranker's wealth, such as: the missing attorney fees and acceleration
clauses; Ranker's insistence on the omission so that he could avoid making late
payments without risk; Ranker's need to borrow the $ 35,000 downpayment and to
make use of Mason-McDuffie's bank connection at Wells Fargo.

    As to the collateral estoppel, the parties agree that one not a party to
prior action must fulfill three requirements before claiming the benefit of the
doctrine: 1) the issue decided in the prior adjudication must be identical with
the one presented by the action in question; 2) a final judgment on the merits;
and 3) the party against whom the doctrine is asserted must have been in privity
with a party in the prior action ( Bernhard v. Bank of America (1942) 19 Cal.2d
807, 813 [122 P.2d 892]).

    Here, the determinative issue is the first one.  The real estate defendants
argue that since both actions arose out of the same transaction, there is
sufficient identity of issues, as the issues in the present action could have
been raised in the 1974 Alhino-Ranker action.  They rely on Sutphin v. Speik
(1940) 15 Cal.2d 195, 202 [99 P.2d 652, 101 P.2d 497]; Kronkright v. Gardner
(1973) 31 Cal.App.3d 214, 216 [107 Cal.Rptr. 270]; Steiner v. Thomas (1949) 94
Cal.App.2d 655, 660 [211 P.2d 321]; Lippert v. Bailey (1966) 241 Cal.App.2d 376,
381 [50 Cal.Rptr. 478]; C. H. Duell v. Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Corp. (1932) 128
Cal.App. 376 [17  P.2d 781]). A careful reading of each of the above authorities
reveals that none applied the rule of Bernhard, supra, 19 Cal.2d 807, to the
action as to a dismissal with prejudice and as to an issue which might have
been, but was not, raised.

   The rule does not mean that issues not litigated and determined are binding
in a subsequent proceeding on a new cause of action.  Rather, it means that once
an issue is litigated and determined, it is binding in a subsequent action
notwithstanding that a party may have omitted to raise a matter for or against
it which, if asserted, might have produced a different outcome ( Price v. Sixth
District Agricultural Assn. (1927) 201 Cal. 502, 511 [258 P. 387];  Carroll v.
Puritan Leasing  Co. (1978) 77 Cal.App.3d 481, 490 [143 Cal.Rptr. 772]; see also
4 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (2d ed.) Judgment, § 201, pp. 3339-3341).

   As our Supreme Court pointed out in Clark v. Lesher, 46 Cal.2d 874, 880, the
pleadings and proof in each case must be carefully scrutinized.  We have already
indicated above that here Alhino's action against the real estate defendants was
predicated on the breach of their fiduciary duties. Thus, the liability of the
real estate defendants does not depend upon Ranker's conduct.  Alhino's action
against them did not involve the "same subject matter between the parties" (cf.
Wouldbridge v. Burns (1968) 265 Cal.App.2d 82, 85 [71 Cal.Rptr. 394]).
Furthermore, the dismissal of the 1974 Alhino-Ranker action did not amount to a
factual determination that Ranker was not guilty of the alleged fraud, but
merely established that Ranker could not be subjected to a subsequent fraud
action by Alhino.

    We conclude, therefore, that the real estate defendants' motion for a
nonsuit was properly denied as Alhino's action against the real estate
defendants was not barred as a matter of law.

    We turn next to the contentions of the real estate defendants that there was
insufficient substantial evidence of fraud.

   Alhino's case against the real estate defendants turned on the jury's
determination of the factual issue as to whether Senjo was Alhino's agent or
Ranker's agent in the transaction.  The jury returned a special finding
indicating that Senjo was Alhino's agent.  The real estate defendants do not
question the evidentiary support for this finding, but focus on Senjo's acts and
Mason-McDuffie's ratification. We have already set forth above Senjo's fiduciary
and statutory duties to Alhino.

   As detailed in our summary of the facts, when Senjo presented the deposit
receipt, he told Alhino that Ranker was wealthy and that Ranker's financial
statement indicated that he owned real properties with a net worth of over $ 5
million.  Senjo also indicated that he had personal knowledge of at least five 7
of the nine properties listed, as he had sold some of them to Ranker.  Apart
from the two Orange Street properties and his home, uncontroverted evidence
established that in 1972, Ranker  did not own five of the properties on the list
(711 Lighthouse, Pacific Grove; 30th Street, Oakland; Highway 1, Pescadero;
Monterey Street, San Francisco; Monterey Block, San Francisco; and Central
Avenue, Alameda).  Senjo also represented that over half of the gross value of
the real estate listed was in the convalescent hospitals.  As to the one at 2910
McClure Street listed on the statement, Senjo knew, or should have known, that
Ranker no longer owned this property, as Senjo had been involved in trading it
for one of the Orange Street properties.  Senjo had no knowledge about the other
convalescent hospitals listed, but did not so inform Alhino.  As to the 233
Orange Street property which Senjo had sold to Ranker, the gross value was
overstated, since the mortgage was listed at $ 100,000 instead of $ 280,000.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   At trial,
Senjo reduced the number to four after hearing contrary testimony from the
former Mrs. Ranker.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Based on his representations of Ranker's wealth, Senjo encouraged Alhino to
accept the unsecured note rather than a note secured  by a first deed of trust,
did not reveal the omission of the attorney fees and acceleration clauses, the
unusual nature of this omission, or the reason for it, i.e., Ranker's
insistence.

   Prior to the close of escrow, Senjo reiterated his representations as to the
financial statement and in addition stated that Ranker had plenty of other
assets, including gold certificates.  He also never disclosed that Ranker had to
borrow the full downpayment of $ 35,000 and had to make use of Mason-McDuffie's
bank connection with Wells Fargo to obtain this loan.  Senjo found the latter
rather strange and wondered about it.  Senjo was aware of his duty to disclose
this fact to his principal, but stated that he did not do so because he believed
that he was Ranker's agent.  Even if so, he was required to refrain from
representing both without full disclosure to the principals ( Loughlin v. Idora
Realty Co. (1968) 259 Cal.App.2d 619 [66 Cal.Rptr. 747]). Senjo also admitted
that Ranker's borrowing of the entire downpayment was a fact that a real estate
agent is obligated to disclose to his principal.

   Although 30 days after Ranker acquired title to the Alhino property he
mortgaged it for $ 98,500, he nevertheless defaulted on his 90-day loan to Wells
Fargo for the $ 35,000 downpayment. After Ranker finally paid off this loan
under pressure from Wells Fargo, he was refused another loan following an
investigation of a financial statement of his assets as of June 1972.  Alhino
also adduced uncontroverted evidence indicating that for several years before
his death, Ranker had borrowed substantial amounts from several banks.

    A year before his suicide, Ranker had made an unsuccessful attempt to take
his own life.  Before his suicide, he consulted a bankruptcy attorney and
indicated that he never owned some of the property listed on his financial
statement. Further, the disparity between Ranker's financial position as
represented at the time of the transaction in June 1972 and his death, two and
one-half years later, leads to a reasonable inference that he was not wealthy in
June 1972.

   As indicated above, Senjo knew that some of his representations concerning
the financial statement were false.  He also knew that Ranker wanted the
omissions in the note so that he could default with impunity, but considered it
merely "eccentric." As the amount of the mortgage on the Orange Street property
(which Senjo had sold to Ranker) was greatly overstated in the financial
statement, the jury could reasonably infer that Senjo knew or should have known
this fact.  The fact that the convalescent hospitals in four different cities
were shown as subject to a single mortgage also would have led a reasonable
person to some inquiry.

   There can be no question that the acts detailed above constituted ample
substantial evidence of Senjo's violation of his fiduciary duties. The real
estate defendants concede that although conflicting, there was ample substantial
evidence of Alhino's reliance.  We, therefore, do not need to discuss the
sufficiency of the evidence on this issue.

   Mason-McDuffie argues that in any event, they did not ratify Senjo's unlawful
conduct.  The record, however, indicates that: 1) Senjo had informed his
supervisor of the details of the Alhino-Ranker transaction, including the
unsecured note and loan of the downpayment; 2) prior to trial, Senjo was
apparently reemployed by Mason-McDuffie and defended at the trial by their
attorney.  The assertion of defense alone demonstrates ratification of the
employee's conduct ( Hale v. Farmers Ins. Exch. (1974) 42 Cal.App.3d 681, 698
[117 Cal.Rptr. 146], disapproved on other grounds in Egan v. Mutual of Omaha
Ins. Co. (1979) 24 Cal.3d 809, fn. 5 at p. 822 [157 Cal.Rptr. 482, 598 P.2d 452]
).

    In any event, the determination as to whether an employee committed a tort
during the course of his employment turns on whether or not: 1) the act
performed was either required or "incident to his duties" ( Curcic v. Nelson
Display Co. (1937) 19 Cal.App.2d 46 [64 P.2d 1153]), or 2) the employee's
misconduct could be reasonably foreseen   by the employer in any event ( Ingle
v. Bay Cities Transit Co. (1945) 72 Cal.App.2d 283 [164 P.2d 508]; see also 1
Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (8th ed.) Agency and Employment, § 164, p. 762).
The employer's liability under the doctrine of respondeat superior extends to
malicious acts and other intentional torts of an employee committed within the
scope of his employment ( Ruppe v. City of Los Angeles (1921) 186 Cal. 400 [199
P. 496]; Transcon. & W. Air v. Bank of America (1941) 46 Cal.App.2d 708, 713
[116 P.2d 791];  Coats v. Construction & Gen. Laborers Local No. 185 (1971) 15
Cal.App.3d 908, 913 [93 Cal.Rptr. 639]).

    A principal or employer who is not at fault directly for a tortious conduct
of his employee or agent in the commission of a fraud may become liable in any
event (see generally, Rest. 2d Agency, § 256 et seq.).  As Witkin notes, the
cases do not always distinguish between the agency theories of actual or
ostensible authority and the tort doctrine of respondeat superior (1 Witkin,
Summary of Cal. Law (8th ed. 1973) § 177, p. 775).  Witkin further states: "
Liability may also be based on imputed knowledge.  Thus, where the principal
actually or apparently authorizes representations about a matter related to the
agent's duties, and the agent has knowledge of their falsity, this knowledge may
be imputed to the principal, even though the agent is acting adversely.  (See
Rest.2d, Agency § 256, Comment d, § 272 et seq.; supra, § 146; 3 Am.Jur.2d,
Agency § 282; cf.  Pashley v. Pac. Elec. Ry. Co. (1944) 25 C.2d 226, 236, 153
P.2d 325 [notice imputed to prevent running of statute of limitations].)" (§
177, p. 775; italics partially added.)

   "If the principal places the agent in a position to defraud, and the third
person relies upon his apparent authority to make the representations, the
principal is liable even though the  agent is acting for his own purposes.  (
Rest.2d, Agency §§ 261, 262, and Appendix, Rep. Notes, pp. 420, 429.) The theory
is that the agent's position facilitates the consummation of the fraud, in that
from the point of view of the third person the transaction seems regular on its
face and the agent appears to be acting in the ordinary course of the business
confided to him.  It is immaterial that the principal receives no benefits from
the transaction." (§ 178, p. 776; italics partially added.)

    It is readily apparent that all of Senjo's acts were either approved or
subsequently ratified by Mason-McDuffie.  The ratification supports the award of
punitive damages ( Egan, supra, 24 Cal.3d, p. 822; Agarwal, supra, 25 Cal.3d,
pp. 950-951).

    Thus, the judgment in favor of Alhino against the real estate defendants
must be affirmed.  We defer our discussion of a setoff as to the compensatory
damages and whether the punitive damages are excessive as a matter of law, to
the final portion of this opinion, which deals with Alhino's cross-appeal from
the order for a new trial.

   We turn next to Alhino's appeal from the judgment on the verdict in favor of
the attorney defendants in her action for malpractice. The issues on this appeal
are the propriety of the court's instruction directing a verdict in favor of the
attorney defendants if the jury found that the real estate defendants were
liable to Alhino, and the sufficiency of the evidence.

    On appeal from a judgment entered on a directed verdict, we view the
evidence as on an appeal from a nonsuit ( Estate of Lances (1932) 216 Cal. 397,
400 [14 P.2d 768]; 4 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (2d ed.) Trial, § 353, p. 3153).
The only question is whether Alhino adduced any substantial evidence to support
a verdict that the attorney defendants deviated from the standard of care in
advising Alhino about Ranker's financial position and in exploring alternative
settlement opportunities. 8

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -8   Alhino
concedes that our affirmance of the judgment in favor of the real estate
defendants moots their allegations of malpractice predicated on the failure to
sue these defendants in the 1974 Alhino-Ranker action.  Accordingly, we need not
discuss the conflict of interest issue.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -



     Independent tortfeasors who do not act in concert are not jointly liable
even  though their acts have united to produce one injury; each is responsible
only for the part of the damage resulting from his own acts ( Summers v. Tice
(1948) 33 Cal.2d 80, 87 [199 P.2d 5 A.L.R.2d 91]).  As the attorney defendants
were later possible independent tortfeasors, Alhino's burden was to show that
their negligence aggravated the original harm caused by the tortious conduct of
the real estate defendants ( Rest. 2d Torts, § 879, com. a).

   As set forth in Budd v. Nixen (1971) 6 Cal.3d 195, 200 [98 Cal.Rptr. 849, 491
P.2d 433], the elements of legal malpractice, like those of any other action for
negligence, are: 1) the duty of the professional to use such skill, prudence and
diligence as other members of his profession commonly possess and exercise; 2) a
breach of that duty; 3) a proximate causal connection between the negligent
conduct and the  resulting injury; and 4) actual loss or damage resulting from
the professional's negligence.

   If the allegedly negligent conduct does not cause damage, it generates no
cause of action in tort.  The mere breach of a professional duty, causing only
nominal damages, speculative harm or the threat of future harm -- not yet
realized -- does not suffice to create a cause of action for negligence.  Hence,
until the client suffers appreciable harm as a consequence of his attorney's
negligence, the client cannot establish a cause of action for malpractice.

    Here, Alhino adduced no evidence of aggravated damages as a result of the
conduct of the attorney defendants.  As to Starr's representations concerning
Ranker's financial position, the record indicates that he advised Alhino that
Ranker was financially responsible on the basis of his inquiries and a Dun &
Bradstreet report.  He further advised Alhino that any definitive ascertainment
of Ranker's financial condition required a more extensive and expensive
investigation.  Alhino declined.  As to alternative security settlements, the
record indicates that the attorney defendants explored a first or blanket deed
of trust (which was not acceptable to Ranker), as well as a second deed of trust
(which was not acceptable to Alhino).  Expert testimony was required ( Estate of
Beach (1975) 15 Cal.3d 623, 635 [125 Cal.Rptr. 570, 542 P.2d 994]).  Here, even
Alhino's expert had no opinion as to whether the attorney defendants had been
negligent or failed to meet the standard of care in settling the 1974
Alhino-Ranker action.  The defense expert also testified that there had been no
breach of the requisite standard of care.

   It follows that the trial court's conditional directed verdict instruction
was proper and that the judgment in favor of the attorney defendants also must
be affirmed.

   Finally, we turn to Alhino's cross-appeal from the conditional order granting
the real estate defendants a new trial 9 on the issue of damages unless Alhino:
1) consented to a reduction of the punitive damages to $ 25,000; and 2) assigned
to them her interest in the Ranker estate.  The real estate defendants concede
that the order is invalid because of the  trial court's failure to provide the
requisite written specification of reasons ( Code Civ. Proc., § 657).  Thus, the
order must be reversed ( Stevens v. Parke, Davis & Co. (1973) 9 Cal.3d 51, 63
[107 Cal.Rptr. 45, 507 P.2d 653, 94 A.L.R.3d 1059]; Zhadan v. Downtown L. A.
Motors (1977) 66 Cal.App.3d 481, 494 [136 Cal.Rptr. 132]).

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -9   Contrary
to the contention of the real estate defendants, the cross-appeal is proper (
Neal v. Farmers Ins. Exchange (1978) 21 Cal.3d 910, fn. 1 at p. 918 [148
Cal.Rptr. 389, 582 P.2d 980]; Miller v. National American Life Ins. Co. (1976)
54 Cal.App.3d 331, 341-345 [126 Cal.Rptr. 731]).
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The real estate defendants argue, however, that as a matter of equity, the
compensatory damages should be reduced by an offset in the amount of Alhino's
recovery from the Ranker estate.  This argument overlooks the fact that at
trial, the real estate defendants took the position that Alhino's damages were
too speculative, objected to evidence of the amount creditors were likely to be
paid from the estate, and raised the issue for the first time in their motion
for a judgment notwithstanding the verdict.  Nor has the amount of the setoff
been pled or proved ( Seaboard Music Co. v.  Germano (1972) 24 Cal.App.3d 618,
622 [101 Cal.Rptr. 255]). Here,  of course, the amount of any potential setoff
is fatally uncertain (cf.  Bernard v. Walkup (1969) 272 Cal.App.2d 595, 606 [77
Cal.Rptr. 544]), as the record does not indicate that the Ranker estate will be
able to pay anything.

   Mason-McDuffie also erroneously attempts to rely on the rule against double
recovery.  As pointed out in Merlo v. Standard Life & Acc. Ins. Co. (1976) 59
Cal.App.3d 5, 20 [130 Cal.Rptr. 416], double recovery is expressly permitted by
Civil Code section 3294 in some circumstances.  In any event, to permit the
setoff here would result in giving effect to a portion of the void order for a
new trial.

   We now turn to the contention of the real estate defendants that the punitive
damages of $ 150,000 were excessive as a matter of law. Our Supreme Court
recently summarized the applicable principles of appellate review in Neal v.
Farmers Ins. Exchange, supra, 21 Cal.3d, 910.  An appellate court may reverse
such an award only when it appears excessive as a matter of law, or where the
recovery is so grossly disproportionate as to raise a presumption that it is the
result of passion or prejudice.  The court stated (p. 928): "In making the
indicated assessment we are afforded guidance by certain established principles,
all of which are grounded in the purpose and function of punitive damages. One
factor is the particular nature of the defendant's acts in light of the whole
record; clearly, different acts may be of varying degrees of reprehensibility,
and the more reprehensible the act, the greater the appropriate punishment,
assuming all other factors are equal.  [Citations.]  Another relevant yardstick
is the amount of compensatory damages awarded; in general, even an act of
considerable reprehensibility will not be seen to justify a proportionally high
amount of punitive damages if the actual harm suffered thereby is small.
[Citation.] Also to be considered is the wealth of the particular defendant;
obviously, the function of deterrence . . . will not be served if the wealth of
the defendant allows him to absorb the award with little or no discomfort.
[Citations.] By the same token, of course, the function of punitive damages is
not served by an award which, in light of the defendant's wealth and the gravity
of the particular act,  exceeds the level necessary to properly punish and
deter." How much in punitive damages will suffice in a particular case is not
susceptible of mathematical definition ( Wyatt v. Union Mortgage Co. (1979) 24
Cal.3d 773, 790 [157 Cal.Rptr. 392, 598 P.2d 45]).

    Since the purpose of punitive damages is to punish the defendant and make an
example of him, the wealthier the wrongdoing defendant, the larger the award of
exemplary damages need be in order to accomplish the statutory objective (
Bertero v. National General Corp. (1974) 13 Cal.3d 43 [118 Cal.Rptr. 184, 529
P.2d 608, 65 A.L.R.3d 878]), from which it "also follows that the poorer the
wrongdoing defendant the smaller the award of punitive damages need be in order
to accomplish the statutory objective" ( Merlo v. Standard Life & Acc. Ins. Co.,
supra, 59 Cal.App.3d, at p. 18). Finally, due consideration must be given to the
importance of the public policy embodied in the statutory provisions the
violation of which was the basis of plaintiff's claim, and the magnitude of
defendant's violation of such policy ( Wetherbee v. United Ins. Co. of America
(1971) 18 Cal.App.3d 266, 270-271 [95 Cal.Rptr. 678];  Weisenburg v. Molina
(1976) 58 Cal.App.3d 478, 490 [129 Cal.Rptr. 813]).

   The evidence in this case supported Alhino's charge of a serious violation of
the policy provisions designed to protect consumers against the violation of
fiduciary duties by real estate brokers and their salesmen (cf.  Wyatt v. Union
Mortgage Co., supra, 24 Cal.3d, pp. 782, 790-791). As our Supreme Court stated
in Vasquez v. Superior Court (1971) 4 Cal.3d 800, 808 [94 Cal.Rptr. 796, 484
P.2d 964, 53 A.L.R.3d 513]: "Protection of unwary consumers from being duped by
unscrupulous sellers is an exigency of the utmost priority in contemporary
society" (cf.  Zhadan v. Downtown L. A. Motors, supra, 66 Cal.App.3d, pp.
496-497).

     However, the record here provides no evidence of the net worth of the real
estate defendants.  Further, the instant award has not been approved by the
trial court though, by reason of its failure to make an adequate statement of
reasons, the order granting a new trial cannot stand.  Nonetheless, we have no
power to weigh the evidence and judge the credibility of witnesses.

   The order granting a new trial, for the reasons above stated, is reversed and
the judgment reinstated.  Having reinstated the judgment, we must take action
appropriate to assure that the punitive damage award is not excessive and is not
the product of the jury's passion or prejudice.  Accordingly, we remand for a
redetermination of the appropriate amount of punitive damages in light of the
principles stated above.  The trial court may take additional evidence on the
net worth of the real estate defendants, if necessary.

   The conditional order granting the new trial is reversed.  The judgment on
the verdict in favor of Alhino against the real estate defendants is affirmed as
to the compensatory damages, but remanded for a redetermination of the punitive
damages in light of the net worth of the defendants.  The judgment on the
verdict in favor of the attorney defendants is affirmed; they are entitled to
their costs on appeal.  As between Alhino and the real estate defendants, each
party shall bear its own costs on appeal and cross-appeal.


                              44 of 100 DOCUMENTS

                                HAYNES v. MEEKS

                            [NO NUMBER IN ORIGINAL]

                          SUPREME COURT OF CALIFORNIA

                        20 Cal. 288; 1862 Cal. LEXIS 53


                                   July 1862

PRIOR-HISTORY:      Appeal from the Twelfth Judicial District.

   This is an action of ejectment to recover the possession of a lot situated
within the limits of the city of San Francisco. Both parties claim title from
the same source--from one George Harlan, who died in the county of Santa Clara
in July, 1850. The plaintiff claims by a conveyance from Aspinwall, who is
alleged to have been at the time the administrator of the estate, executed upon
a sale made by order of the Probate Court in November, 1855. The defendant
claims by a conveyance from the heirs of Harlan, executed in April, 1854. On the
trial, it was admitted that Harlan was at the time of his death a resident of
Santa Clara county; that he left a widow, six children--three of whom were
minors--and two grandchildren, sons of a deceased daughter; and that at the time
of the commencement of this action the defendant was in possession of the
premises. It was also admitted that Henry C. Smith was duly appointed by the
Probate Court of Santa Clara county administrator of the estate of said Harlan,
on the nineteenth day of August, 1850, and on the same day filed his bond,
qualified, and commenced acting as administrator; that he filed an inventory,
allowed claims against the estate, sold property of the estate under orders of
the Probate Court, and from time to time made report to the Court of his acts;
that on the fourteenth day of June, 1853, he applied to the Court for an order
to sell certain real property of his intestate to pay the debts outstanding
against the estate and the expenses of administration, and such proceedings were
had upon his application that on the thirteenth of August, 1853, an order of
sale was made by the Court, under which order said real estate was sold in
September, 1853, for $ 19,240; that the sale was in October following confirmed
by the Court; that on the twenty-ninth of November, 1853, a citation was issued
by the Court to Smith, to appear and show cause why the attachment should not
issue against him for failure to file his account for final settlement, and that
on his failure to appear, an attachment was ordered December 26th, 1853. On the
thirty-first of December, 1853, Smith filed the following written resignation:
"Henry C. Smith, administrator of the estate of George Harlan, deceased, hereby
resigns his appointment as such administrator, and asks that his resignation be
received and he be discharged therefrom. H. C. Smith."

   Thereupon, on the same day, the following order was made by the Probate
Court:

   "Now comes Henry C. Smith, administrator of the above estate, and files his
resignation as administrator of said estate. It is, therefore, ordered by the
Court that the said Henry C. Smith do turn over to John Youtz, Public
Administrator in and for the county of Santa Clara, all the papers and effects
in his possession relating to said estate, and that he make a full and complete
settlement of all his proceedings relating to said estate to the said John
Youtz, Public Administrator as aforesaid, on or before the first day of the next
term of this Court; and that when the said Henry C. Smith has fully made such
settlement, he and his securities be released from any further liability on said
estate. It is further ordered by the Court, that said estate be placed into the
hands of the said John Youtz, Public Administrator in and for the county of
Santa Clara, for purposes of general administration." On the twenty-fourth of
January, 1854, Smith presented to the Court what purported to be his final
report of the condition of the estate, and of his proceedings therein,  showing
that he had received $ 28,357, had disbursed $ 20,017.13, had a balance in his
hands of $ 8,340.87, and that there were still outstanding claims against the
estate to the amount of about $ 6,300. Objections to this account were made by
certain of the creditors, after the hearing of which, the Court, on January
25th, 1854, made an order allowing the disbursements of Smith only to the amount
of $ 14,600, and declaring a certain balance to be due to the creditors; and
after a recital that it appeared from said report that there were sufficient
funds in the hands of said administrator to pay the debts of said estate found
to be due, and which had been allowed, directing the administrator to pay all
the debts without delay, and to make a final settlement on the first day of the
next term, and containing, in reference to the order of December 31st, the
following: "It is further ordered by the Court, that the order heretofore made
on the thirty-first day of December, A. D. 1853, directing the said Henry C.
Smith, as administrator of the estate of George Harlan, deceased, to turn over
the said estate to the Public Administrator of Santa Clara county, and the order
placing the said estate in the hands of said Public Administrator, be and the
same hereby is revoked."

   Smith did not make the settlement as directed at the February or March term
of the Court, but appeared on the first day of April, in obedience to a citation
which had been issued, and moved for leave to file a new report, which was
granted, and at the same time auditors were appointed to examine his vouchers
and accounts and report thereon to the Court, and an attorney was also appointed
to represent the minor heirs. On the twenty-second of April, 1854, Smith
presented a final account, approved by the auditors, which showed that he had
received $ 28,657, had disbursed $ 21,584.50, and still had in his hands funds
of the estate to the amount of $ 7,072.50; that there was a debt allowed and
unpaid of $ 4,604.85, and that there was still certain personal property of the
estate in his hands as administrator. On the twenty-fifth of April, the Court
adopted this report, and ordered that Smith pay into Court the balance of $
7,072.50, and also six hundred and thirty dollars, being the value of the
personal property of the estate in his hands, which in his report was alleged to
have been lost or stolen; and "that said administrator do at the same time hand
into this Court all papers, deeds and whatsoever other property he may have in
his possession belonging to the aforesaid estate."

   Subsequently, Smith, upon affidavit, moved the Court to allow an item in his
account of $ 1,000 for extra services and expenses as administrator, which
motion, being opposed by the heirs, was heard on the twenty-second of May, 1854,
and after the introduction of proofs, was disallowed by the Court. No further
proceedings were had in the Probate Court in regard to the administration of the
estate of Harlan by Smith, nor was any order made by the Court for his removal
or discharge other than as above set forth.

   On the eighteenth day of May, 1855, Benjamin Aspinwall presented to the said
Probate Court a petition for letters of administration, of which the following
is a copy:

   "To the Honorable the Judge of said Court:

   "The petition of Benjamin Aspinwall, of the county of San Francisco,
respectfully shows, that George Harlan, late of the county of Santa Clara, is
deceased; that he died, according to the best information and belief of your
petitioner, sometime in the year 1850; that he left no will; that he left the
following named persons him surviving, who are heirs or next of kin to said
deceased, viz: Joel Harlan, Jacob Harlan, Elisha Harlan, Catherine Harlan and
others; that he left real and personal estate in the counties of Santa Clara and
San Francisco, and also, as your petitioner believes, in the county of Alameda.
Petitioner further shows, that in August, 1850, one H. C. Smith was by the
Probate Court of Santa Clara county duly appointed administrator of the estate
of said deceased, and undertook to administer said estate; that while he, said
Smith, was so duly in the administration of said estate, your petitioner
commenced a suit against him as such administrator in the District Court for the
county of Santa Clara, in the State of California, on a claim your petitioner
then held against said estate, and did, on the nineteenth day of July, 1853,
obtain judgment in said Court against the said H. C. Smith, administrator of
said estate, for the sum of $ 8,104.85, with interest at the rate of ten per
cent. per annum, as appears of record in said Court, and to which your
petitioner refers. On which judgment the said Smith, administrator as aforesaid,
at different times has paid your petitioner the sum of $ 3,500, which is the
only payment that has been made on said claim.

   "Petitioner further shows, that on the twenty-fifth of January, 1854, the
said Smith was cited to render a final account of his administration of said
estate before the said Probate Court of Santa Clara county, and such proceedings
were then and there had as appears of record; that the said Smith was adjudged
to have sufficient funds in his hands belonging to said estate to pay all the
debts due from said estate, and ordered said Smith to pay said debts, which he
refused to do. Your petitioner further shows, that subsequently thereto he
commenced a suit against said Smith and the sureties on his administration bond,
in the Superior Court of the city of San Francisco, and recovered a judgment
against them for the sum of $ 4,644.93 damages, besides costs; that he caused
executions to be issued to the counties of Santa Clara and Alameda in order to
collect the amount of his said judgment; that the said execution so issued to
the county of Alameda, where said Smith resides, has been returned "nulla bona"
wholly unsatisfied; and that your petitioner has as yet been unable to collect
anything on the said execution so issued to the county of Santa Clara; and your
petitioner believes, and so charges the fact, that the said Smith and his said
sureties are all insolvent; all of which your petitioner is able to prove as he
believes. Your petitioner further shows, that the administration of the said
estate by the said Smith has fully ceased and determined; that your petitioner
has never received in payment of his said claim against said estate more than
said $ 3,500. Your petitioner further shows, that there was due him on his said
claim against said estate, in judgment as aforesaid, on the sixteenth day of
March, 1854, the sum of $ 4,644.93, which bears an interest of ten per cent. per
annum, which is wholly unpaid; that there is real estate in the city of San
Francisco belonging to the estate of said Harlan, deceased, of the value of $
15,000 or $ 20,000, which has never been administered, applied or sold for the
payment of the debt of your petitioner, and which your petitioner avers ought to
be sold by an order of this Court, and the proceeds of such sale be applied to
the satisfaction and payment of his said claim.

   "Wherefore, your petitioner respectfully prays that he may be appointed
administrator of the unadministered part of the estate of said George Harlan,
deceased, in the capacity of administrator 'de bonis non,' in order that any
part of said estate yet remaining unsold may, by an order of this Court, in due
and proper form obtained, be sold to pay the debt of your petitioner, and any
other just debts against the said estate.

   The petition was duly verified.

   (Signed.)   "Benj. Aspinwall."

   On the fifteenth day of June thereafter, the Court made the following order,
appointing Aspinwall administrator:

   "And now again comes Benjamin Aspinwall, by his attorney, L. Archer, and the
matter of the application for letters of administration issue to said Aspinwall
as administrator 'de bonis non' having been taken under advisement, the Court
now finds, after hearing the proofs and allegations, that Henry C. Smith had
been appointed by this Court administrator of said estate in the year 1850, but
that said Smith has not fully administered upon the same; that there are debts
still outstanding against said estate, and that there is a large amount of
property belonging to said estate, and that said estate has never been fully
administered upon and divided among the heirs. The Court, therefore, grants the
prayer of the petitioner. And it is ordered and decreed by the Court, that
Benjamin Aspinwall be, and he is hereby appointed administrator 'de bonis non'
of all the goods, chattels and effects which remain unadministered upon the
estate of George Harlan, deceased; and it is ordered that the Clerk issue
letters of administration to said Benjamin Aspinwall, upon his filing a good and
sufficient bond, as required by law, in the sum of $ 5,000--said bond to be
filed in twenty days from the date of this order."

   Aspinwall filed the required bond and duly qualified August 8th, 1855. On the
eleventh of August, Aspinwall filed his petition for the sale of real property
of the estate, of which the following is a copy:

   "In Probate Court for the county of Santa Clara. In the matter of the estate
of George Harlan, deceased.

   "To the honorable, the Probate Judge of said Court:

   "The petition of Benjamin Aspinwall respectfully shows that he was duly
appointed administrator de bonis non of all and singular the goods, chattels and
effects of George Harlan, formerly of the county of Santa Clara, deceased,  on
the eighth day of August, 1855. That said estate has heretofore been partially
administered by Henry Smith, whose time of administration has wholly ceased.
That no personal estate has come to the hands of your petitioner; nor is there
any personal property, to the best knowledge of your petitioner; the said Smith,
as such former administrator, having disposed of the whole of the same. Your
petitioner further shows that the following described real estate, lying and
being in the city of San Francisco, belongs to and is the property of said
estate, viz:

   "That certain one hundred vara lot, numbered on the official map of the said
city ten, and located on the south side of Mission street, between Second and
Third streets, of the value of about eight thousand dollars. Also, the following
lot, to wit, commencing at the northwest corner of the fifty-vara lot, numbered
on the official map of the city of San Francisco three hundred and
seventy-three; thence running easterly, on the northerly line of said fifty-vara
lot, fifty-eight feet nine inches; thence southerly, on the westerly line of
Union Place, thirty-six feet; thence westerly, at right angles, thirty-five feet
nine inches;  thence southerly, at right angles, forty-one feet six inches;
thence westerly, at right angles, twenty-three feet; thence northerly, at right
angles, seventy-seven feet six inches, to the point of beginning--of the value
of about four hundred dollars.

   "Petitioner further shows, that he formerly recovered a judgment against the
said estate, in the District Court of the State of California, for the county of
Santa Clara, for about the sum of $ 8,000, as near as he can recollect. That
said Smith, as administrator of said estate, has made two separate payments to
your petitioner on said judgment, amounting to about the sum of $ 3,500.
Petitioner avers that there was due to him from said estate, on said judgment
claim, the sum of five thousand three hundred and five dollars and fifty-seven
cents, on the nineteenth day of January, A. D. 1855, and that he is entitled to
interest thereon from that date at the rate of ten per cent. per annum. That he
has made every effort in his power to collect and recover said amount from the
said Smith, as administrator, from said estate, and from the sureties on the
administration bond of said Smith, but without avail or success. Petitioner
further saith, that he is informed that one Joel Harlan, one of the heirs of the
said deceased, has a claim against said estate; but of the amount or truth
thereof your petitioner is not advised, and refers to the records of the said
Probate Court, and to the proofs henceforth to be introduced, in respect to the
same, if necessary. That there are no other claims or demands against said
estate, to the knowledge of your petitioner. And further shows, that the
following persons are the only heirs and next of kin of said deceased, to the
knowledge of petitioner, namely: Mary Smith, daughter of the said deceased, wife
of Henry Smith, of Alameda county; Joel Harlan, (son) of Alameda county; Nancy
Huff, (daughter) wife of Lucius Huff, of Alameda county; Jerome Van Gorden and
George Van Gorden, children under the age of twenty-one years, of Rebecca,
daughter of said deceased, and wife of Ira Van Gorden--said Rebecca being
dead--of Los Angeles county; George Harlan, Elisha Harlan and Sarah Ann Harlan,
minors under the age of twenty-one years, sons and daughter of the said
deceased; said Elisha residing in Alameda county, said George and Sarah in Napa
Valley. Your petitioner is informed and believes that said Joel Harlan is the
general guardian of the said Elisha Harlan, but that he cannot ascertain that
any guardian has been appointed for the other minor heirs and next of kin.

   "Petitioner further shows that it is necessary to sell the whole, or part of
said real estate, to pay the debts of your said petitioner, and any other debt
or debts that may be due and owing from said estate, when the same can be
ascertained. That he has no other mode or means of recovering the same or any
part thereof.

   "Therefore your petitioner prays for the aid of this Court in the premises,
and that proceedings may be had and an order made pursuant to the statute in
such case made and provided, for the sale of the whole, or so much of the
aforesaid real estate as may be sufficient to pay the debt of your petitioner,
and such other debts, if any there be against said estate, and that for such
minor heirs or next of kin of said deceased as have no guardian, suitable
persons may be appointed guardian or guardians to take care of their interests
in the premises: and your petitioner will ever pray.

   "Benj'n Aspinwall, Administrator."

   Which petition was duly verified.

   Onthe tenth of November, 1855, an order of sale was made, of which the
following is a copy:

   "In the matter of the estate of George Harlan, deceased. And now again comes
Benjamin Aspinwall, administrator de bonis non of the above estate, by his
attorney, L. Archer, and again presents to the Court his petition heretofore
filed herein, praying for an order and decree of this Court to sell a portion of
the real property belonging to said estate. Also comes the attorney for the
absent and minor heirs, and the objections filed by said attorney to the
granting of said petition for a sale of real property having been taken under
advisement, and the Court now here having considered the matters therein
contained, and being sufficiently informed therein, overrules said objections;
and it being proved to the satisfaction of the Court that due notice of the said
petition, and of the time and place of hearing the same, has been given as
required by law, the Court now proceeds to hear and determine the matters in
said petition contained; and the proofs and allegations being heard, and the
Court being fully satisfied from the same that a sale of the following described
property to wit: (Here follows a description of the two parcels described in the
petition for the sale, in the same language as that used to describe them in the
petition) is necessary to pay the debts outstanding against said estate, it is
therefore ordered and decreed by the Court that the said administrator, Benjamin
Aspinwall, do, after giving a good and sufficient bond as required by law, in
the penalty of eight thousand dollars, proceed according to law to sell to the
highest and best bidder, for cash in hand, the above described real property, as
follows: The one hundred-vara lot number ten to be sold in lots of twenty-five
by fifty varas, and the remainder of the property in such parcels or parcel as
to the said administrator may seem best for the interests of said estate. And it
is further ordered by the Court that said administrator, before proceeding to
sell the said property in accordance with this order, do give due and lawful
notice of the time, place and terms of said sale, and also a description of the
property to be sold, by publishing the same for at least six weeks next
preceding the day set for the sale, in the 'San Francisco Daily Herald,' a
newspaper published daily in the said city of San Francisco, and also by posting
notices thereof in three of the most public places in the county of San
Francisco; said notices to describe the property to be sold with common
certainty."

   At the conclusion of the trial, the defendant's counsel asked the Court to
give to the jury the following instructions:

   1st. At the time of the appointment of Aspinwall, by the Probate Court of
Santa Clara county, as the administrator of the estate of Harlan, and at the
time of the sale of the one hundred vara lot number ten, by Aspinwall, as the
administrator of the estate of Harlan, Henry E. Smith was the legally appointed
and qualified administrator of that estate. The Probate Court of Santa Clara
county, therefore, had no jurisdiction in respect to the appointment of a second
administrator, and could confer upon Aspinwall no power to sell. The appointment
of Aspinwall was absolutely void; the sale made by him was a nullity; and the
deed made by him, as administrator, conveyed no title.

   2d. Though Smith may have presented to the Probate Court his resignation as
administrator of the estate of Harlan, yet if the same was not accepted by the
Probate Court, nor acted upon, but on the contrary the said Smith continued to
act as administrator, and the Court continued to deal with him as such, such
resignation was ineffectual to divest Smith of his trust, and he continued to be
the legal administrator of the estate; and so long as he continued to be such
administrator, the Probate Court had no jurisdiction or power to appoint a
second administrator. Such appointment was void, and all acts done by the
appointee were nullities.

   3d. After a sale has been made, under the authority of the Probate Court, of
sufficient real property to pay all the debts of the estate, and all expenses of
administration and charges against the estate, and the money has come into the
hands of the administrator, the creditors of the estate must look alone to the
funds in the administrator's hands for the payment of their claims. So far as
the heirs of the intestate are concerned, the sale and the receipt of the money
by the administrator are a satisfaction of the debts, and the Probate Court is
without jurisdiction to order any further sale of property of the estate. Such
an order is void, and any sale made under it conveys no title to the purchaser.

   4th. The petition presented by Aspinwall to the Probate Court, for an order
to sell real estate, was defective in not showing the amount of personal estate
that came to the hands of the administrator of Harlan's estate, and in not
setting forth all the real estate of which the intestate died seized, or which
was then unsold, or the condition of any of the real estate; and said petition
did not give to the Probate Court any jurisdiction to make the order of sale,
and the order made therein was void, and the sale made under its authority a
nullity.

   5th. The Probate Court had no jurisdiction to make the order of sale actually
made on the petition of Aspinwall, and the order was void for the further
reason, that no order to show cause why the order of sale should not be made was
made by the Court, and served in the manner directed by the statute.

   The Court refused to give any of these instructions, to which defendant
excepted. The Court then instructed the jury to bring in verdict for the
plaintiff, to which defendant excepted.

   The jury found for the plaintiff, and judgment for him was entered
accordingly, from which the appeal is taken.

COUNSEL: A.  P. Crittenden , for Appellant.

I. At the time of appointment of Aspinwall as administrator of Harlan, Smith was
the legally appointed and qualified administrator of Harlan's estate. The
Probate Court had no jurisdiction to appoint another administrator, the office
being filled. The appointment of Harlan was void, and all acts pretended to be
done by him as administrator were nullities. (Act to Regulate Estates of
Deceased Persons, secs. 100, 70, 81, 86, 98, 112, 146, 230, 249, 283, 82, 83,
281, 233, 237; Flinn v. Chase, 4 Denio, 85; Beckett et als. v. Selover, 7 Cal.
215; 4 Phil. Ev. 64, n. 42, and cases cited, 69, 77; Bloom et als. v. Burdick, 1
Hill, 130; Corwin et als v. Merritt, 3 Barb. 341; Dakin v. Hudson, 6 Cow. 223;
Atkins v. Kinnan, 20 Wend. 241; Planters' Bank of Mississippi v. Johnson, 7 S. &
M. 449; Brown v. Campbell, 6 How. 230; Currie v. Steward, 5 Cush. 55; Wiley,
Adm'r, v. White, 2 Stewart, 331; Ventress v. Smith, 10 Pet. 161; Bright v. Boyd,
1 Sumner, 478; Kohler v. Knapp, 1 Brad. Surr. R. 243; Holyoke v. Haskins, 5
Pick. 20; Cutts v. Haskins, 9 Mass. 543;  Howard v. Gore, 5 Pick. 369; Griffiths
v. Frazier, 3 Cranch, 11.)

II. Even if the appointment had been valid, the Court had no jurisdiction to
order a second sale of the property of the estate to pay the claim of Aspinwall;
sufficient money to pay the same having been realized by a former sale made for
the purpose. The first sale satisfied the debt, so far as the estate and those
interested in it were concerned. (Act above cited, wherever relating to sales
and payment of debts; Gregory v. McPherson, 13 Cal. 562.)

III. The petition of Aspinwall for an order to sell was defective, in not
showing the amount of personal property that had come to the hands of Harlan's
administrator, and in not setting forth all the real estate of which Harlan died
seized, or which was then unsold, or the condition of any of it, and it did not
give the Court any jurisdiction to order a sale, and the order was void.
(Authorities cited above.)

IV. The Court erred in refusing to give the instructions prayed by the
appellant.

V. The Court erred in instructing the jury in peremptory terms to find a verdict
for the respondent.

Tod Robinson, also for Appellant.

 The Probate Court was deprived of all power furtherto dispose of the estate,
after a sufficient quantity had been sold to pay the debts and expenses of
administration. In other words, that Court has not the function to revive its
power on this subject after it has once been exercised and its ends obtained.

This proposition is derived from a consideration of the constitution of the
Court as one of limited jurisdiction in this particular: from the implications
of the statute, and from the analogies of the law.

I. From the consideration of the Court as one of limited special jurisdiction,
where its powers are evoked to dispose of the property of an estate.

Whatever doubts may exist with regard to the powers of the Probate Court, or
what credit is to be given to its judgments or acts on other subjects, yet as to
those which that Court derives under particular statutes, and which would not in
the absence of the statute pertain to it as a Court of Probate, it is
universally conceded it must, in common with all other Courts, be deemed a Court
of limited jurisdiction. (29 Ala. 525; 1 Hill, 139; 3 Barb. 343.) And these
cases, and all others on the subject, hold that the power to dispose of the
property of estates is derived whollyfrom the statutes. Now, the statute
authorizes the Probate Court to order the sale of the property of an estate, but
defines the circumstances and conditions under which it may alone be done, and
the manner and mode of doing it. The circumstances and conditions are, when
there are not sufficient assets in the hands of the administrator to pay the
debts and expenses of the estate: in that case, so much as is necessary for
these ends may be sold, and no more, with the exception of the provision
contained in section one hundred and sixty-one of the act.

In this case such an order had been made, and so much of the property of the
estate as was necessary to pay the debts of the estate and the expenses of
administration had been sold, and the money paid into the hands of the
administrator. The Probate Court can do no more. It possesses only a limited
power, and has exhausted the power given by statute. Nowhere in the statutes can
there be found any authorization to the Probate Judge to order the sale of
property by an administrator to supply the losses by embezzlement or misconduct
of the administrator himself. Counsel will have to go out of the statute for
such authority, and thatvery necessity establishes the fact that it does not
exist.

II. This view is sustained by all the just implications of the statute.

By the provisions of that statute, in order to obtain the sale of real property,
it is necessary that it shall appear that there is not sufficient personal
property to pay the debts, etc., of the estate, what that personal property is,
the amount of debts outstanding, etc. These requisites indicate that it is only
after a general and particular acquaintance is obtained by the Probate Judge of
the condition and circumstances of the estate, and the absolute necessity of the
sale of the realty is made apparent, that the Court can be authorized to sell at
all. When this knowledge is obtained, by a full review of the whole matter, the
Court then orders a sale of the lands of the estate, or so much thereof as may
be necessary to pay the claims against the estate, etc. When that order is made,
by no express provision of the statute does it appear that the Probate Court can
revise, renew or remodel it, or make further order concerning the subject. The
powers of the Court, as touching this matter,  have become exhausted by their
exercise.

III. Thisview is also supported by the analogies of the law.

The objections urged against the views of the appellant are based mainly, if not
entirely, upon what is claimed to be the conclusiveness of the judgments, orders
or decrees of Courts of Justice. The argument is, that inasmuch as the Probate
Court has the power to sell the property of an estate under some circumstances,
and in the exercise of that power has ordered a sale, the purchaser under such
sale is protected in his purchase by the conclusiveness of the order, and the
full faith and credit which is given to the acts of judicial tribunals. This is
generally true with regard to Courts of general jurisdiction, and is received
with still greater moderation relative to the exercise of powers by Courts of
limited jurisdiction. But with regard to a purchase made under the judgments of
Courts of general jurisdiction, though as a general rule the purchaser is not
required to look to anything besides the judgment and execution, yet these, when
entirely regular, are not always sufficient to protect the purchaser. The
purchaser is bound to see that the defendant has been summoned,  or in some
other mode has been allowed his day in Court.

Itis likewise the case, that a purchaser under a judgment which had been paid
obtains no title to the property. (2 Hill, 567; 8 Wend. 681.) And the reason is,
that a purchaser under a power purchases at his peril. The judgment and
execution constitute the power of attorney which authorizes the officer to sell.
If the judgment is paid, the power is gone. If there is no subsisting authority
to sell, no title is acquired. In such case, the purchaser must take the risk
that some act, either of record or in pais, has not occurred to extinguish the
authority through which he derives title.

If such is the rule of law with regard to acts done in pursuance of judgments of
Courts of general jurisdiction, are they not applicable with equal or greater
force to acts done in pursuance of orders made by a Court of professedly limited
powers, in ordering the sale of property of others? If payment to a sheriff, who
is proceeding to sell the property of a judgment debtor under a judgment and
execution, is a satisfaction of the judgment, and a sale under such judgment
will give no title to the purchaser, why should it appear strange that payment
to an administrator of moneys by sale of portionsof the estate, sufficient to
pay all demands against the estate, is a satisfaction of those claims as regards
the heirs of the estate?

When this illustration was mentioned on the argument, it was urged that there
was no analogy between the case at bar and the one propounded, because, it is
said, a Sheriff is the agent of the plaintiff, and an administrator is the
representative of the estate.

To call a Sheriff an agent of a party in Court, is an entire misnomer. In no
case do his relations to parties or his actions bear any resemblance to the
character of an agent, or acts of agency. He is an officer of the Court and of
the law, and in no just sense can he be called an agent, nor can his acts be
construed by rules of agency, any more than can the acts of a Judge or a
Governor. So likewise an administrator is an officer of the Court and of the
law. (1 Williams' Executors, 330, 389; 32 Ala. 682.)

But however this may be, or in what relation a Sheriff stands to a judgment
creditor, it is not claimed that he is the agent of the purchaser. The relation
in which the Sheriff or administrator stands to the creditors cannot affect the
rights of the purchaser, and it is his interestswe are now considering; and the
purchaser in the supposed case takes no title, because there is no authority
(which was the judgment) for the sale, the judgment having been paid. It is not
disputed that an administrator is the representative of the estate, though the
expression is destitute of all logical precision in the connection with the case
at bar in which it is used. The administrator may be the representative of the
estate, but he is not a representative of the heirs. And this is a controversy
between heirs and those who claim under them, and a purchaser under a credit. An
administrator never represents the heirs in any way in disposing of the estate.
When he applies to sell property, he is representing the creditors, and them
solely; for if the administrator fails to apply, the creditors may under the
statute. On such occasions he acts "contradictorily" to the heir. The heirs must
be cited, and an opportunity allowed them to contest the application. The
administrator is plaintiff, the heirs defendants. It is his business to urge,
theirs to oppose. It is their property which is proposed to be sold, and not the
administrator's--they are adversaries. He in so doing is actingon behalf, and
therefore as the representative of creditors. When the sale takes place, the
money goes into the hands of the creditors' representatives and the heirs'
adversary. The act by which their property is taken from the heirs is wholly
compulsory on the part of the heirs, and is solicited and invited on the part of
the creditors and their representative. The administrator in all these
proceedings is the agent of the interests of the creditors, and is the opponent
of the interests of the heirs. When the proceeds of the sale of their estate is
placed in the hands of the administrator, who in this proceeding is acting for
and on behalf of creditors, and therefore as their representative, is it not
sufficient to absolve the heirs and their property from all further liability to
creditors?

If the administrator squanders or misapplies the money, should not the loss fall
upon those at whose instance, or by whose act, or for whose benefit, the
property was sold, and money came into the hands of the delinquent? Neither the
administrator nor the Court has the power to sell the lands of an estate, except
at the instance of the creditors or for their benefit. When it is thus soldfor
their benefit and in invitum on the part of the heirs, should not the loss fall
upon those upon whom the benefit would have been conferred?

In case a judgment is paid to a Sheriff under an execution, the judgment is
satisfied. The judgment creditor can get out no new proceedings against the
debtor, and must look to the Sheriff for payment. The defendant is wholly
absolved. Nor can a purchaser obtain a good title from a sale under a judgment
so satisfied. In a proceeding to sell the property of an estate, the creditors
are the actors. Through the instrumentality of the officer of the law and of the
Court--the administrator--the property of the heir is sold and the proceeds go
into the hands of an officer of the Court and the law. Precisely as in the case
of an execution it goes into the hands of the Sheriff, who is likewise an
officer of the Court and the law. Is there then any just reason why the property
of the heir should not be absolved from all further responsibility?

When a claim against an estate is allowed by an administrator and approved by
the Judge, it is a judgment against the estate, which judgment is to be enforced
against the property of the estateby the instrumentality of the administrator or
the creditors, with the concurrence of the Court. (Deck's Estate v. Gerke, 5
Cal. 666.) Such a judgment was obtained in this case. Such proceedings were had
as amounted to an execution, to wit: an authority for the administrator to sell
the property. He did sell sufficient to pay the judgments, and the amount came
into his hands. If he had done the same thing as Sheriff, the remaining property
of the debtor would have been discharged from all liability for the debt. Acting
as administrator, the reason appears to be stronger why the estate should be
absolved from all further responsibility than in cases where the Sheriff
misapplies the money collected on execution; for the reason, that in cases of an
execution the plaintiffs and defendants are parties of mature age, qualified to
watch over and guard diligently their own interests; but in proceedings before a
Probate Court, in a large majority of instances, the parties whose rights are
affected are minors--infants without capacity in presumption of law, and in
fact, to give that attention and to take those steps which may be necessary to
guard themselves against the negligence or dishonestconduct of those whom the
law has forced upon them as the guardians and administrators of their interests.
By the provisions of the statute, if any just suspicion is excited by the acts
of the administrator, as touching the fidelity of his administration, or his
solvency becomes questionable, or that of his sureties, provision is made by
which creditors can remove him from his office of trust or obtain full and
satisfactory security. But no such privilege is given to the heir; and if it
were, in the vast number of cases in which the heirs are of tender years, how
totally ineffectual would the right be to them. Yet in this case it is contended
that the law gives a greater protection to those who are capable of attending to
their own affairs and neglect to do it, than to those who are unable to attend
to their own interests and are peculiarly the wards of the law.

In examining this point, but one case has been found in point--that in 2
Carter's Ind. R. 446. But as the decision in that case seems to have been
rendered without argument, and as no reason was given by the Court for its
determination, it possesses none of the qualities of authority or of
persuasiveness. Not how it has been, but why it has been so decided, is the
essential element of all authoritative or respected precedents. Some further
reason than the precedent of the Indiana case must be furnished, to satisfy an
intelligent Court and bar of the justice of a decision which shall conform to
it.

D. O. Shattuck and Selden S. Wright, for Respondent.

I. Whether the Probate Court acted legally or illegally in appointing an
administrator, is not material in this case; it is a judicial act, and can only
be considered on appeal, and cannot be inquired into collaterally. (Haynes v.
Meeks, 10 Cal. 110; Sadler v. Sadler, 16 Ark. 628; Riley v. McCord, 24 Miss. [3
Jones] 265; Pelegrud v. Ferguson, 6 Rich. Eq. S. C. R. 378; Alexander v. Stuart,
8 Gill & Johnson, 226; McLarin v. Thompson, Dudley, S. C. R. 335; White v. Brown
, 7 Monroe, 446; Ex parte Barker, 2 Leigh 719; Riser v. Snoddy, 7 Ind. 442;
Bryan v. Walton, 14 Geo. 185; Stern v. Stern, 25 Miss. 513; Clarke v. Puhon, 31
Maine, 503; Ragland v. Green, 14 Smedes & Mar. 195;  Daney v. Streeklinge, 15
Texas, 557; Alexander v. Maverick, 18 Id. 194-6; Erwin v. Scriber, 18 Cal. 499.)


II. A decree of confirmation of a sale of land by a Probate Court cannot be
inquired into collaterally except for fraud. (Runyan v. Newark India Rub. Co., 4
Zabr. 467; Emery v. Hildreth, 2 Gray, [Mass.] 228; Voorhies v. Bank of U. S., 10
Pet. 477; Seymour v. Seymour, 22 Conn. 272; Poor v. Boyce, 12 Texas, 440; Bland
v. Muncostic, 24 Miss. [2 Cush.] 62; Merrill v. Harris, 6 Foster, [N. H.] 142;
Simmons v. Estelle, 19 Penn. [7 Harris] 439; Irwin v. Jeffries, 3 Ohio, N. S.
389; McDoud v. Burch, 7 Geo. 559; Schinker v. McFarland, 4 Barb. 139; Jennings
v. Jennings, 9 Ala. 285; Snyder v. Markel, 8 Watts, 416; Jackson v. Robinson, 4
Wend. 436; Jackson v. Irwin, 10 Id. 441; Atkins v. Kinnan, 20 Id. 241; Tolrin v.
Thompson, 2 Peters, 163-168; Stern v. Stern, cited on first proposition;
Leverett v. Harris, 7 Mass. 296; 1 Phil. Ev. 242; 1 Greenl. Ev., sec. 550; Ex
parte Tobias Watkins, 3 Pet. 207;  Hyde v. Turner, 1 Barb. 75.)

III. The sale of real estate by an administrator is a proceeding in rem,
operating on the estate and not on the heir. (Grignon's Heirs v. Actor, 2How. U.
S. 341; Sheldon v. Newton, 3 Ohio, N. S. 494; Lynch v. Baxter, 4 Texas, 431;
Rogers v. Wilson, 8 Eng. [13 Ark. R.] 507; Howard v. Moore, 2 Mich. [Gibbs]
226.)

IV. A bona fide debt against the estate is a lien on the land of the deceased,
and although personal property may have come to the hands of the administrator
sufficient to pay the debts, and he has misappropriated it, it does not release
the creditor's lien, and is no cause for preventing an order of sale to pay such
debts if other remedies have been exhausted. (Nettleton v. Dixon, 2 Cart. [Ind.]
446; Hodgden v. White, 11 N. H. 208-217; Leverett v. Harris, 7 Mass. 295;
Perkins v. Fairchild, 11 Id. 227; Soye v. McAllister, 18 Texas, 95.)

In deciding on the sufficiency of assets, the Probate Court acts judicially, and
its judgments cannot be attacked collaterally. (Jackson v. Robinson, 4 Wend. 441
.)

The act of an administrator in receiving assets and misappropriating them is not
analogous to that of a Sheriff in levying on personal property. The Sheriff is
elected, and is the chosen legal agent of one of the parties. The administrator
claims by right, andthe creditor cannot dispute the appointment.

Again: the Court sits upon and adjudicates the question of assets. Were a Court
to decide that a former levy was not a satisfaction of the debt, and award an
execution under which land should be sold, the sale would unquestionably be
good.

JUDGES: Field, C. J. delivered the opinion of the Court. Cope, J. and Norton, J.
concurring.

OPINION BY: FIELD

OPINION

    This is an action to recover the possession of certain real estate situated
in the city of San Francisco. Both parties deraign title from the same
source--from one George Harlan, who died in the county of Santa Clara in July,
1850. It is admitted that Harlan was possessed of a good title to the premises
at the time of his death. The plaintiff claims by a conveyance from Aspinwall,
who is alleged to have been at the time administrator of Harlan's estate,
executed upon a sale ordered by the Probate Court in November, 1855; the
defendant claims by a previous conveyance from Harlan's heirs, executed in
April, 1854.

   Soon after the death of Harlan, one Henry C. Smith was appointed
administrator of the estate, and immediately qualified and entered upon the
discharge of his duties. Whilst he was acting as administrator, real property
belonging to the estate was sold by order of the Probate Court, upon his
petition, to pay the debts of the estate and the expenses of the administration.
Funds were thus received by him sufficient, with other funds previously in his
hands, to pay all the debts and expenses, and leave a balance of nearly $ 2,000.
Among the debts was one to Aspinwall, and upon it the latter instituted suit,
and in July, 1853, recovered judgment for upwards of $ 8,000. Upon this judgment
only the sum of $ 3,500 was ever received from the administrator. On the
thirty-first  of December following, Smith filed a paper, in which he declared
that he resigned his appointment as administrator, and requested that the
resignation be received. The Court thereupon ordered him to turn over the papers
and effects of the estate in his hands to the Public Administrator of Santa
Clara county, and to make with him a full settlement before the first day of the
following term; declaring that when he had made such settlement, he and his
sureties should be released from further liability; and directing that the
estate be placed in the hands of the Public Administrator for the purposes of
general administration. At the next term--in January, 1854--Smith presented an
exhibit purporting to be a final report of the condition of the estate, and of
his proceedings therein, and showing a balance of funds in his hands more than
sufficient to pay all outstanding claims. The Court approved of his accounts in
part, and ordered him to pay immediately all the debts of the estate, and to
make a final settlement at the next term; and revoked the order of December
31st, by which he was directed to turn over the estate to the Public
Administrator, and the latter was authorized to take charge of it for general
administration.

   In May, 1855, not having obtained payment of the balance of his judgment,
Aspinwall applied to be appointed administrator of what was alleged in his
petition to be the unadministered part of the estate, and in June following the
appointment was made, and he gave the usual bond and qualified. In November,
1855, he obtained from the Court an order directing him to sell two parcels of
land situated in the city of San Francisco. At the sale which followed, the
plaintiff became the purchaser of the premises described in the complaint. The
sale was duly reported and confirmed, and a conveyance by Aspinwall, as
administrator, executed. It is under this conveyance that the plaintiff claims.

   The questions presented for consideration relate to the validity of the
appointment of Aspinwall as administrator, and to the jurisdiction of the Court
to order the sale which was made by him. To the appointment of Aspinwall it is
objected that Smith, the original administrator, was still in office--his
resignation not having been accepted, nor his letters revoked. To the
jurisdiction of the Court, it is objected that there were sufficient funds in
the hands of  Smith, the original administrator, to pay all the debts and
charges against the estate; and that the petition of Aspinwall for the sale was
fatally defective in its averments.

   Upon the first question presented, we are concluded by the previous decision
of this Court when the case was here at the July term, 1858, (10 Cal. 110). It
was then held upon substantially the same evidence, that the resignation of the
first administrator, Smith, was accepted by the Probate Court; that the
acceptance of the resignation, before Smith had settled his accounts, was only
an irregularity--or, as the Court termed it, an error "merely voidable"--one, in
other words, which might have been corrected by appeal, or direct proceedings
for its correction, but which could not be set up collaterally in impeachment of
the action of the Probate Court. We confess that we are by no means satisfied
with the conclusions at which the Court arrived in this respect. We do not
perceive in the act of Smith, the former administrator, anything more than an
offer to resign. A resignation is not a matter absolutely in the power of an
administrator, to be made at any time he may choose. The statute only confers
upon him a conditional right to resign. Its language is that he may resign, "
provided he shall first settle his accounts and deliver up all the estate to
such person as may be appointed by the Court." Smith never complied with this
condition, and it nowhere appears that the Court ever dispensed with it. The
Court did, it is true, on the thirty-first of December, 1853, order him to turn
over the estate to the Public Administrator of Santa Clara county; but in the
following month it vacated the order, and directed him to apply the moneys in
his hands to the payment of the outstanding claims. And the subsequent
proceedings show a recognition by the Court of his continued existence as
administrator of the estate. Admitting, as contended, that the Court, having the
power to remove an administrator for failure to account, could accept of his
resignation without such account being rendered, it does not appear that any
such course was ever pursued. The appointment, therefore, of Aspinwall--a new
administrator--the former administrator not having been removed, nor his
resignation accepted, was a proceeding which the Court had no jurisdiction to
take. The appointment of a new administrator can no more be  made whilst a
former administrator is in office, than an appointment can be made in the first
instance until the death of an intestate. The allegation of the death of a
person in a petition for letters would not confer any jurisdiction, if such
person were still living. The assumption of the fact of the party's death,
however regular the proceedings in other respects, would not support the
issuance of letters against the proof of such party being still alive. So, too,
the allegation by Aspinwall in the petition for his appointment, that the
"administration of Smith had fully ceased and determined," is without force
against the record evidence to the contrary. Nor can it be said that there was a
removal of Smith by force of the subsequent appointment of Aspinwall. There is
no such thing as a removal of an existing administrator simply by force of the
appointment of another person. The office must first become vacant before a
second appointment can be made. A vacancy may arise by operation of law upon the
happening of certain events, as by lunacy of the administrator established by
judicial decree, or by his conviction of an infamous crime. (Secs. 95, 96 and
101.) In such case, the event, when established or brought to the notice of the
Probate Court, is equivalent to an order of the Court revoking the letters. But
where the law does not declare the vacancy as a consequence flowing from a
particular event, a revocation of the letters of the first administrator, he
being still living, is as essential to the appointment of another person to
succeed him, as was the death of the intestate to the original appointment; and
the only competent proof of a revocation of letters in such case is an order of
the Court directing it. But upon the question of the acceptance of the
resignation of Smith, and the validity, so far as any collateral attack is
concerned, of the appointment of Aspinwall, we are concluded, as we have stated,
by the previous decision of this Court. That decision constitutes the law of the
case, and controls upon the present appeal. ( Davidson v. Dallas, 15 Cal. 75;
Phelan v. San Francisco, 20 Cal. 39.) We have expressed our views upon the
question in order to obviate the idea of an implied approval of the decision,
and to leave us unembarrassed by it if similar questions are presented in other
cases for consideration. It may be observed here, that the decision which
appears in the report in 10 Cal. 120,  remanding the cause, with directions to
the Court below to enter judgment for the plaintiff, was subsequently modified
on petition for rehearing by directions for a new trial.

   The present appeal must, therefore,  be determined upon the questions
presented as to the jurisdiction of the Court to order the sale made by
Aspinwall.

   The authority of the Probate Court to order a sale of real property of an
intestate is derived entirely from the statute. It is a limited, and not a
general authority.  It may be exercised in certain specially designated cases;
it can be exercised in no other. ( People v. Corlies, 1 Sandf. 247; Corwin v.
Merritt, 3 Barb. 343; Bloom v. Burdick, 1 Hill, 139; Currie v. Stewart, 27 Miss.
55; Laughman v. Thompson, 6 Smedes & Mar. 259; Wiley v. White, 3 Stew. 355;
Townsend v. Gordon, 19 Cal. 189.) When, therefore, an order of sale is relied
upon, the question is, was the order made in a case provided by the statute? To
determine this, we must, in the first instance, look to the petition for the
sale, which is the foundation of the order; assuming, of course, that the Court
acquired jurisdiction originally to grant administration upon the estate. The
proceeding for the sale, though made in the general course of administration, is
a distinct and independent proceeding, in the nature of an action, of which the
petition is the commencement, and the order of sale is the judgment. ( Estate of
Spriggs, 20 Cal. 121.) We must, then, examine the petition, to ascertain whether
a case is presented by its averments, within the statute, upon which the court
can act. And the petition must show on its face two things: first, the
insufficiency of the personal property to pay the debts and charges against the
estate; and second, the necessity of the sale of the real property, or some
portion thereof, for that purpose. Both must appear before the Court can take
jurisdiction of the proceeding. The truth of the averments--their sufficiency
appearing--is a matter which must be determined at the hearing of the petition,
and the judgment of the Court thereon, if rendered upon legal notice, cannot be
questioned collaterally. It may be reviewed, and if erroneous, corrected by
appeal, but not otherwise.

   The statute prescribes with particularity what facts must be stated in the
petition. After declaring that the personal estate  shall be first liable for
the debts and expenses, and if this is insufficient to pay the same, and the
allowance to the family, that the real estate may be sold for that purpose (sec.
115); and that the executor or administrator may in such case make the sale upon
the order of the Probate Judge, (sec. 154) it provides as follows: "To obtain
such order, he shall present a petition to the Probate Court, setting forth the
amount of personal estate that has come to his hands, and how much thereof, if
any, remains undisposed of; the debts outstanding against the deceased, as far
as the same can be ascertained; a description of all the real estate of which
the testator or intestate died seized, and the condition and value of the
respective portions and lots; the names and ages of the devisees, if any, and of
the heirs of the deceased, which petition shall be verified by the oath of the
party presenting the same." (Sec. 155.) "If it shall appear by such petition,"
continues the statute, "that there is not sufficient personal estate in the
hands of the executor or administrator to pay the allowance to the family, the
debts outstanding against the deceased, and the expenses of administration, and
that it is necessary to sell the whole or some portion of the real estate for
the payment of such debts," the Probate Judge shall make an order directing all
persons interested to appear before him at a specified time and place, "to show
cause why an order should not be granted to the executor or administrator to
sell so much of the real estate of the deceased as shall be necessary to pay
such debts." (Sec. 156.) As will be seen from the provisions to which we have
thus referred, a sale of the real property cannot be made so long as there is a
sufficiency of personal property in the hands of the administrator to pay the
outstanding debts and charges against the estate. There must be an insufficiency
of such property for that purpose, before the Court has jurisdiction to act upon
the petition. And this insufficiency must appear, not by mere averment, but by
the statement as to the personal property and the outstanding debts and charges
which the statute provides. But this is not all: it must also appear by the
petition "that it is necessary to sell the whole, or some portion of the real
estate," for the payment of the debts and charges. (Sec. 155.) Such necessity
does not follow as a matter of course  from the insufficiency of the personal
property. The real estate may be yielding an income sufficient to pay the
outstanding debts and charges, for the payment of which the sale is asked,
before such sale could be made and confirmed, or if resisted, could be the
subject of review on appeal. In such case, there would be no necessity for any
sale. And the income, though not sufficient for the payment of the entire amount
of these debts and charges, may be sufficient to pay the greater portion of
them. In this case, the necessity for the sale would be limited to such
portions--supposing there were more than one parcel--as would make up the
deficiency. The necessity must appear, before the Court can take any
jurisdiction and act upon the petition. And this necessity must appear, not by
mere averment, but by an exhibition of the real property of the deceased. The
necessity is a conclusion which the Court must draw for itself from the facts
stated. It is not a matter for the executor or administrator to determine; it is
a matter for the Court, and the petition must, therefore, furnish the materials
for its judgment. These consist in the description which the statute provides
the petition shall set forth, "of all the real estate of which the testator or
intestate died seized, and the condition and value of the respective portions
and lots." (Sec. 155.) A compliance with the statute in this particular is,
then, essential to the jurisdiction of the Court, as without it the Court cannot
judge of the necessity of the sale asked; and in this view, we do not perceive
how it can be dispensed with from the petition, any more than the statement as
to the personal property and the outstanding debts. ( Bloom v. Burdick, 1 Hill,
130; Corwin v. Merritt, 3 Barb. 343; Townsend v. Gordon, 19 Cal. 188; Gregory v.
Taber, Id. 397.)

   Proceeding now to the examination of the petition of Aspinwall in the light
of the views we have expressed, we find it fatally defective in several
essential particulars. It sets forth that no personal estate has come to his
hands, and that there is none to his knowledge, Smith, the former administrator,
having disposed of the whole of it; and that two parcels of land situated in the
city of San Francisco belong to the estate, giving the description and value of
such parcels. It does not state the amount of the personal property which had
come to the hands of the former administrator, or what disposition had been had
of it, or that any effort had been  made to ascertain the disposition of it, or
of its proceeds, or to compel the former administrator to account. It simply
avers that the petitioner (Aspinwall) had made every effort in his power to
collect from the former administrator and his sureties the amount due to him
upon a judgment recovered against the estate, but without success. Nor does it
state the extent, condition or value of the real estate of which the intestate
died seized, nor the condition of the parcels described.

   If we look outside of the petition to other records of the Court respecting
the estate, we find, as we have stated, that for the payment of the debts and
the expenses of administration real property had already been sold, and proceeds
received more than sufficient for that purpose. Even the application of
Aspinwall for letters avers that on the twenty-fifth of January, 1854, Smith was
adjudged by the Court to have sufficient funds in his hands to pay all the debts
against the estate, and was ordered to pay them. We refer to the possession of
funds by the former administrator, not that it can have any effect in
determining the sufficiency of the averments in the petition of Aspinwall. If
those averments are in themselves sufficient, the jurisdiction of the Court
attached without regard to the funds previously received. A petition may set
forth inaccurately the amount of the personal property which has come to the
hands of an administrator; it may even omit valuable portions thereof; yet if it
purport on its face to set forth the whole of such property, and how much of it,
if any, remains undisposed of, the order for the sale which may follow cannot be
attacked by reason of the inaccuracies or omissions. The truth of the averments
respecting the personal property, so far as they affect the validity of the
order, is to be determined at the hearing of the petition. We refer to the
possession of funds by the former administrator, to show the necessity of a
strict compliance with the statute in the statements of the petition. The
statute requires that the petition shall set forth the amount of the personal
property which "has come to the hands of the executor or administrator;" that
is, the amount which has been received since the administration of the estate
commenced. It also requires that the petition shall set forth the amount of such
property, if any, remaining undisposed of. A  statement of these particulars
will direct the attention of the Court, on the hearing, to the property which
has been disposed of, and lead to inquiries as to the manner of its disposition,
and the use made of any proceeds received. A question might then arise whether,
if funds had been received by the executor or administrator sufficient to pay
the outstanding debts and expenses, a sale of the real estate for such payment
could be ordered, even if the funds received had been squandered or illegally
disposed of; whether, in other words, if funds properly applicable to the
payment of outstanding debts and expenses, and ample for that purpose, have been
lost by a fraudulent or an illegal use of them by the executor or administrator,
the loss is to fall upon the creditor or the heir. This latter question has been
discussed in the present case; but we do not think it properly arises. There is
no evidence that the funds received by the former administrator have been
squandered, or ever used at all, or that upon proper proceedings before the
Probate Court--and none appear to have been taken--their transfer to the new
administrator might not be obtained. The inability of Aspinwall to collect the
balance due upon his judgment from the former administrator personally, or the
sureties on his official bond, establishes nothing as to the loss of any funds
belonging to the estate.

   The administrator, Aspinwall, was not relieved from a compliance, to the
extent of his ability, with the statute, as to the statement of the personal
property in his petition, from the fact that there had been a previous
administrator of the estate. He is designated, it is true, in the order of
appointment, "as administrator de bonis non." But there is no such officer known
to our law. By our law there are only two classes of administrators; special and
general. Special administrators are those appointed to take temporary charge of
the estate until general letters are issued, or during the suspension of a
general administrator, and in like cases. General administrators are those
appointed to administer generally upon the entire estate. Where the authority of
a general administrator has terminated by death, the revocation of his letters,
or otherwise, and a new administrator is appointed, the latter takes the place
of the former. He succeeds to the office, clothed with the same powers  and
subject to the same restrictions; and when he invokes the action of the Court,
he must institute the same proceedings, and make, to the extent of his ability,
a similar showing. He must set forth, not merely the personal property which has
come into his own possession since his appointment, but, so far as he is able,
that which has come into the hands of the administrator of the estate--for such
is the plain meaning of the statute--whether that administrator was himself or
his predecessor. He may not be able to set forth the entire amount, but he must
endeavor to do so. The records of the Court, especially the inventory filed,
will aid him in this respect, if the previous administrator, he being still
alive, or his papers, if dead, do not furnish the requisite information. He can
at least state to the Court the imperfection of his knowledge, and thus direct
the attention of the Court to the necessity of particular inquiries on the
subject at the hearing.

   In the petition of Aspinwall there is no attempt to comply with the statute
in respect to the personal property. The averment that no personal estate has
ever come to his hands, and that there is none, the former administrator having
disposed of the whole of it, leaves the Court in entire ignorance as to the
condition of the estate with respect to such property, information in respect to
which is essential to the jurisdiction of the Court. And in respect to the real
property, the petition is still more glaringly defective. It simply states that
two parcels of land, giving their description and value, situated in the city of
San Francisco, belong to the estate. It says nothing of the condition of those
parcels--whether they were improved or waste lands; whether they were yielding
income or burdening the estate with expenses--from which the Court could
determine as to the necessity of their sale. Nor does it purport to give a
description of all the real estate of which the intestate died seized. So far as
appears, several other parcels may also have belonged to the estate, which it
would have been more advantageous to the heirs to have sold than the parcels
described.

   It follows that the petition is fatally defective, and its averments gave no
jurisdiction to the Court. The subsequent action of the Court, therefore, in
ordering a sale, and the proceedings based thereon, partake of the original
defect, and are void.

   Judgment reversed, and cause remanded for new trial.


                              45 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           FRANK BUCCELLA, Plaintiff and Respondent, v. EUGENE MAYO,
             Defendant and Appellant; DAVID H. FOX, as Real Estate
            Commissioner, etc., Real Party in Interest and Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 21250

           Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

            102 Cal. App. 3d 315; 162 Cal. Rptr. 369; 1980 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1489


                               February 20, 1980

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Orange County, No. 214701, Harmon G.
Scoville, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1) Brokers § 25--Duties and Liabilities of Brokers--Reimbursement From Real
Estate Education, Research and Recovery Fund--Fraud--Real Estate Licensee.
--The Real Estate Education, Research and Recovery Fund may not be ordered to
pay with respect to damages remaining unpaid upon a judgment against a real
estate licensee even if it was based on fraud of the licensee, where the conduct
of the licensee was not such as requires a real estate license.

(2a) (2b) (2c) Brokers § 25--Duties and Liabilities of Brokers--Reimbursement
From Real Estate Education, Research and Recovery Fund--Necessity of Showing
That Involved Acts Were Those for Which Real Estate License Was Required.  --The
trial court committed reversible error in entering an order directing payment of
about $ 7,000 from the Real Estate Education, Research and Recovery Fund on
account of an unsatisfied default judgment against defendant real estate
licensee entered in a prior action against him by another real estate agent.
There was no competent evidence presented at the hearing, by judicial notice or
otherwise, that plaintiff's judgment against defendant was obtained under
grounds of fraud, misrepresentation, deceit, or conversion of trust funds
arising directly out of any transaction when the judgment debtor was licensed
and performed acts for which a real estate license was required (Bus. & Prof.
Code, § 10471). The allegations of the complaint filed in the underlying action
indicated that as to one count defendant was acting as a principal for his own
account during the alleged transactions, and that as to another count there was
no evidence whatever suggesting that defendant had anything to do with the
transaction involved.

(3) Evidence § 2--Definitions and Distinctions--Allegations in Pleadings as
Evidence.  --Except to the extent that the failure to answer an allegation in
pleadings might constitute an admission, allegations in pleadings do not
constitute evidence.

(4a) (4b) Brokers § 25--Duties and Liabilities of Brokers--Reimbursement From
Real Estate Education, Research and Recovery Fund--Evidence.  --Bus. & Prof.
Code, § 10470 et seq., providing for payment out of the Real Estate Education,
Research and Recovery Fund, of damages remaining unpaid upon judgment against
any licensee for fraud, clearly contemplates the presentation of evidence to
establish the plaintiff's right to recovery against the fund, not just argument.
Furthermore, the statutory provisions authorizing recovery from the fund found
in § 10470 et seq., clearly indicate that the Legislature contemplated a full
evidentiary hearing on an application for recovery against the fund.

(5) Brokers § 25--Duties and Liabilities of Brokers--Reimbursement From Real
Estate Education, Research and Recovery Fund--Recovery by Real Estate Licensee.
--A defrauded real estate licensee who was acting as a principal in a
transaction and whose conduct did not require a real estate license is not
precluded from recovery against the Real Estate Education, Research and Recovery
Fund under Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10471, by virtue of the fact that he or she is a
licensee.

COUNSEL: Dougherty, Elekes & Carroll and Patrick C. Carroll for Defendant and
Appellant.

George Deukmejian, Attorney General, and Raymond B. Jue, Deputy Attorney
General, for Real Party in Interest and Appellant.

Bruce R. Fink for Plaintiff and Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Kaufman, J., with Tamura, Acting P. J., and Morris, J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: KAUFMAN

OPINION

     Plaintiff, Franklin Buccella, obtained an order directing payment of $
6,946.28 from the Real Estate Education Research and Recovery Fund 1
(hereinafter Fund) on account of an unsatisfied default judgment against
defendant, Eugene Mayo.  Both defendant 2 and Fund appeal from the order.  We
conclude the order must be reversed because the record discloses that no
evidence was presented to the trial court establishing that the conduct of
defendant complained of by plaintiff constituted or involved acts for which a
real estate license is required.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   The Real
Estate Education Research and Recovery Fund as such was abolished as of January
1, 1977, and the monies therein were transferred to a separate account in the
Real Estate Fund which basically serves the same purpose.  (Stats. 1976, ch.
271, § 2, p. 565; Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10450.6.)
2   Defendant is aggrieved by the order because it will result in the automatic
suspension of his real estate license. (See Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10475.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Plaintiff's original complaint for "breach of contract; fraudulent
representation; detrimental reliance; action to enforce a trust and punitive
damages" was filed May 22, 1974.  Named as defendants were Eugene Mayo (herein
designated defendant), his wife Caroline Mayo, Allen R. Snapp, his wife LaTrisia
Snapp, and Mariner Savings and Loan Association, Inc.  On September 16, 1974, a
first amended complaint was filed naming the same parties defendant and seeking
the same relief as the original complaint.  Defendant was personally served with
the summons and both the complaint and first amended complaint.  He failed to
respond, and on October 29, 1974, his default was entered.

   The first amended complaint contained three counts which in substance
contained allegations to the effect that plaintiff was defrauded by the various
defendants.  In view of the basis for our decision it is necessary  to set forth
rather specifically the substance of the allegations insofar as they pertain to
defendant.

   In the first count it was alleged that defendant was at all pertinent times a
licensed real estate salesman; that on December 5, 1972, defendant and his wife
executed and delivered to plaintiff a promissory note in the amount of $ 3,200
and a deed of trust to secure the note describing certain real property in which
defendant and his wife resided; that to induce plaintiff to make the loan which
was the consideration for the promissory note and deed of trust defendant made a
number of misrepresentations to plaintiff including misrepresentations that he
owned the real property described in the deed of trust and that he needed the
loan only for a short time pending his sale of another property at a substantial
profit, the proceeds of which would be used to repay plaintiff's loan; and that
in truth and fact defendant and his wife had on April 11, 1972, conveyed all of
their interest in the title to the described property to another party and the
deed of trust delivered to plaintiff was valueless.

   The allegations in the second count were very similar to those in the first.
It was alleged that on November 27, 1972, defendant executed and delivered to
William H. Willming and Mary Ann Willming a promissory note in the amount of $
2,600 and a second deed of trust to secure the note; that Mr. and Mrs. Willming
were the agents of defendant and that contemporaneously the note and deed of
trust were assigned to plaintiff by the Willmings; that the money paid by
plaintiff went not to the Willmings but to Mariner Savings and Loan Association
who received the money as agent for and on behalf of defendant; that to induce
plaintiff to enter into this transaction defendant made certain
misrepresentations including that the "real property securing this loan has a
great deal of equity and it is a very safe investment" and that "the loan was
only needed for a very short time and that [defendant] was selling some other
property and would be paying back this money within the next few months" and
that plaintiff would be advised by mail if there was any default or problems
with the first deed of trust on the property; that defendant defaulted in making
payments on the first deed of trust; that the holder of the first trust deed
filed notice of default; that defendant failed to inform plaintiff of the
default or the notice of default and thus prevented plaintiff from taking steps
to protect his interest; and that the security of the second deed of trust had
become valueless.

    The third count was somewhat different.  It alleged that on September 1,
1972, Allen R. Snapp and LaTrisia Snapp executed and delivered a promissory note
in the amount of $ 2,800 and a second trust deed to secure the note to Lawrence
Arnold Berger and his wife, Callie Y. Berger; that the same day the Bergers
assigned the note and deed of trust to plaintiff; that at the time of the
assignment of the note and deed of trust to plaintiff Mr. and Mrs. Snapp knew
that the payments on the first deed of trust were in arrears; that plaintiff
paid valuable consideration to Mr.  and Mrs. Snapp and Mariner Savings and Loan
Association for the assignment of the note and deed of trust; that the second
deed of trust assigned to plaintiff has become valueless; that defendants Eugene
Mayo, Caroline Mayo, Allan R. Snapp, LaTrisia Snapp and Mariner Savings and Loan
Association "entered into a scheme, plan and conspiracy to defraud the
Plaintiff"; that to induce plaintiff to pay for the assignment of the note and
deed of trust each of the defendants made certain misrepresentations to the
plaintiff including that the property described in the deed of trust "had lots
of equity to protect the Plaintiff," that the property was to be renovated and
refurbished forthwith, that the property was to be sold at a substantial profit
as soon as renovation had been completed and that plaintiff would be paid in
full at that time, that the payments on the first deed of trust were current,
that the defendants would see that plaintiff would receive notice in case of any
difficulty or any default in payment on the first deed of trust, that the
defendants Allen R. Snapp, LaTrisia Snapp, Eugene Mayo, and Caroline Mayo would
guarantee payment, that plaintiff would make a lot of money investing in second
trust deeds, that plaintiff could rely on the defendants for advice in his
investments, and that defendant Eugene Mayo "was experienced in real estate
investments and would protect the plaintiff"; that defendant intended plaintiff
to rely upon certain nonverbal representations such as the fact he drove a
late-model Cadillac, wore expensive clothing, and made frequent trips to Mexico;
that defendant was a licensed real estate salesman and had been the top salesman
in his office in the preceding year; and that Mariner Savings and Loan
Association accepted money from plaintiff on behalf of defendants Eugene and
Caroline Mayo.

   Following discovery proceedings and plaintiff's filing a second amended
complaint which set up a fourth count against Mariner Savings and Loan
Association for  conversion, the matter proceeded to trial to the court as
between plaintiff and the nondefaulting defendants on December 16 and 17, 1975.
Pursuant to a stipulation among the parties involved, dismissals with prejudice
were filed with respect to defendants  Caroline Mayo, Allen R. Snapp and
LaTrisia Snapp. 3 At the conclusion of trial the court granted plaintiff's
motion for leave to amend his pleadings to conform to proof, and the court
rendered judgment against plaintiff as to the sole remaining nondefaulting
defendant, Mariner Savings and Loan Association.  However, the court rendered
judgment in favor of plaintiff as to defendant on all three counts.  On the
first count plaintiff was awarded $ 2,560 compensatory damages plus interest and
punitive damages of $ 10,000.  On the second count plaintiff was awarded $
2,050 compensatory damages plus interest and punitive damages of $ 2,000.  On
the third count plaintiff was awarded $ 2,744 compensatory damages plus a late
fee and interest.  No punitive damages were awarded on the third count; however,
attorney fees in the amount of $ 362 were allowed plaintiff.  The total amount
of the judgment exclusive of the attorney fees and costs was $ 21,204.20.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3
Apparently Mrs. Mayo paid $ 100 and Mr. and Mrs. Snapp paid $ 300 in
consideration of the dismissals.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   After a number of unsuccessful attempts to satisfy the judgment against
defendant, on or about October 8, 1976, plaintiff made application to the court
for an order directing payment of a portion of the judgment ($ 9,194.20) from
the Fund.  In the verified application plaintiff alleged that defendant "was a
real estate licensee and was performing acts for which a real estate license is
required . . . when the cause of action against him occurred" and that "the
judgment against defendant-licensee is grounded upon causes of action for fraud,
misrepresentation, deceit or conversion of trust funds."

   The Real Estate Commissioner representing the Fund opposed the application
admitting that plaintiff had recovered a judgment against defendant but denying
the other allegations in the application.  In points and authorities filed with
the court, the commissioner contended that inasmuch as plaintiff himself was
licensed as a real estate salesman at the time of the transactions, he was not
one of the class of persons permitted to recover from the Fund, that defendant's
conduct did not involve acts for which a real estate license was required but
that, on the contrary, defendant acted in the transactions as a principal, and
that plaintiff had not diligently pursued his remedies against the other
defendants who allegedly defrauded him.

   On the same grounds as set forth in the memorandum of points and authorities,
the commissioner also moved to dismiss plaintiff's application.   In opposition
to the motion to dismiss, plaintiff's attorney filed a declaration executed by
him in which it was conceded that the first count involved a transaction in
which defendant was acting as a principal and with respect to which, therefore,
no real estate license was required.  However, as to the other two counts, it
was averred in the declaration: "In the instant case, the facts are set forth
with general accuracy by the Attorney General.  [Plaintiff] was in the capacity
as a client on the purchase of several notes secured by deeds of trust.
[Defendant] was acting as the broker on these trust deeds in two of the
instances involved . . . ."

   Plaintiff's application and the Fund's motion to dismiss came on together for
hearing on February 23, 1979, before a judge other than the one before whom the
original trial was conducted.  There was apparently a good deal of discussion in
chambers, but the only evidence introduced at the hearing was the testimony of
plaintiff on direct and cross-examination relating exclusively to his own
licensed status and the state of his knowledge and sophistication.  The
testimony did not touch upon the several transactions involved or the conduct of
defendant.   (See fn. 4.) It was stipulated that defendant  was at the time of
the transactions a real estate licensee. 4

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   It is
asserted by plaintiff that the parties also stipulated that the judgment against
defendant was based on fraud.  We do not so read the record.  Counsel for
plaintiff stated to the court that he believed counsel for the Fund would so
stipulate.  The court stated that it was its understanding "that you had no
question that they were for fraud." Counsel for the Fund then said: "No, sir,
your Honor.  The only -- as we discussed in chambers, the defenses work as to
the -- since the first cause of action is now withdrawn from consideration, the
defense [as] to the second cause of action was whether or not --." At that point
the court again began speaking, describing the defense of the Fund as to the
second cause of action, that it was not a licensed transaction.

   Even if this exchange may be interpreted as a stipulation, there is a further
difficulty.  Defendant did not participate in the proceeding and did not join in
the stipulation.

   In any event, however, the point is of no significance.  As counsel for the
Fund correctly explained to the court, the Fund may not be ordered to pay with
respect to a judgment even if it was based on fraud of a licensee, if the
conduct of the licensee was not such as requires a real estate license. (Bus. &
Prof. Code, § 10471.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Without objection, the court granted the request of plaintiff to take
judicial notice of the files, records and pleadings in the case. 5 In addition,
the court purported to take judicial notice of the fact the  transaction alleged
in count 2 of the first amended complaint involved conduct requiring a real
estate license.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   Counsel
called the court's attention particularly to "the complaints and amendments
thereto in the case[, the] judgment[,] . . . the minutes of the Court," and "the
form of the judgment itself."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Having conceded that the first cause of action was based upon activity not
requiring a license, plaintiff withdrew his request that the Fund be ordered to
pay anything on account of the judgment as to the first count.  The court ruled
that plaintiff was entitled to an order against the Fund for payment of $
6,946.28 referable to counts 2 and 3 of the first amended complaint.  The Fund's
motion to dismiss was denied.

   On appeal the Fund reasserts virtually all of its contentions in the trial
court.  Defendant joins in those contentions and in addition appears to contend
that the judgment is void or voidable inasmuch as the judgment was rendered on
the basis of pleadings amended to conform to proof after the time his default
was entered. 6  Save one, we do not pass on appellants' other contentions,
because the record discloses there was no competent evidence presented at the
hearing, by judicial notice or otherwise, that plaintiff's judgment against
defendant was obtained "under grounds of fraud, misrepresentation, deceit, or
conversion of trust funds arising directly out of any transaction when the
judgment debtor was licensed and performed acts for which a license is required
. . . ." (Bus.  & Prof. Code, § 10471.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   Defendant
asserts that no such amendment was ever served on him, and so far as the record
discloses no such amendment was ever filed.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The nature of the evidence received at the hearing has already been
described.  There is nothing in the record indicating that the declarations
filed in support and in opposition to plaintiff's application and the Fund's
motion to dismiss were received in evidence, but even if they could be
considered, they contain no competent evidence that the transactions underlying
counts 2 and 3 of the first amended complaint involved activity for which a real
estate license was required.  The declaration of plaintiff himself stated in the
statutory language that that was the case, but the statement was wholly
conclusory, could hardly be testified to in that form by plaintiff, and,
moreover, was said to be true with respect to all counts collectively, including
count 1 as to which it was conceded at the hearing no conduct requiring a
license was involved.  The declaration executed by plaintiff's attorney also
contained a very general, conclusory statement that in two of the transactions
plaintiff was acting as a client and defendant acted as a broker. Obviously,
the statement of those conclusions would not constitute competent testimony.

    So that we might know what the trial court had before it, we have ordered up
the file and have read all of the pertinent documents, including the pleadings,
the judgment and the exhibits attached to the pleadings, consisting of the trust
deeds, notes and assignments involved.  None of them establish that the
transactions involved actions on the part of defendant that required a real
estate license.

   The pleadings strongly indicate that in the transaction forming the basis for
count 2, defendant was acting as a principal for his own account.  The only
possible doubt might lie in the fact that the note and deed of trust executed by
defendant were to Mr. and Mrs. Willming, but plaintiff alleged that Mr. and Mrs.
Willming were the agents of defendant and that the money paid by him to Mariner
Savings and Loan was received by it for and on behalf of defendant.  The
documents themselves tend to confirm that the Willmings were used simply as a
"straw man" and that, as alleged by the plaintiff, the transaction really
involved a loan from plaintiff to defendant for which he received the promissory
note and deed of trust. The note, deed of trust and assignment are all dated
November 27, 1972, and the deed of trust and the assignment were both notarized
on December 6, 1972, by the same notary public.  Further, the deed of trust and
the assignment were recorded simultaneously at 8:01 a.m., December 26, 1972.

   Subdivision (a) of section 10133 of the Business and Professions Code
expressly excludes from the definitions of a broker and a salesperson, "[anyone]
who directly performs any of the acts within the scope of this chapter with
reference to his own property . . . ." (Italics added.) The allegations in
plaintiff's pleadings and the documents attached as exhibits do not indicate
that defendant was acting other than as a principal with respect to his own
property as to the transaction involved in count 2, and there is nothing else in
the record to support the trial court's conclusion that defendant's activity
required a real estate license. Certainly the matter was not the proper subject
of judicial notice.

   There is even a more fundamental defect in the showing made by plaintiff at
the hearing on his application.   Except to the extent that the failure to
answer an allegation in pleadings might constitute an admission, allegations in
pleadings do not constitute evidence.    As is hereafter more fully discussed,
article 3 of the Business and Professions Code (§ 10470 et seq.) clearly
contemplates the presentation of evidence to establish the plaintiff's right to
recovery against the Fund, not just argument.

   Apparently the trial court was persuaded by plaintiff's argument that his
judgment against defendant constituted prima facie evidence of or created a
rebuttable presumption of his right to recovery from the fund.  In the case of
some judgments recovered other than by default that would be true.  (See Bus. &
Prof. Code, §§ 10473, 10473.1.) However, in the case of a default judgment,
section 10473.1 of the Business and Professions Code specifically provides:
"Whenever an applicant's judgment is by default, stipulation, or consent, or
whenever the action against the licensee was defended by a trustee in
bankruptcy, the applicant shall have the burden of proving his cause of action
for fraud, misrepresentation, deceit, or conversion of trust funds. Otherwise,
the judgment shall create a rebuttable presumption of the fraud,
misrepresentation, deceit or conversion of trust funds." (Italics added.) This
specific provision controls the more general recitation in Business and
Professions Code section 10473: "The judgment shall be only prima facie evidence
of such cause of action and for the purposes of this article shall not be
conclusive." We further note that the ultimate burden of the applicant is not
just to prove his judgment but, rather, to prove that he had "a valid cause of
action within the purview" of the statutory provisions.  (Bus. & Prof. Code, §
10473; see also § 10473.1.)

     For many of the same reasons, what the trial court had before it is also
insufficient to establish that defendant's activities in respect to the
transaction underlying count 3 required a real estate license. Looking to  the
allegations in plaintiff's pleadings, it appears that the promissory note and
deed of trust involved were executed and delivered by Mr. and Mrs.  Snapp with
respect to property owned by them to Mr. and Mrs. Berger and that Mr. and Mrs.
Berger assigned the note and deed of trust to plaintiff.  There is no direct
allegation that defendant had anything to do with the transaction other than
that he, mostly lumped together with the other defendants, made certain
representations concerning the profitability of the transaction, guaranteeing
payment and "protecting" the plaintiff.  It was alleged that defendant was a
licensed real estate salesman and had been the top salesman in his office in the
preceding year and, by incorporation by reference, that some unspecified sum of
money was paid as consideration for the assignment  to Mariner Savings and Loan
Association which was acting as defendant's agent.  Thus, from the pleadings the
nature of defendant's connection with this transaction is completely unknown.
The documents involved in the transaction contain nothing whatever suggesting
that defendant had anything to do with the transaction.  Both the deed of trust
from the Snapps to the Bergers and the assignment from the Bergers to plaintiff
are dated September 1, 1972; the two documents were recorded simultaneously on
September 19, 1972; and they both indicate that recording was requested by
plaintiff, whose name and address appear at the top of each document for return
after recordation by the recorder.

     The statutory provisions authorizing recovery from the Fund found in
article 3 of the Business and Professions Code (§ 10470 et seq.) clearly
indicate that the Legislature contemplated a full evidentiary hearing on an
application for recovery against the Fund.  Section 10472 provides that "[the]
court shall conduct a hearing upon such application," authorizes continuances
and specifies what the applicant must show.  Section 10473 provides that the
court shall order payment by the Fund "only upon a determination that the
aggrieved party has a valid cause of action within the purview of" the statutory
provisions.  Section 10473.1 provides that "[the] judgment debtor may defend any
such action on his own behalf and shall have recourse to all appropriate means
of defense and review, including examination of witnesses."  One of the facts an
applicant is required to prove by the presentation of evidence is that his
judgment against the licensee was obtained under grounds of fraud,
misrepresentation, deceit, or conversion of trust funds "arising directly out of
any transaction when the judgment debtor was licensed and performed acts for
which a license is required . . . ." (Bus. & Prof.  Code, § 10471, italics
added; Robinson v. Murphy (1979) 96 Cal.App.3d 763, 767-768 [158 Cal.Rptr. 246]
.) There is no evidence in the record that would support a finding that the acts
of defendant in connection with the transaction underlying count 3 required a
real estate license.

   The order appealed from must therefore be reversed.  Inasmuch as retrial
appears likely and the possibility is great that the question will again arise,
it is necessary for us to pass upon one other legal argument of appellants, that
plaintiff is precluded from recovering from the Fund in any event because at the
time of the transactions involved he, himself, was a licensed real estate
salesman. The argument apparently is that real estate licensees are not included
in the class of persons meant  to be afforded relief by the statute.  (Cf.
Middelsteadt v. Karpe (1975) 52 Cal.App.3d 297, 301-303 [124 Cal.Rptr. 840].)

   We, of course, do not know what the evidence might show upon retrial, but
from the record before us it would appear that plaintiff was acting in respect
to these transactions not as a licensee, but on his own behalf as a principal.
Just as such a licensee acting as a principal as to his or her own property is
treated as a member of the public, not as a licensee, for purposes of imposing
liability upon the Fund, we can see no reason why a licensee who is acting as a
principal with respect to his or her own property should not be considered a
member of the public for purposes of recovery from the Fund.  Since the acts of
the defrauded  licensee did not require a real estate license, the fact that he
or she was a licensee is an irrelevancy.  (Cf.  Fox v. Prime Ventures, Ltd.
(1978) 86 Cal.App.3d 333, 336 [150 Cal.Rptr. 202].) Middelsteadt v. Karpe, supra
, 52 Cal.App.3d at pages 302-303, is not controlling.  In that case and in the
cases relied on by the court the person claimed to have been wronged was a
licensee acting qua licensee.  We conclude that a defrauded licensee who was
acting as a principal in the transaction and whose conduct did not require a
real estate license is not precluded from recovery against the Fund by virtue of
the fact that he or she is a licensee. 7

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   Rather
obviously the licensed status of a party who claims to have been defrauded is
germane to the issues of lack of knowledge and justifiable reliance.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The order is reversed.


                              46 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           EUGENE ALBERT de ST. GERMAIN, Respondent, v. D. D. WATSON,
          as State Real Estate Commissioner, etc., et al., Appellants

                                 Civ. No. 14193

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                  Division One

          95 Cal. App. 2d 862; 214 P.2d 99; 1950 Cal. App. LEXIS 1050


                                February 3, 1950

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied March 4, 1950, and
Respondent's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court was Denied April 3,
1950.  Shenk, J., and Carter, J., Voted for a Hearing.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of the City and
County of San Francisco.  Milton D. Sapiro, Judge.

   Proceeding in mandamus to vacate suspension of a real estate broker's
license.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Brokers--Licenses--Mandamus--Evidence.  --In a mandamus proceeding
questioning the Real Estate Commissioner's suspension of a real estate broker's
license, a finding of a custom in the real estate business of the acceptance by
brokers, without disclosure to their principal, of nonnegotiable promissory
notes as deposits from purchasers was not sustained, where the only evidence to
that effect was the broker's testimony that he had sometimes accepted such
notes, and there was no evidence of the acceptance of notes by brokers without
disclosure of such fact to their principal.

(2a) (2b) (2c) Id.--Duties--Disclosure.  --A real estate broker, like a trustee,
has an affirmative duty to disclose all material facts which might influence his
principal's decision; and a broker who impliedly represented to his principal
that he had received cash from a purchaser as a down payment and did not
disclose that he had actually accepted a nonnegotiable promissory note violated
the Real Estate Law regardless of his intent to defraud or ability to make good
on the note, since the principal was entitled to determine for himself whether
he was satisfied with the note before agreeing to a sale. (Bus. & Prof. Code, §
10176, subds. (a), (i).)

(3) Id.--Authority--To Accept Promissory Notes.  --Although there may be a
custom in real estate transactions for a broker to accept a check from a
purchaser instead of cash as a down payment, the existence of such custom would
not establish a custom to accept promissory notes.

(4) Negotiable Instruments -- Promissory Notes and Checks.  --While checks are
universally accepted as money in business, promissory notes are not. The maker
of a check represents he has money in the bank to cover it and the failure to
have such money may be a crime; the maker of a note makes no such representation
and his failure to pay is not a crime.

(5) Brokers--Duties--Disclosure.  --A real estate broker who, while acting for
the seller, accepts a nonnegotiable promissory note instead of cash as a down
payment from the purchaser without disclosure of such fact to the seller
violates the Real Estate Law, regardless of whether the broker secures an
advantage from such acceptance.

COUNSEL: Fred N. Howser, Attorney General, R. L. Chamberlain and Richard H.
Perry, Deputy Attorneys General, for Appellants.

Christin, Keegan & Carroll for Respondent.

JUDGES: Bray, J.  Peters, P. J., concurred.  Ward, J., dissents.

OPINION BY: BRAY

OPINION

     Appellant Real Estate Commissioner of the State of California, suspended,
for a period of 15 days, respondent's license to engage in business as a real
estate broker. In a mandamus proceeding brought in the superior court, a
judgment was entered vacating that suspension. From that judgment the
commissioner has appealed on the judgment roll alone.

   Question Presented

    The main question presented is whether the acceptance by a real estate
broker of a nonnegotiable promissory note as the down payment on an agreement to
purchase real property without informing the seller, who is the broker's client,
of that fact, constitutes a violation of section 10176, subdivisions (a) and (i)
(formerly subdivision (f)), Division 4, Business and Professions Code.  1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   The act
involved here is cited as the "Real Estate Law" section 10000, Business and
Professions Code.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Facts

   There is practically no dispute as to the facts.  A transcript of the
proceedings before the commissioner was incorporated in the return to the
petition for the writ of mandate, and hence is a part of the judgment roll.  The
court considered the matter as a trial "de novo" and reviewed the transcript.
No additional evidence was offered.  A fair summary of the facts follows:

   Respondent has been in the real estate business in San Francisco for many
years.  In May of 1948, he spoke to a Mr. Zimmerman about selling a portion of
the latter's property for him.  Zimmerman (hereafter called the seller) orally
agreed that respondent could look for buyers for the property.

   On June 4, the seller received a call from respondent that respondent was
coming over to see him, and had obtained a buyer for the property.  Respondent
arrived, and produced a uniform agreement of sale and deposit receipt, dated
June 2, 1948.  The deposit receipt read in part as follows: "Received from Geo.
Anastasi, hereinafter designated as the purchaser, the sum of One Thousand . . .
. ($ 1,000.00) Dollars, being deposited on account of G. A.  Thirty six thousand
. . . . ($ 36,000.-) Dollars, lawful money of the United States of America; the
purchase price of the following described property . . ." Nothing was said
concerning the deposit. The seller signed the contract.  At about that time the
buyer, Anastasi, arrived and respondent said to him, "Well, you bought yourself
a building, Mr. Zimmerman just signed the contract." The seller testified at the
hearing that he would not have signed the contract had he known the deposit was
a promissory note.

   Respondent and his salesman, Harrison, testified that when they had talked to
the buyer earlier he had asked if he should withdraw money from the bank and
they said no, thinking he had a checking account and could write a check for the
deposit. When the time came to close the deal the buyer disclosed that he had no
checking account but stated that he had plenty of funds in the bank.  It was
then after 3 p. m.  Under these circumstances respondent suggested that the
buyer sign a demand promissory note for the deposit and this was done.  The note
read as follows: "On demand, for value received undersigned Geo. Anastasi
promise to pay to St. Germain & Co., the sum of $ 1,000.00.  This note being in
lieu of check or cash deposit on account of agreement of sale of this date,
entered into by the parties.  Said deposit subject to terms of agreement."

   The buyer said that the Bank of America, Columbus branch, would back him up,
and that he would meet respondent there the following Monday morning.
Respondent was there but the buyer never showed up.  Thereafter, respondent
attempted unsuccessfully to have the buyer carry out the contract.

   The seller did not learn the nature of the deposit until June 18, when, upon
inquiring at respondent's office to see what was holding up the transaction, he
learned that respondent was having difficulty in reaching the buyer, and was
informed that the down payment was a promissory note which had been temporarily
misplaced by respondent, and that the amount of the deposit had not been
increased to 10 per cent, as was required by the contract.  In spite of these
things the seller said he was still willing to go through with the deal if the
buyer was also willing.

   When respondent finally got in touch with the buyer, the latter refused to go
through with the contract.  The seller testified  that after he signed the
contract he received calls from other persons about the property but turned them
down on the assumption the place was sold.  Thereafter respondent paid the
seller the sum of $ 375 although the promissory note had not yet been collected.
Although the seller attempted to withdraw the complaint he had filed against
respondent with the commissioner, the latter went ahead with the hearing on that
complaint.

   The Real Estate Law Involved

     Section 10176 of the Business and Professions Code (the Real Estate Law)
provides that the commissioner on his own motion may, and if any person files a
verified complaint, shall investigate the actions of any person "engaged in the
business or acting in the capacity of a real estate licensee" and may
temporarily or permanently revoke a real estate license where the licensee has
been guilty of "(a) Making any substantial misrepresentation . . .  (i) Any
other conduct, whether of the same or a different character than specified in
this section, which constitutes fraud or dishonest dealing." The commissioner
found that respondent's action in failing to disclose to his principal that the
$ 1,000 mentioned in the deposit receipt as having been received from the buyer
was not cash but a nonnegotiable  promissory note to respondent, violated both
subdivisions (a) and (i) above set forth.

   Findings of the Court

     The court, exercising its independent judgment on the evidence as shown in
the transcript, made the following finding: "It is true that frequently the real
estate profession accepts a note or a check from a prospective buyer without
divulging the same to the seller and that the petitioner while acting as the
agent for the sellers took the responsibility and stood good for the credit and
that he issued and adjusted the payment of a portion of the forfeited deposit to
the said Zimmermans."

   Assuming, without deciding,  that if there were a custom of the real estate
profession to accept nonnegotiable promissory notes as payment in real estate
transactions without disclosure to the principal, such a custom would excuse an
action which would otherwise constitute a violation of the Real Estate Law, it
becomes necessary to determine if there is any evidence in the record to support
the court's finding that such a custom exists.  We have carefully read the
record.  There is no evidence to support it.  There is evidence to support that
part of the finding which states that checks are customarily accepted by brokers
in real estate transactions, in place of cash, but the only evidence on the
subject of promissory notes is the testimony of respondent: "Q. Well, then, you
have had occasion to be in this business for many years?  A. Yes.  Q. And are
familiar with all the customs and uses of the business or profession, especially
in your particular office? A. Yes sir.  Q. And you are familiar with how the
business is carried on in the City and County of San Francisco, having been in
that business all these years; is that right?  A. Yes." No question was then
asked him as to whether there was a custom concerning the acceptance of
promissory notes.  Later he gave the following testimony: "Q. Let me ask you
this.  In your forty years in the business is that a custom in transactions?  At
this time if the client hasn't got the money or a checking account, to take a
demand note?  A. It has been a number of times in my experience; always
successfully.  Q. This is the first time it has fallen down in your experience?
A. Yes . . ." This, of course, was not testimony that there was any such custom
in the real estate business generally.  At most it was merely testimony that
respondent had done it a number of times successfully.  Of course, custom is not
proved by the acts  of the individual in question, but by proof of the practices
of persons in that profession generally.  (25 Cal.Jur. 418; People v. Caldwell,
55 Cal.App.2d 238 [130 P.2d 495].) Moreover, even assuming that this was
evidence of a custom to accept notes, it  does not even purport to show that
such custom, if it exists, includes the failure to divulge such acceptance to
the principal.  No such custom was proved and hence the court's finding on that
subject must fall.

   Respondent's Act Vilated the Real Estate Law

     The court made the following finding: "It is true that the petitioner did
not intend to nor did mislead the sellers and it is true that the petitioner did
not act in a fraudulent nor dishonest manner in his dealings with the said
sellers." We agree with such finding insofar as intentional fraud or dishonesty
is concerned.  The commissioner recognized such fact that by making the
suspension a nominal one.  However, in spite of the fact that respondent acted
in good faith in the matter, he still violated the spirit and letter of the Real
Estate Law. It is a well known fact that prior to the enactment of this law,
there were a considerable number of persons engaged in the real estate business
who were carrying on that business in an unethical manner, and that one of the
purposes of the law was to raise the standards of that profession and to require
its members to act fairly and ethically with their clients.  Some of the things
which brokers had done theretofore, and which were not necessarily illegal or
unethical, were prohibited in the interests of protecting the public.  Thus,
commingling the money or other property of his principal with his own is
expressly prohibited.  There were many brokers, prior to the enactment of the
law, who placed moneys received for their clients in their personal accounts,
and yet who scrupulously paid their clients every cent coming to them.  It was
not that commingling moneys meant necessarily that the client would be
defrauded, but that such a practice might result in fraud or injury to the
client.  So it is with the undisclosed acceptance of a promissory note. In this
case, the broker was well able to make good the full amount of the note had the
seller insisted.  But the possibilities of fraud, and of injury to a seller by
the undisclosed acceptance of a promissory note are unlimited.  In the first
place, the seller is entitled to know before entering into a binding obligation
to tie up his property by an agreement to sell, that for some reason the buyer
either cannot or will not  put up cash.  He, rather than his broker, should
determine whether the reason for the buyer's not paying cash is satisfactory.
He, rather than his broker, should determine whether he is satisfied that a
promissory note be accepted as a payment, even though the broker stands ready,
as here, to guarantee its payment.  For us to hold that a broker may accept a
promissory note as payment to his principal, without disclosure, is not a
violation of the law, would be to countenance a practice which is equally as
dangerous as the commingling of money.

   In this case, the violation of subdivision (a), "misrepresentation," and
subdivision (i), conduct which "constitutes fraud or dishonest dealing" was not
intentionally done.  The misrepresentation and dishonesty were passive rather
than active.  When the broker showed the seller the deposit receipt reading
"Received from . . . the purchaser, the sum of One Thousand . . . . ($ 1,000.00)
Dollars, being deposited on account of . . . the purchase price," etc., signed
by respondent as agent for the seller, such act was a representation that the
agent had received that much money for his principal.  The seller had the right
to believe that the person he was asked by his own broker to enter into an
agreement with, was able to and did put up one thousand dollars (i.e., money),
and that if the buyer for any reason not chargeable to the seller refused to go
on with his agreement, there was that much of the buyer's money to be forfeited
and kept by the seller. But when a promissory note is accepted, the money is not
there to be kept.  The seller has a lawsuit on his hands to collect on the note.
He, at least, is entitled to know from his own agent that that might be the
situation before he signs the agreement of sale.

     Respondent's testimony shows that the custom in real estate transactions is
for the agent to accept checks in payment of the purchase price of real
property. Whether it is the custom not to divulge to the seller principal that
the down payment is so made does not appear.  Assuming that  the custom goes
that far, it is a long way from establishing a custom to accept promissory
notes, as there is a great difference between a check and a note.   One of the
most important differences is that when a person gives a check he represents
that he has the money in the bank to cover it, and that the bank will pay the
amount called for.  (19 Cal.Jur. 948.) Moreover, if he does not have the money
in the bank it may constitute a crime.  ( Pen. Code, § 476a.) A note, even one
payable on demand, makes no such representation, and the failure to pay when
presented is not a crime.  In modern business checks are universally accepted as
money; promissory notes are not.

     "'The law of California imposed on . . . the real estate agent the same
obligation of undivided service and loyalty that it imposes on a trustee in
favor of his beneficiary.  Violation of his trust is subject to the same
punitory consequences that are provided for a disloyal or recreant trustee.  (
King v. Wise, 43 Cal. 628.)' ( Langford v. Thomas, 200 Cal. 192, 196 [252 P.
602].) Such an agent is charged with the duty of fullest disclosure of all
material facts concerning the transaction that might affect the principal's
decision.  [Citing many cases.]" ( Rattray v. Scudder, 28 Cal.2d 214, 222 [169
P.2d 371, 164 A.L.R. 1356].)

   Respondent has cited no case supporting his contention that the undivulged
acceptance of a promissory note as here is not a violation of the law.  He has
cited cases involving situations where as between a debtor and the agent's
principal, it has been held that the agent's acceptance of a check constitutes
payment to the principal.  To the same effect is Indemnity Ins. Co. v. Watson,
128 Cal.App. 10 [16 P.2d 760], as to the acceptance by the agent of a note upon
which he promptly secured cash and which note was eventually paid.  There the
court said: "In California the general rule which prohibits payment to an agent
authorized to collect in any form other than money has been relaxed to permit
payment by check.  ( California Stearns Co. v. Treadwell, 82 Cal.App. 553 [256
P. 242].) On principle, no good reason appears why the relaxation should not be
extended as stated in the above-quoted language from Corpus Juris to include
payment by note where, as here appears, money or its equivalent in bank credit
was immediately secured by the agent through sale of the note which upon
maturity was paid in full by the maker." (P. 18.) Under certain circumstances it
has been held that the setting off of an agent's indebtedness against that of an
indebtedness to his principal constitutes payment.  ( Stuyvesant Ins. Co. v.
Sussex Fire Ins. Co., 90 F.2d 281.) In none of these cases was the agent
impliedly representing to his principal, as here, that he had received money.
More important, in none of them was it a situation in which, at the very
inception of the agreement into which the principal was entering, the true facts
were concealed from him by his agent.    Jones v. Real Estate Commissioner, 80
Cal.App.2d 592 [182 P.2d 289], is not in point here.  There the appellate court
compelled the commissioner to reinstate the broker's license, not because the
alleged misrepresentations did not amount to unfair dealing, but because it
found that there was no evidence showing such misrepresentations were made.

     Respondent contends that as he received no advantage from his failure to
disclose he did not violate the law.  The law, however, does not make the
securing of an advantage an element.  Respondent also contends that before
anyone could be found guilty of violating the law by accepting a promissory note
as a down payment without divulgence, the Legislature must first amend the Real
Estate Law prohibiting such action or at least the commissioner must promulgate
a regulation prohibiting such action.  There does not have to be any such
action, either by the Legislature or the commissioner, to prohibit what is
already prohibited by the law, namely, misrepresentation and dishonest dealing.
Perhaps had the evidence established a long-continued custom of the profession
of acceptance of notes without divulgence, a situation might have existed which
would require, as a practical matter,  a notice by the commissioner to all
engaged in the real estate business to desist from that practice before a
crackdown should take place.  However, as heretofore pointed out, there is no
evidence of such custom in this case.  Moreover, all real estate brokers who are
conscious of their ethical obligations to their clients should know that this
practice is not safe or ethical.

     A real estate broker, like a trustee, has an affirmative duty to disclose
all material facts which might influence the decision of his principal; the fact
that the prospective buyer cannot or does not make the down payment on the
purchase of real property in money but by a promissory note is a material fact
which the seller is entitled to know before agreeing to sell; here the agent
failed to make such disclosure and hence violated the Real Estate Law as above
set forth.

   The judgment is reversed.

DISSENT BY: WARD

DISSENT

   WARD, J.  I dissent.

   The problem herein presented to this court is not the sufficiency of the
evidence to sustain the determination of the issues involved and the
reasonableness of the penalty imposed by the real estate commissioner.  Upon the
issuance of a writ  of mandate those questions have been adjudicated in the
trial de novo in the superior court.  The task assigned to this court is to
consider the findings of the superior court and examine the evidence in the
light of the sufficiency thereof to sustain such findings, -- in brief, to
conclude if the trial court was correct in determining that under the provisions
of section 10176 of the Business and Professions Code there was no substantial
misrepresentation (subd. (a)) and no fraud or dishonest dealing (subd. (i)).

   Any statement which does not place the buyer or the seller at a disadvantage
should not be classified as a "substantial misrepresentation." Here it is not
the making of a statement but the failure to make all the details known to the
seller that is the basis of the charge of dishonesty. It is not claimed that any
statement made or not made was with intent to defraud or take an undue advantage
of the seller. The evidence does not disclose that the seller was in fact
injured.  The seller, with reference to a conversation had with an attache of
the agent's office, testified as follows: "As far as I am concerned, I even told
her so -- as far as I am concerned I will still stand behind the deal even if
his time limit had expired to increase his deposit on the purchasing price."

   In support of the claim that the agent was dishonest, the real estate
commissioner states that it is not the custom to accept a promissory note in
lieu of a check or cash as a deposit on the purchase price. There is the
testimony of the agent that in some cases he had adopted the practice and custom
of accepting promissory notes.  There was no cross-examination to indicate that
the testimony to that effect was untrue and no evidence was presented indicating
it was not a custom followed under certain circumstances by agents generally.
In this connection the trial court stated: "To the contrary, it only appears
that the agent followed a practice that has been carried on by brokers, and
believed that he was accepting the note for cash and was responsible to the
seller therefor.  In view of these facts there is no basis whatsoever for the
findings and decision made by the Commissioner.  They are not supported by the
evidence." There is substantial evidence to support the finding of the trial
court.  This court may not revalue, nor substitute its opinion for, the findings
of the trial court when such findings are supported by the evidence.

   The trial court may have concluded that although the penalty imposed by the
period of suspension indicated only a  technical, if any, violation of the act,
the findings and "Determination of Issues Presented," as set forth by the
commissioner, branded the agent as a dishonest agent, a stigma that never could
be lived down.  The trial court may have concluded that the power of revocation
and suspension of a license to practice a profession or conduct a business
should be used only in "justifiable cases" ( Jones v. Real Estate Commissioner,
80 Cal.App.2d 592, at p. 600 [182 P.2d 289]).

   I am satisfied that the order of the trial court should be affirmed.


                              47 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In the Matter of the Application of L. A. RALEIGH for a Writ
                                of Habeas Corpus

                                 Crim. No. 2116

                          Supreme Court of California

                 177 Cal. 746; 171 P. 950; 1918 Cal. LEXIS 678


                                 March 19, 1918

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Rehearing Denied.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPLICATION for Writ of Habeas Corpus.

COUNSEL: Fred W. Fry, and O. R. Wood, for Petitioner.

W. H. L. Hynes, District Attorney, and U. S. Webb, Attorney General, for
Respondent.

JUDGES: In Bank.  Richards, J., pro tem.  Sloss, J., Wilbur, J., Melvin, J.,
Victor E. Shaw, J., pro tem., and Angellotti, C. J., concurred.

OPINION BY: RICHARDS

OPINION

     This is an application for a writ of habeas corpus wherein the petitioner
seeks to test the validity of the act of the legislature approved June 1, 1917
(Stats. 1917, p. 1579), entitled "An act to define real estate brokers, agents,
salesmen, solicitors; to provide for the regulation, supervision, and licensing
thereof; to create the office of real estate commissioner and making an
appropriation therefor." The act in question makes it unlawful for any person,
copartnership, or corporation to engage in the business or act in the capacity
of a real estate broker or real estate salesman within this state without first
obtaining a license therefor.  It proceeds to define who are to be considered
such brokers or salesmen within the meaning of the act.  These definitions are
followed by the proviso that the act shall not apply to certain designated
classes of persons, copartnerships, or corporations performing any of the acts
enumerated in the aforesaid definitions of brokers or salesmen. The act proceeds
to create a state real estate commissioner's department, the chief officer of
which shall be a commissioner appointed  by the Governor, who shall hold office
at his pleasure, with his office at Sacramento, with an annual salary of five
thousand dollars, payable out of the state treasury, with power to appoint such
clerks and deputies as may be necessary for the proper discharge of the duties
of his office, and with an annual allowance from the state treasury of a sum not
to exceed fifty thousand dollars a year for the expenses of the department.  All
persons, copartnerships, or corporations other than those exempted from the
requirements of the act, seeking to do business in this state as real estate
brokers or salesmen, are required to first obtain a license from the real estate
commissioner so to do, by making an application therefor in the manner and with
the credentials specified in the act, and by the giving by real estate brokers
of a bond payable to the people of the state of California, with sufficient
surety or sureties, to be approved by the commissioner, in the sum of one
thousand dollars, conditioned for the faithful performance by such brokers of
their duties as defined in the act.  An annual license fee of ten dollars is
also required of brokers, and of two dollars from salesmen and solicitors.  The
commissioner is given power to temporarily suspend or permanently revoke these
licenses after hearing upon charges presented against the holders thereof, for
any violation of their duties as defined in the act; and from the decision of
the commissioner in respect to these matters a method of appeal is sought to be
provided to the superior court.  Real estate brokers are also required to have
and maintain offices for the transaction of business.

   The first assault which the petitioner makes upon the validity of this act
relates to the exemptions of certain classes of persons, copartnerships, and
corporations, from its terms, which, according to the contention of the
petitioner, are based upon no proper distinctions or classifications and which
therefore take away from the act its necessary quality as a general law. The
provisions of the act thus assailed read as follows:

   "The provisions of this act shall not apply to any person, copartnership or
corporation who shall perform any of the acts aforesaid with reference to the
buying, selling or exchanging of property owned by such person, copartnership or
corporation, or renting, collecting rents, or negotiating a loan on such
property; nor shall the provisions of this act  apply to salaried employees
other than salesmen or solicitors of a licensed real estate broker; and
provided, further, that the provisions of this act shall not apply to persons
holding a duly executed power of attorney from the owner for the sale of real
estate, nor shall this act be construed to interfere in any way with services
rendered by an attorney at law, nor shall it be held to include a receiver,
trustee in bankruptcy, or any person selling real estate under order of any
court, nor to a trustee selling under a deed of trust, nor apply to any
corporations, associations, copartnerships, companies, firms and individuals now
or hereafter subject to the jurisdiction or authority of the railroad
commission, nor to corporations now or hereafter organized under the laws of
this state for the purpose of conducting the business of banking within this
state, nor to corporations, associations, copartnerships, companies, firms and
individuals after they have secured from the insurance commissioner or the
bureau of building and loan supervision a certificate of authority or license to
do business within this state, nor to corporations, associations, copartnerships
or companies, subject to federal regulation or not organized for profit, nor to
mutual water companies and irrigation districts."

   It is conceded by the petitioner that some of the foregoing exemptions from
the operation of the act are based upon easily discerned distinctions and proper
classifications; as, for instance, that of persons, copartnerships, or
corporations buying, selling, exchanging,  renting, and negotiating loans upon
their own property; also that of receivers or trustees in bankruptcy, or other
persons selling real estate under orders of court; but as to certain other
classes of those exempted from its terms, the petitioner insists that the
absence of any real basis for classification is so clear, and the want of an
equal distribution of the burdens imposed by the act so obvious and wide-spread
in its application, as to render the statute void.  The clause in the foregoing
provision of the act which appears to be most obnoxious to this criticism is
that which provides for the exemption from its terms of "corporations,
associations, copartnerships, companies, firms and individuals, after they have
secured from the insurance commissioner or the bureau of building and loan
supervision a certificate of authority or license to do business within this
state." The very general terms in which this exemption is  phrased give it
application to everybody, whether corporation, association, firm, or individual,
who holds from the insurance commissioner of the state a license to engage in
any form or kind of insurance business, whether as insurance companies issuing
policies of insurance of any kind, or insurance agents of such companies doing
an insurance business as such, or as insurance brokers soliciting and placing
business with such agents or companies.  It is therefore broad enough in its
terms to provide that whoever holds in any of these capacities any form of
license from the insurance commissioner is, by virtue of the holding of such
license, exempted from the provisions of the act under review when engaged in
the performance of any of the acts relating to the buying, selling, exchanging,
leasing, or encumbering of real estate, for the doing of which identical acts
real estate brokers and salesmen, not being also the holders of licenses as
insurance companies, brokers, or agents, must be licensed under and must conform
to the provisions of this act.  When the laws relating to the procurement of
licenses of insurance companies, agents, or brokers are consulted, it is found
that their requirements for the obtaining of licenses from the insurance
commissioner are much more simple and far less burdensome than those which, by
the terms of the act in question, are imposed upon real estate brokers and
salesmen. Had these burdens been equal or in any degree equivalent, had the
safeguards cast about the business of insurance agents or brokers to insure
honesty of character and fair dealing in business been the same as or similar to
those which this act requires of real estate brokers or salesmen, it might well
be argued that the possession by a corporation, firm, or individual of a license
to engage in any form or department of the insurance business would suffice as
an acceptable substitute for the license, bond, recommendations, and other
safeguards provided for in the real estate agent's act.  But such is not the
case.  The Statutes of 1917, either in the form of amendments to sections 596
and 633 of the Political Code (Stats. 1917, pp. 147, 1617), or in the form of
the addition of section 633a (Stats. 1917, p. 1615), to said code, embrace the
requirements for obtaining from the insurance commissioner certificates of
authority or licenses to do the business of insurance companies, agents,
brokers, or solicitors within this state.  Section 633 of said code, as amended,
and section  633a thereof, as newly enacted, have special reference to insurance
brokers and agents, and to the licenses to be obtained by each.  In neither of
said provisions is there to be found any requirement that the person seeking
such license must produce recommendations of other persons as to his character
or fitness in point of moral qualification for the business he desires to engage
in; nor is there any requirement as to the giving of bonds in any amount to
insure his fidelity therein,  both of which requirements are made of real estate
brokers seeking licenses under the act herein assailed.  Neither are insurance
brokers or agents required to maintain offices for the transaction of business,
as are real estate brokers under this act.  In other important particulars the
burdens cast upon these respective classes of persons are unequal, the
inequality resting most onerously upon those not being insurance brokers or
agents, who seek to engage in the business of real estate brokers or salesmen.
We can discover no reason, and we are given none by those attempting to uphold
this act, for this obvious discrimination, nor for the exemption of insurance
brokers and agents engaging in the real estate business, from the provisions of
the act under review.  It is a matter of common knowledge that the business of
insurance broker or agent, and the business of real estate broker or agent, are
combined and conducted by the same person, firm, or corporation, quite
generally, and hence that the aforesaid exemption of such persons, firms, or
corporations, so combining these two forms of business, from the provisions of
this act, would have such a widespread effect as to not only render the act
obnoxious to the claim that it was not a general law, but also to create a
discrimination so sweeping in its scope and effect as to compel the conclusion
that the act would not have secured its passage by the legislature save for the
inclusion in it of this exemption; and hence, of necessity, that if such
exemption is invalid, the entire act must fail.  We can perceive no escape from
these conclusions.  The foregoing reasoning and conclusions also apply to
persons, firms, or corporations holding certificates of authority or licenses
from the bureau of building and loan supervision, in so far as this act purports
to exempt such persons, firms, or corporations from these provisions in case
they or any of them engaged in the business of dealing in  real estate in the
capacity of brokers or salesmen, as defined  in this act.  The law is well
settled that a statute which contains exemptions amounting to substantial
discriminations between those attempted to be classified, where no reasonable
basis for the classification exists, is violative of the provisions of the
constitution requiring the passage of general laws and forbidding special
legislation in all cases where general laws can be made applicable.  ( Pasadena
v. Stimson, 91 Cal. 238, [27 Pac. 604]; Ex parte Bohen, 115 Cal. 372, [36 L. R.
A. 618, 47 Pac. 55]; Rauer v. Williams, 118 Cal. 407, [50 Pac. 691]; Ex parte
Sohncke, 148 Cal. 262, [113 Am. St. Rep. 236, 7 Ann. Cas. 475, 2 L. R. A. (N.
S.) 813, 82 Pac. 956].)

   The petitioner herein assails certain other of the exemptions found in the
provisions of this act above set forth.  But one of these requires brief notice,
namely, the clause relating to the exemption of attorneys at law.  The language
of the clause in question is as follows: "Nor shall this act be construed to
interfere in any way with the services rendered by an attorney at law." In view
of the fact that this clause occurs in the midst of a provision having relation
to the exemption of persons performing the several acts of dealing in or with
real estate, for which real estate brokers or salesmen, not being attorneys at
law, must procure licenses, its purpose is, to say the least of it, obscure; and
since the act itself is penal in its requirements that all persons not in the
exempted classes who undertake to engage in the real estate business as brokers
and salesmen shall possess licenses, and in its penalties to be imposed upon
those not having licenses so to do, it might plausibly be argued that attorneys
at law conducting transactions in relation to real estate in the capacity of
salesmen, brokers, agents, or mortgagees or rent collectors are by virtue of the
above-quoted clause exempted from the provisions of the act.  We do not,
however, deem it necessary to finally pass upon this question, in view of what
has been said of the clearer invalidity of the act upon the former ground; nor
do we deem it necessary to discuss the other exemptions in the act which the
petitioner herein assails, nor in fact to consider the other points of attack
made by him upon the constitutionality of the act.  If it is not in its present
form a general law, then the question as to whether or not a general law dealing
with the same subject matter would be a valid exercise of legislative power is
not at present before this court.

    It is ordered that the writ be upheld and the petitioner discharged.


                              48 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          ROBERT WILLIAM MILNER, Plaintiff and Respondent, v. DAVID H.
           FOX, as Real Estate Commissioner, etc., et al., Defendants
                                 and Appellants

                                 Civ. No. 44478

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                 Division Three

            102 Cal. App. 3d 567; 162 Cal. Rptr. 584; 1980 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1510


                               February 26, 1980

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A petition for a rehearing was denied March 27, 1980,
and respondent's petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied April
30, 1980.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of San Mateo County, No. 197320, Lyle R. Edson,
Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1a) (1b) Brokers § 5--Regulation of Brokers--Grounds for Discipline and
Defenses--Sale of Unsecured Promissory Notes.  --The trial court erred in
granting a real estate broker's petition for a writ of mandate ordering the
Commissioner of Real Estate to set aside his decision suspending the broker's
license for six months for violating Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10231, which requires
a broker to invest his clients' funds in loans secured by liens on real
property, where the broker was the president and designated broker officer of a
corporate real estate licensee, engaged in the business of brokering and
servicing loans, which had accepted loan payoff funds from a client in return
for unsecured demand notes. The statute applies not only to new funds invested
but prohibits a mortgage broker from placing for investment any loan funds,
whatever their source, unless secured by a lien on real property.

(2a) (2b) Brokers § 5--Regulation of Brokers--Grounds for Discipline and
Defenses--Sale of Unsecured Promissory Notes.  --Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10231.1,
which allows real estate loan servicing companies receiving monthly payments or
payoffs 60 days to take care of the bookkeeping and to remit the funds to the
lender, and to extend the bookkeeping time by an interest-free agreement, does
not permit them to pay interest for the short term use of retained payoff funds.
The purpose of the statute is to provide that investors receive the return on
their investment reasonably promptly; nothing in the section permits a mortgage
broker to issue unsecured notes in exchange for loan payoffs.

(3) Brokers § 21--Duties and Liabilities of Brokers--Corporate Violation of Real
Estate Law--Sale of Unsecured Promissory Notes.  --A real estate broker, who was
the president and designated broker officer of a corporate real estate licensee
engaged in the business of brokering and servicing loans, was legally
responsible for the corporation's violating Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10231, by
accepting loan payoff funds in return for an unsecured demand note during the
period he was president and designated broker, though he had no knowledge of or
direct dealing with the investor whose payoff funds were so accepted, and though
he acted in good faith on the advice of attorneys. A corporate real estate
broker in contemplation of law conducts its business if at all under the active
aegis of its designated broker and the designated broker must reasonably be
charged with responsibility for corporate compliance with the law.

COUNSEL: George Deukmejian, Attorney General, and Julian O. Standen, Deputy
Attorney General, for Defendants and Appellants.

Alfred L. Young for Plaintiff and Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by White, P. J., with Scott and Feinberg, JJ., concurring.

OPINION BY: WHITE

OPINION

     This is an appeal from a judgment of the San Mateo County Superior Court
granting respondent Milner's (hereafter respondent) petition for a writ of
mandate ordering appellant Commissioner of Real Estate (hereafter Commissioner)
to set aside his decision suspending respondent's real estate broker's license
for six months.  The Commissioner instituted appropriate administrative
proceedings accusing respondent and others 1 of alleged violations of Business
and Professions Code sections 10176, subdivisions (a) and (i), 10231 and 10177,
subdivision (d). 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1
Respondent's case is companion to Norman v. Department of Real Estate (1979) 93
Cal.App.3d 768 [155 Cal.Rptr. 715], decided by Division One of this court,
opinion by Elkington, J.  That court affirmed the judgment of the superior court
denying a petition for writ of mandate seeking relief from disciplinary
sanctions imposed by the Commissioner upon officers Alfred L. Norman, Robert
Norman, and John A. Colistra of Homeowners Loan Corporation.
2   Business and Professions Code section 10176, as relevant to the appeal,
follows: "The [Commissioner] may, upon his own motion, and shall, upon the
verified complaint in writing of any person, investigate the actions of any
person engaged in the business or acting in the capacity of a real estate
licensee within this state, and he may temporarily suspend or permanently revoke
a real estate license at any time where the licensee, while a real estate
licensee, in performing or attempting to perform any of the acts within the
scope of this chapter has been guilty of any of the following: (a) Making any
substantial misrepresentation . . . .  (i) Any other conduct, whether of the
same or a different character than specified in this section, which constitutes
fraud or dishonest dealing."

   Business and Professions Code section 10231, as relevant, provides: "No
person in doing any of the acts set forth in subdivision (d) of Section 10131,
subdivision (e) of Section 10131, and Section 10131.1 shall accept any purchase
or loan funds or other consideration from a prospective purchaser or lender, . .
. except as to a specific loan or a specific real property sales contract or
promissory note secured directly or collaterally by a lien on real property . .
. ."

   Business and Professions Code section 10177, subdivision (d) as relevant
provides: "The commissioner may suspend or revoke the license of any real estate
licensee, or may deny the issuance of a license to an applicant, who has done
any of the following: . . . (d) Willfully disregarded or violated any of the
provisions of the Real Estate Law (commencing with Section 10000 of this code)
or of Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 11000) of Part 2 of this division or of
the rules and regulations of the commissioner for the administration and
enforcement of the Real Estate Law and Chapter 1 of Part 2 of this division."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     Homeowners Loan Corporation (hereafter Homeowners) was a real estate
licensee engaged in the business of brokering and servicing loans secured by
real property. Respondent was the designated officer of Homeowners' corporate
real estate license pursuant to Business and Professions Code 3 section 10211
and was Homeowners' president in charge of its sales force during at least part
of the relevant period. 4

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Unless
otherwise noted all references are to the Business and Professions Code.
4   "Homeowners sought no review of the Commissioner's order revoking its real
estate broker's license, and that order is now final." (See Norman, supra, at p.
772.)

   In Norman, supra, at page 773, the court described in more detail what
respondent's brief refers to as Homeowners "large" loan or "syndicate" business:
"Howeowners was engaged in the business of brokering loans secured by trust
deeds on real property, in the manner described by Business and Professions Code
sections 10131, subdivision (d) and (e), and 10131.1.  Typically, with its own
funds it would lend money on the security of such trust deeds, and then sell
interests in the loans and their security to individual public 'investors' (a
term which we shall hereafter use).  When such interests were sold, Homeowners
would collect the loans' agreed payments and distribute them proportionately to
investors according to their interests.  Generally the investors purchased their
interests in the loans through outside brokers who were not otherwise affiliated
with Homeowners.  Those brokers were paid commissions by Homeowners for their
services."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     The Commissioner adopted the proposed decision of the hearing officer
finding that respondent violated section 10231 in that Homeowners had on two
occasions accepted loan funds from a George Boyd in return for unsecured demand
notes.  (Apparently Boyd had no direct dealings with respondent either in person
or over the phone.  Boyd's account was handled exclusively by Ronald Samman, an
independent broker who was neither employed nor supervised by Homeowners.  Boyd
lost no money as a result of the alleged violation.)

    Exercising its independent judgment upon the weight of the evidence, the
trial court mandated that the Commissioner's decision be set aside as "contrary
to law and [is] not supported by the Findings of Fact"; and therefore determined
that the "penalty imposed" was an "abuse of discretion." 5

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5
Respondent's existing real estate broker's license is a "vested" right.
Therefore, the administrative decision is reviewed by means of a limited trial
de novo in which the trial court not only examines the record for errors of law
but also exercises its independent judgment upon the weight of the evidence
produced before the administrative agency, together with any further evidence
properly admitted by the court.  (See Code Civ. Proc., § 1094.5, subd. (d);
Merrill v. Department of Motor Vehicles (1969) 71 Cal.2d 907, 914 [80 Cal.Rptr.
89, 458 P.2d 33].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    It is our view that the "Boyd" transactions were section 10231 violations.
Accordingly we reverse the trial court's judgment and remand for further review
of the propriety of the "penalty imposed."

   Appellant Commissioner assigns six issues on appeal.  They are:

   1.  Did the Boyd notes violate section 10231?

   2.  Was respondent responsible for the issuance of the Boyd notes?

   3.  Did respondent act "willfully" within the meaning of section 10177,
subdivision (d)?

   4.  Was the decision supported by the administrative findings?

   5.  Did the trial court in determining the sufficiency of the administrative
findings apply an incorrect standard of review?

   6.  Was the discipline imposed upon respondent an abuse of discretion?

   In this case wherein the trial court is authorized to conduct a limited trial
de novo, our appellate function is analogous to that in an ordinary civil
appeal: "only errors of law are subject to its cognizance, and a factual finding
can be overturned only if the evidence received by the trial court, including
the record of the administrative proceeding, is insufficient as a matter of law
to sustain the finding." (See Merrill v. Department of Motor Vehicles,   supra,
71 Cal.2d 907, 915.) For example, in this case, while the evidence is
conflicting and arguable to say the very least, yet the evidence is substantial
and supports the trial  court's factual findings.  Accordingly, we are not
permitted to and will not disturb them in this appeal.  While we footnote them
in their entirety, it would appear that findings 1 through 6 only are relevant
to our discussion and decision. 6

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   The trial
court's findings of fact and conclusions of law follows: "1.  That Petitioner
was terminated from his employment from Homeowners Loan Corporation on April 19,
1973.

   "2.  That immediately following Petitioner's termination of employment from
Homeowners Loan Corporation he notified the Commissioner of Real Estate of such
termination.

   "3.  That Boyd's funds which are the subject of this action, namely, the
amounts of $ 1,000 and $ 3,000 respectively, were the results of payoffs of
other notes and deeds of trust which Mr. Boyd left with Homeowners Loan for
servicing and said funds were not the result of new investments wherein the
funds would have come directly from Mr. Boyd to Homeowners Loan Corporation.

   "4.  That the loan payoffs above mentioned in the amounts of $ 1,000 and $
3,000 were held by Homeowners Loan Corporation for less than sixty (60) days.

   "5.  That Petitioner was advised by two California lawyers, John Colistra and
Richard McGowan, that the acts complained of by the Real Estate Commissioner
were legal and proper.

   "6.  That Petitioner had no direct knowledge of the actual Boyd transactions
and that said transactions were handled in their entirety by others.

   "7.  That the six months' suspension is arbitrary, capricious and an abuse of
discretion as it has no relation to the offense charged.

   "8.  That the broker who handled the Boyd transaction was Ron Sammon and he
was not charged or in any way disciplined by the Department of Real estate.

   "9.  That the standard of proof required in order for the Hearing Officer to
make a finding is 'convincing proof to a reasonable certainty.'

   "From such findings of fact the Court makes the following

   "Conclusions of Law

   "1.  That the decision of the Real Estate Commissioner is contrary to law and
is not supported by the Findings of Fact.

   "2.  That the penalty imposed by the Commissioner was arbitrary, capricious
and an abuse of discretion."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     Obviously the determination as to whether the Boyd transactions, found by
the trial court to be "payoffs" and not "new investments" (finding 3),
constitute section 10231 violations presents a question of law for our review.

     Respondent argues in this appeal, as apparently he successfully contended
in the trial court, that section 10231 is not applicable to the Boyd
transactions "as that section pertains only to new funds invested." We
understand respondent's argument to be that the disposition of payoff funds is
regulated by section 10231.1 7 to the exclusion of section  10231.  Simply
stated, respondent's argument is that while the Real Estate Broker's Act
requires that a broker or salesman initially invest his client's funds in
investments secured by a lien on real property (§§ 10131, subds. (d) and (e),
10131.1), 8 the same act does not prohibit the broker or salesman from
reinvesting the returned funds in unsecured investments, herein the unsecured
promissory notes of Homeowner's corporate affiliate.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   Section
10231.1 provides: "No person in doing any of the acts set forth in subdivision
(d) of Section 10131, subdivision (e) of Section 10131 and Section 10131.1
shall, as agent or principal retain funds payable according to the terms of a
promissory note or real property sales contract secured directly or collaterally
by a lien on real property, for a period longer than 60 days, except pursuant to
a written agreement with the purchaser or lender; provided that no agreement
shall provide for the payment of interest on funds so retained."
8   Section 10131 provides in relevant part: "A real estate broker within the
meaning of this part is a person who, for a compensation or in expectation of a
compensation, does or negotiates to do one or more of the following acts for
another or others: . . . [para. ] (d) Solicits borrowers or lenders for or
negotiates loans or collects payments or performs services for borrowers or
lenders or note owners in connection with loans secured directly or collaterally
by liens on real property or on a business opportunity.  [para. ] (e) Sells or
offers to sell, buys or offers to buy, or exchanges or offers to exchange a real
property sales contract, or a promissory note secured directly or collaterally
by a lien on real property or on a business opportunity, and performs services
for the holders thereof."

   Section 10131.1 provides: "A real estate broker within the meaning of this
part is also a person who engages as a principal in the business of buying from,
selling to, or exchanging with the public, real property sales contracts or
promissory notes secured directly or collaterally by liens on real property, or
who makes agreements with the public for the collection of payments or for the
performance of services in connection with real property sales contracts or
promissory notes secured directly or collaterally by liens on real property.

   "As used in this section, 'in the business' means:

   "(a) The acquisition for resale to the public, and not as an investment, of
eight (8) or more real property sales contracts or promissory notes secured
directly or collaterally by liens on real property during a calendar year, or

   "(b) The sale to or exchange with the public of eight (8) or more real
property sales contracts or promissory notes secured directly or collaterally by
liens on real property during a calendar year; provided, that no transaction
negotiated through a real estate licensee shall be considered in determining
whether a person is a real estate broker within the meaning of this section."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    That respondent's argument proved persuasive in the trial court is
understandable in light of the fact that Elkington, J.,  had not rendered the
court's opinion in Norman v. Department of Real Estate, supra, 93 Cal.App.3d 768
. 9 In Norman, the court sustained the commissioner's  sanction imposed upon the
license of one John A. Colistra (respondent's successor to the office of
Homeowners' president and "designated real estate broker").  With respect to the
"Boyd" transactions the court stated that "Homeowners had patently violated
section 10231." (At p. 774.) Accordingly, the court held Colistra reasonably
charged with responsibility for a third Boyd-Samman unsecured $ 2,000 promissory
note caused to be issued by Homeowners on June 24, 1973.  (Additionally the
referee found a section 10231 violation on July 2, 1973, in the amount of $
4,000 evidenced by an unsecured note issued to one Eloise Henfling.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -9   In our
deliberations we have considered the distinct possibility that the trial court
may have reasoned that while Homeowners' issuance of unsecured interest bearing
promissory notes to Boyd was a "patent" section 10231 violation, respondent did
not "willfully" violate section 10231 when acting in good faith reliance on the
advice and direction of Homeowners' attorneys.  The trial court's findings (see
fn. 6, p. 572) do not foreclose such a possibility.  In any event, we seek to
make our view clear.  We hold that respondent acted "willfully" within the
meaning of section 10177, subdivision (d) (see fn. 2, p. 569) when he signed and
issued the memorandum dated February 12, 1973, directed to investment salesmen.
It reads as follows: "Under the permit issued by the Department of Corporations,
the company must fund the large loans with its own funds after approval and
before the loan can be sold to our investors. HLC has arranged a line of credit
with its banking institution for this purpose.  This form of lending results in
costs to us and interest paid to the bank.

   "In order to eliminate the possibility of investment salesmen losing
investors' funds because of lack of merchandise or because the particular loans
being offered does [sic] not meet with the investors' approval, the company is
presently making available, to the investor, its negotiable corporate demand
note, as security for those funds that the investor places with the company, on
an interim basis, until such time as the investor purchases a specifically
secured investment.

   "This arrangement is being accomplished in order to accommodate the various
investors you might have who desire to still have their money working for them,
at 10% per annum, during the interim period when they have not invested in a
specific loan package and having our investors benefit rather than the
commercial bank."

   "Willfully" as used in section 10177, subdivision (d) does not require an
intent to violate the law, only an intent to engage in the act or conduct
prohibited by the statute is required.  (See Goodhew v. Industrial Acc.  Com.
(1958) 157 Cal.App.2d 252, 256-257 [320 P.2d 513].) Respondent acted voluntarily
with an awareness of the nature of his conduct and therefore "willfully." Advice
of counsel or other evidence of good faith does not render his act any less
"willful." (See People v. Clem (1974) 39 Cal.App.3d 539, 542 [114 Cal.Rptr. 359]
.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      Respondent first acknowledges that section 10231.1 "allows servicing
companies receiving monthly payments or payoffs 60 days to take care of their
bookkeeping and to remit said funds to the lender." Respondent then spuriously
reasons that because section 10231 allows that the statutory "bookkeeping" time
may be extended by an interest free agreement, the section does not prohibit a
servicing company (Homeowners) during the statutory 60 days (herein about 30
days) from unilaterally agreeing to pay interest for the short term use of the
retained "payoff" funds.  (See fn.  9, p. 573.)

   We remain unpersuaded.  Manifestly, Commissioner's position is the only sound
rationale.  Sections 10231 and 10231.1 when logically read  together are
compatible.   Section 10231 prohibits a mortgage broker from placing for
investment any loan funds, whatever their source, unless secured by a lien on
real property. To read and interpret section 10231 as making a distinction
between "new" and "payoff" loan funds would, in our opinion, lull the secured
investor into a sense of false security not to mention defeating the purpose of
the act.  It is inconceivable that the Legislature would require that the
lending public investments be secured by realty and at the same time afford no
protection or security for the returned investment.  Clearly such is not the
case.   The purpose of section 10231.1 is to provide that investors receive the
return on their investment reasonably promptly.  We agree with appellant
Commissioner that nothing in this section permits a mortgage broker to issue
unsecured notes in exchange for loan payoffs. We reverse the judgment.

    Norman v. Department of Real Estate, supra, 93 Cal.App.3d 768, is sound
authority for resolution of the remaining legal question presented in this
appeal.   Accordingly, we hold that respondent herein is legally responsible for
Homeowners' section 10231 digressions, certainly during the period that he was
president and "designated real estate broker." Apparently, on this record he
ceased to function as president on April 19, 1973, (finding No. 1) and
immediately notified the Commissioner of his disassociation.  (Finding No. 2.)
However, the trial court made no finding as to the effective date respondent
ceased to operate as the designated real estate broker or officer.  The referee
found the date to be May 11, 1973,  the date Colistra assumed the role of
designated officer or broker. Arguably then respondent is responsible for both
the April 8 and May 6 Boyd transactions.  A corporate real estate broker in
contemplation of the law conducts its brokerage business if at all under the
active aegis of its designated broker. (See Norman, supra, at pp. 776-777.)
However, Norman, at pages 776-777, teaches that the designated real estate
broker must reasonably be charged with responsibility for corporate compliance
with the Real Estate Law. In the light of findings Nos. 1 and 2 of the trial
court, we find it would be unreasonable to charge respondent with Homeowners'
May 6, 1973, "Boyd" transaction.  Further, in this instance we find that such a
result does not frustrate the "statutory scheme." (See Norman, supra, at p. 777
.)

   Particularly is this true in the light of the fact that Homeowners' section
10231 violation of April 8, 1973 (Boyd -- $ 1,000 unsecured note) standing alone
is clearly sufficient to warrant the imposition of sanctions  on respondent
Milner's individual real estate broker's license. Neither the fact that the
"payoff" funds were held short term for unsecured reinvestment nor the fact
respondent acted on the advice of attorneys, nor the fact that respondent had no
knowledge of or direct dealing with Boyd when considered separately or
collectively can serve to absolve his licensee from responsibility for
Homeowners' violation.  Clearly any other view herein would frustrate the
statutory scheme.

   The views that we have expressed and the result we have reached render it
unnecessary to discuss appellant's contentions regarding the sufficiency of
referee's findings to support the Commissioner's decision and whether the trial
court in setting aside the Commissioner's findings imposed upon the Commissioner
an incorrect standard of proof, i.e., "convincing proof to a reasonable
certainty."

   The judgment is reversed.  Upon remand the trial court will review the
propriety of the Commissioner's sanction upon respondent's real estate broker's
license. We, of course, express no opinion as to this issue.  Indeed it would be
presumptious on our part to even hold an opinion.  The learned trial court
herein fully understands that our respective roles are well delineated.  (See
Norman v. Department of Real Estate, supra, 93 Cal.App.3d 768, 777.)


                              49 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          R. J. HIPWELL et al., Appellants, v. PIONEER INVESTMENT AND
                   TRUST COMPANY (a Corporation), Respondent

                                 L. A. No. 1684

                          Supreme Court of California

                 150 Cal. 723; 89 P. 1085; 1907 Cal. LEXIS 577


                                 March 28, 1907

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  N. P. Conrey, Judge.

COUNSEL: Hunsaker & Britt, for Appellants.

John S. Chapman, John D. Pope, and T. C. Thornton, for Respondent.

JUDGES: In Bank.  Beatty, C. J.  McFarland, J., Angellotti, J., and Lorigan, J.,
concurred.  Shaw, J., and Sloss, J., dissented.

OPINION BY: BEATTY

OPINION

     In October, 1892, the parties to this action entered into a contract in
writing as follows: --

   "This agreement made and entered into this 16th day of October, 1902, by and
between the Pioneer Investment and Trust Company, a corporation, party of the
first part, and R. J. Hipwell and T. R. Grandstaff, parties of the second part,
witnesseth:

   "That, whereas said party of the first part is desirous of establishing in
connection with its stock and bond brokerage, corporate agency and promotion
business, a real estate department, for the purpose of carrying on and
conducting, in the city of Los Angeles and elsewhere, a general real estate,
rental, collection and insurance business; and,

   "Whereas, the parties of the second part are desirous of taking charge of and
managing and conducting said real estate department for and on behalf of and in
conjunction with the party of the first part;

   "Now, therefore, the party of the first part agrees to furnish and equip a
suitable room, in connection with its general offices in said city of Los
Angeles for the use of said parties of the second part in conducting said real
estate business, and it is also agreed that said party of the first part pay all
reasonable expenses of maintaining the same, such as rent, telephone, stationery
and advertising and make all other outlays necessary or incident to the proper
conduct of said real estate business in a businesslike manner.

    "The party of the first part further agrees that it will pay and allow said
parties of the second part, jointly, as their compensation, and in full for
their services for conducting and managing such real estate brokerage business,
one half of all commissions, fees, charges or gross profits, of all and every
character accruing from sales made or other business pertaining or incident to
said real estate department, negotiated by said parties of the second part or
either of them, through or in connection with conducting and handling said
general real estate agency business.

   "The parties of the second part agree that they will faithfully devote their
whole time during reasonable business hours, and will exert their best endeavors
toward conducting the affairs of said real estate department in a businesslike
manner and for the best mutual interests of all parties hereto, and they further
agree that they will accept, in full payment for their said services, the said
one half of the gross receipts of all said business negotiated, handled and
conducted by them as hereinbefore expressed.

   "It is further agreed that the business of said real estate department shall
consist in buying, selling, owning, handling or otherwise dealing in real estate
or real property or interests therein, as a real estate agent or broker; acting
as a general insurance agent in negotiating and placing fire insurance on all
and every character of property either as broker for insurance companies or
representative of other agents for such companies; acting as agent for owners of
real property in renting or leasing same and collecting and accounting for the
rentals or other profits thereof;  and said business of said department shall in
no wise be construed to include the stock, bond, brokerage or other business of
said party of the first part and the proportion of profit accruing to the
parties of the second part shall bear no relation thereto.

   "It is further agreed that all the business of said real estate department
shall be conducted in, by and under the name of the party of the first part as a
corporation, and that the parties of the second part shall act in all things
pertaining to conducting said real estate department, by, through and with the
general direction of the officers of the party of the first part.

   "It is further agreed that all profits accruing from such business, so
handled or negotiated by the parties of the second  part, and all record of
business pertaining thereto shall be reported as soon as practicable to the
secretary or other authorized officer of said party of the first part, and the
record thereof kept, and all moneys or property incident thereto handled, in
pursuance of the by-laws and authorized orders of the board of directors of said
party of the first part.

   "It is further agreed that the profits from which said parties of the second
part shall receive their share or division, as aforesaid, shall include profits
arising from the transaction  of the business of said department, whether the
same be brought in or negotiated by said parties of the second part or by any of
the officers of the party of the first part.

   "The life of this contract shall be one year from date subject to revocation
or amendment by said parties hereto.

   "In witness whereof," etc.

   Pursuant to said contract a "real estate department" of defendant's business
was established and put in charge of the plaintiffs, but it does not appear that
they transacted any business except that out of which this litigation has
arisen.  Very soon after the date of the contract they negotiated for the
purchase by defendant of a tract of land in the city of Los Angeles, which was
surveyed, subdivided into lots, and mapped as the Hollenbeck Heights tract. The
plaintiff Hipwell took actual charge on the ground of the work of surveying,
grading of streets, and sidewalking said tract, and had personal supervision and
charge of the grading outfit and of the working force during those necessary
preliminaries to the marketing of the lots.  When the lots were put upon the
market, defendant sought and obtained from plaintiffs permission for the
employment of outside brokers, and the allowance of commissions to them on such
sales as they should make.  All but eleven of the lots were sold for about $
12,267.  They had cost, including purchase price of the tract and expense of
subdividing, grading, etc., about $ 8,639, so that the profits of the
speculation amounted to $ 3,628.

   Plaintiffs asserted a claim under the contract to one half of these profits.
Defendant denied their claim to a share of the profits of the speculation,
contending that under the contract they were entitled to no more than one half
of the  commissions on the sales that had been made.  As a result of this
difference, defendant, on the 1st of February, 1903, terminated the contract,
and plaintiffs commenced the present suit for an accounting of the profits of
the transaction here detailed, and for a recovery of the one half, which they
contend they are entitled to under the terms of the agreement as above set
forth.  Defendant answered, defending the action upon its construction of the
contract, and the superior court, upon findings of fact which are substantially
embodied in the foregoing statement, sustained the defense, giving judgment to
the plaintiffs for only a small balance found due for commissions, without
costs.  The appeal is from the judgment alone, and presents the single question
of the true construction of the written agreement.

   Looking alone to the terms of the writing, its meaning cannot be said to be
entirely clear, but the weight of the argument, I think, is very decidedly in
favor of the construction placed upon it by the superior court.  The "general
real estate, rental, collection and insurance business," to be added as a
department to the established business of the defendant, does not, ex vi termini
, imply, and certainly does not express, anything more than the usual brokerage
business conducted by real estate and insurance agents, and we find in a
subsequent clause that the business is expressly designated as "such real estate
brokerage business" in immediate connection with the stipulation fixing the
compensation of the plaintiffs for their services, which is to be "one half of
all commissions, fees, charges, or" (not and) "gross profits of all and every
character arising from the sales,"  etc.  Here, it will be seen, commissions,
fees, and charges, according to the grammatical construction of the sentence,
are made the equivalent of gross profits, and those words have no application to
the selling price of lands, or to the difference between the purchase price and
the selling price.

   But counsel for appellants strongly insist that in another and subsequent
clause of the agreement the parties have given, as they had a right to do, a
definition of the purpose and scope of their contract, which, so far as it is
unambiguous, the court is bound to accept.  The legal proposition is conceded,
but it is denied by respondent that the definition in question is unambiguous or
at all in conflict with what appears  in the previous clause.  The language of
the clause here referred to is: "It is further agreed that the business of said
real estate department shall consist in buying, selling, owning, handling, or
otherwise dealing in real estate, or real property, or interests therein, as a
real estate agent or broker," etc.  I have italicized those parts of this clause
to which the respective parties attach peculiar importance.  Respondent
contending that the words "as real estate agent or broker" qualify everything
that goes before, while the argument on the other side is that it would be
absurd to connect them with the word "owning," for the reason that there can be
no such thing as owning property in the capacity of broker. It cannot be denied
that grammatically the last words of the clause do qualify all that precedes
them, and it is equally undeniable that to allow them that effect as to the word
"owning," is to produce a legal absurdity.  The result, however, is simply to
add an ambiguity to what is otherwise clear, and this requires the rejection of
the ambiguity.  But even if the word "owning" should be taken by itself,
detached from its context, it is clear that all the other words, "buying,
selling," etc., are qualified by the words "as a real estate agent and broker,"
and this renders the word "owning" entirely meaningless, for the mere owning of
property is not a business or any part of a business.  Especially it is not a
business involving fees, charges, commissions, or profits, gross or net.
Nothing is to be gained, I think, by further attempts at mere verbal analysis of
this clause of the  agreement.  There is, in my opinion, a more conclusive
argument against the construction contended for by appellants in the fact that
the agreement is perfectly silent as to the manner in which funds are to be
provided for the purchase of property by the department.  If, as contended, it
was the understanding that, in addition to its brokerage and agency business,
the department was to engage in the purchase and sale of real property on its
own account, it seems incredible that parties stipulating so carefully, and with
such redundancy of words regarding other matters, and so explicitly enumerating
the various items of office expenses to be borne by defendant, should have
omitted to make any provision for raising or advancing the funds necessary to
effect the contemplated purchases.  Upon this point I have  not failed to
consider the argument of counsel that the advance of the necessary funds for
this purpose by the defendant is stipulated in the general words of the third
clause of the contract: "and make all other outlays necessary or incident to the
proper conduct of the said real estate business in a businesslike manner." I
think, however, that these words, taken in the connection in which they occur,
and with the qualification which they contain, cannot be held to refer to
anything except the expenses of conducting the business of the office.  They are
to be construed according to the maxim Noscitur a sociis, and cannot be extended
so as to comprehend an obligation on the part of defendant to provide all the
purchase money for contemplated purchases of property to be improved and sold on
speculation.

   Another argument in favor of appellants' contention is based upon the
frequent occurrence of the word "profits" in the agreement, the argument being
that it is a word fitly used in reference to the excess of the selling price of
land or other commodity over cost, but is not properly descriptive of the
earnings of a broker in the form of commissions, fees, etc.

   It seems a sufficient answer to this argument to say that in a contract like
this, the fees and commissions of the brokers, being the profits of the
business, are properly so designated.

   It is further contended, and must be conceded, that in construing a contract,
the situation of the parties -- the surrounding circumstances -- must be
considered, and it is claimed that the court cannot put itself in the position
of these parties without taking judicial notice that by the prevailing custom a
general real estate business, especially in Los Angeles for several years prior
to October, 1902, has comprehended not only agency or brokerage in the purchase
and sale of lands, but purchase and sale on account of the broker or firm of
brokers. Without deciding the legal proposition involved in this argument, it
may be conceded for the purposes of this decision that the parties to this
agreement were well informed of the custom said to have been prevalent among
real estate brokers in Los Angeles of combining with their brokerage business
ventures on their own account. But on this supposition it seems all the more
strange that if they expected to conform to the custom they should have omitted
all provision  for the contribution of the purchase money necessary in such
ventures. If they knew that they could combine speculation with agency, they
knew equally well that they could confine themselves to agency, and, from the
terms of their agreement, it would seem that they did so.

   The contention of appellants that it is altogether unreasonable to suppose
that they would have entered into this agreement to give their whole time to the
business of the department for one half of the commissions when they could have
gone into business by themselves and retained the whole of the commissions,
rests upon the assumption that they could foresee the failure of the projected
brokerage business which they had in contemplation.  No doubt they expected
success where they encountered only failure.  Perhaps they were without the
necessary means to provide an office and pay the expenses involved in what
appears to have been an experiment to last for a year -- the business to be
continued or abandoned according to the results.  If they had made the
experiment upon their own resources, their small gains might have netted a
considerable loss.  Conducted as it was, in connection with the defendant, the
only business the department ever did (so far as appears) was the negotiation of
the purchase and sale of this Hollenbeck Heights tract -- property purchased and
improved by the defendant with its own funds and at its own risk.  It does not
seem to be a valid ground of complaint on the part of the plaintiffs that the
defendant gave them the only opportunity they had to make any earnings at all
during the fourteen weeks the business continued.  The only remaining argument
in support of the appeal which seems of sufficient importance to demand
particular consideration is based upon the merely probative facts found by the
court that the plaintiff Hipwell personally superintended the subdivision of the
tract and the grading and sidewalking of the streets, and that the defendant
sought and obtained the consent of the plaintiffs to the employment of outside
brokers to negotiate sales.  This it is contended shows the practical
construction of the contract by the parties, and that they understood that the
profits of the speculation were to be shared equally between them.  But the
court does not so find, and its conclusion as to the proper construction of the
agreement cannot be set aside on the strength of these  findings, unless they
are absolutely and fatally inconsistent with that conclusion.  No such
inconsistency is apparent.  Assuming the  contract to have been confined to a
brokerage business, there is nothing inconsistent in the fact that the
defendant, on the suggestion of plaintiffs, should have bought the Hollenbeck
tract and prepared it for sale at its own expense and risk.  Nothing in the
contract excluded it from engaging in such a venture, and nothing in the
contract required it to share the gains of the speculation, any more than it
requires the plaintiffs to bear a share of the loss.  That Hipwell should have
superintended the subdivision of the tract, the grading, etc., is not
surprising, if his department was to have commissions on the sale of the lots,
especially considering that the department had nothing to do until the
subdivision, grading, etc., was complete, and these lots in a condition to be
put upon the market.  And if he did superintend the preparation of the lots for
sale, upon an understanding, tacit or otherwise, that the department was to
negotiate the sales, it was natural that defendant should ask the consent of
plaintiffs to the employment of outside brokers, and the payment to them of a
portion of the commissions.  In view of these considerations, it cannot be held
that there is any fatal inconsistency between these probative facts and the
conclusion of the superior court that the contract of the parties did not cover
the profit of the Hollenbeck tract venture.

   The judgment of the superior court is affirmed.


                              50 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          RALPH W. CHAPMAN, Respondent, v. DIVISION OF REAL ESTATE OF
                   THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA et al., Appellants

                                 Civ. No. 5487

            Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District

            153 Cal. App. 2d 421; 314 P.2d 773; 1957 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      1510


                                August 22, 1957

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Respondent's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court
was Denied October 15, 1957.  Shenk, J., Carter, J., and Schauer, J., were of
the Opinion that the Petition Should be Granted.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of San Diego
County.  L. N. Turrentine, Judge.

   Action for declaratory relief and to enjoin certain proceedings before the
Division of Real Estate.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Subdivisions--Application of Statutes Governing.  --Application of the
subdivision laws (Bus. & Prof. Code, § 11000 et seq.) is not limited to
subdivisions created subsequent to the effective date of the Real Estate Law
adopted in 1933, nor to the original subdivider or owner.

(2) Id.--Powers of Commissioner.  --The Real Estate Commissioner had
jurisdiction to proceed with an administrative hearing as authorized by Bus. &
Prof. Code, § 11000 et seq., with regard to proposed sale of subdivided lands,
where it appeared that he had reasonable cause to believe that lack of water
supply and sewage and drainage facilities made the lands unsuitable for proposed
residential purposes, that there were no practical means of ingress or egress,
that the cost of development of such means would far exceed the value of the
lots thereby rendered accessible, and that certain roads, constituting a
material alteration, had been constructed without the required approval after
recordation of the subdivision map.

(3) Id.--Prerequisites to Judicial Relief.  --As a prerequisite to judicial
relief with respect to a controversy concerning plaintiff's rights to sell
subdivided lands coming within Bus. & Prof. Code, § 11000 et seq., plaintiff
must first exhaust his administrative remedies thereunder.

COUNSEL: Edmund G. Brown, Attorney General, and Lee B. Stanton, Deputy Attorney
General, for Appellants.

Ben W. Hamrick, Stickney & Stickney and Edward Strop for Respondent.

JUDGES: Mussell, J.  Barnard, P. J., concurred.

OPINION BY: MUSSELL

OPINION

     This is an action for declaratory relief and to obtain an injunction
prohibiting the Division of Real Estate of the State of California and D. D.
Watson (F. W. Griesinger, substituted), Real Estate Commissioner, from taking
any further action in proceedings now pending before the Division of Real Estate
involving the sale by petitioner and his associates of approximately 2,000 lots
in an undeveloped residential subdivision, originally known as Tract Number
1317, East San Diego Villa Heights in San Diego County.

   The trial court rendered judgment declaring that the Subdivision Law,
Business and Professions Code, sections 11000 to 11021, applies only to
subdivisions created subsequent to the effective date of the  Real Estate Law
adopted in 1933; that insofar as section 2796 of the rules and regulations of
the Real Estate Commissioner, title 10, chapter VI, article 12 of the California
Administrative Code, purports to give the Real Estate Commissioner jurisdiction
over proposed sales of lots  in subdivisions created prior to August 11, 1933,
by the owner of said lots who is neither the original owner, original developer,
original subdivider or agent for any thereof, said section is declared to be
unconstitutional and not binding upon the plaintiff in this action; that the
appellants have no jurisdiction over the proposed sale of lots in the tract
involved.  Appellants were enjoined and prohibited from taking any further
proceedings or making any further orders affecting the property involved.
Appellants Division of Real Estate and the commissioner appeal from this
judgment.

   The facts as stated in the partial agreed statement of facts are
substantially as follows:

   Plaintiff, Sidney B. Chapman, Arthur E. Chapman and C. Paul Sisson are the
partners of a partnership known as Dictionary Hill Avocado Groves, and as such
are the beneficial owners of certain lots in East San Diego Villa Heights, a
subdivision in the county of San Diego, State of California, legal title to
which is now held of record in trust by Security Title Insurance Company, as
trustee.  That Ben F. Moore and Ed Fackler, Jr., are real estate brokers duly
licensed as such under the laws of California and are presently engaged in a
program of selling lots in said tract on behalf of said trustee and the
beneficial owners.

   That plaintiff and each of the other parties named in the preceding
paragraphs have been served with copies of orders to show cause, statements of
issues and a notice of hearing on said orders to show cause and statements of
issues, notifying plaintiff and each of said parties that a hearing would be had
by D. D. Watson, Real Estate Commissioner, before the Division of Real Estate of
the State of California at the District Court of Appeals Courtroom, 620 Ash
Street on the 21st day of May, 1956, at 2 o'clock p. m. for the purpose of
ordering the prohibition of further sales of lots in said subdivision upon the
ground that such sales are in violation of the Subdivision Law (Bus. & Prof.
Code, §§ 11019 and 11020).  That pursuant to said orders to show cause and
notice of hearing, plaintiff has filed with said Division of Real Estate his
notices of defense and requesting a hearing of said proceeding.  That plaintiff
is a party beneficially interested in this proceeding and the names of all other
parties interested or who will be affected by this petition and complaint are:
Plaintiff, Respondent herein, and Sidney B. Chapman, Arthur E. Chapman, C. Paul
Sisson, Security Title Insurance Company, Ben F. Moore and Ed Fackler, Jr.,
respondents  named in the proceeding before the Division of Real Estate.

   That the real property involved in this action constitutes approximately 340
acres of unimproved land known as "East San Diego Villa Heights." Said land was
originally owned and subdivided by Title Insurance and Trust Company, a
California Corporation.  On February 21, 1911, a subdivision map of said
property, being Map Number 1317, containing all of said land and showing 2,568
lots, was filed in the office of the county recorder of San Diego County, all in
accordance and in compliance with the laws then existing and in effect.  This
subdivision map was prepared without reference to the topography of the land and
the streets and roads on said tract were laid out in a rectangular grid type of
map without regard to the mountainous terrain and ravines in the area.

   That the original owner and subdivider, Title Insurance and Trust Company,
conveyed various lots in said subdivision to various individuals and had been
divested of title to all remaining lots in said subdivision prior to January 4,
1936, by a grant deed of 2,416 lots to Interstate Realty Improvement Company and
various deeds  from tax collectors.  The Interstate Realty Improvement Company
conveyed various lots in said subdivision to various individuals and was
divested of its remaining title to all of the lots acquired from Title Insurance
and Trust Company by quitclaim deed to M. Kelly and wife.  Kelly and his wife
then conveyed their interest in all lots acquired from Interstate Realty
Improvement Company to Capital Incomes Corporation.  That Dictionary Hill
Avocado Groves, a partnership, first acquired a record interest in 323 lots in
said subdivision on March 14, 1952, by a quitclaim deed dated March 14, 1952,
and recorded in Book 4404, page 393 of the official records of San Diego County.
Since March 14, 1952, said partnership has acquired title to numerous lots in
said subdivision by various conveyances of record and now holds title to some
2,000 of the 2,568 lots in said subdivision.  That no other subdivision map for
this tract has been filed since the filing of Map Number 1317 on February 21,
1911; that no proceedings have been instituted with respect to this subdivision
pursuant to the Subdivision Land Exclusion Law (Bus. & Prof. Code, §§ 11700-
11709).

   That the present owner, Dictionary Hill Avocado Groves, a partnership, who is
neither the original owner, subdivider, developer or agent thereof, now proposes
to sell a majority of the lots which it owns to various purchasers, which sales
if allowed will far exceed five in number.  Prior to the filing of this action
the present owner of said lots, acting by its respective agents, attempted to
comply with the subdivision law of this state by making application to the
Division of Real Estate for a subdivision report and for authority to sell lots
owned by it.  That Dictionary Hill Avocado Groves, pursuant to Business and
Professions Code, sections 11000 to 11021, and the rules and regulations of the
Real Estate Commissioner contained in title 10, chapter VI, article 12 of the
California Administrative Code, filed with the respondents a questionnaire and
paid the prescribed fee therefor for the purpose of securing the Real Estate
Commissioner's public report and authority to sell from 2,000 lots owned by it
in the tract involved.  That after some investigation and conference respondents
disclaimed ownership of any lots in certain blocks of said tract, which lots are
marked in green on the tract map filed herein (Exhibit 1).  Other lots in said
tract which have never been owned by the partnership are also shown in green on
said map.

   That the Real Estate Commissioner issued a partial subdivision public report
authorizing the sale of some 350 lots in the subdivision tract and pursuant
therewith the partnership, acting by and through its agents, has sold some of
the lots covered by said partial report.  That on November 28, 1955, the
partnership asked for a further partial report on some additional 550 lots in
said tract which were not included in the previous partial report and renewed
its original request for a subdivision report on all lots which it owned in said
tract. After the receipt of these requests the respondents made a further
examination into the matter and made certain determinations set forth in the
orders to show cause and statements of issues referred to in paragraphs two and
four of plaintiff's amended complaint for declaratory relief and injunction and
respondents commenced their administrative proceeding Number H-13382 L.A. by
filing and serving said orders to show cause and statements of issues mentioned
in said paragraphs of plaintiff's amended complaint.

   That prior to the commencement of this action and in order to facilitate the
sales of lots which would otherwise be inaccessible, the plaintiff and the
present owners have constructed contour roads over a portion of the subdivision,
which roads cut across and traverse certain of the lots in said tract. That the
Board of Supervisors of San Diego County vacated and abandoned portions of
various alleys in said  subdivision and certain of the dedicated streets therein
in the northwest part of said subdivision tract.

       That there exists a controversy between the plaintiff and the respondents
as to whether the Business and Professions Code, sections 11000 to 11021, and
the rules and regulations of the Real Estate Commissioner contained in title 10,
chapter VI, article 12 of the California Administrative Code apply to the
proposed sales of lots in the subdivision by the plaintiff and the present
owners, and as to whether the respondents, Division of Real Estate and the Real
Estate Commissioner, have jurisdiction to proceed with the hearing on the orders
to show cause and the statements of issues filed by the Commissioner of Real
Estate in its proceeding Number H-13382 L.A., and further as to whether the
plaintiff must exhaust the administrative remedies as provided by statute before
applying to this court for injunctive and declaratory relief. That if the
respondents are not restrained and enjoined from proceeding with said
administrative hearing and if the plaintiff and present owners are not permitted
to immediately proceed with the sale of the 350 lots which they own in said
subdivision covered by the partial report they will sustain permanent and
irreparable damage.

   The trial court's findings substantially embodied the foregoing statements of
fact and further found that "there has not been any alteration of the
subdivision or of the lots therein by reason of abandonment of dedicated streets
or by reason of the contour roads constructed by the plaintiff and present
owners as heretofore mentioned, or for any other reason"; that "the plaintiff
and the present owners have neither waived their right to question nor are they
estopped from objecting to the jurisdiction of the Division of Real Estate over
sales of lots in this subdivision"; that "the plaintiff and present owners have
not exhausted the administrative remedies provided by law or by section 11019 of
the Business and Professions Code."

   The principal question involved in this special appeal is whether the Real
Estate Commissioner has jurisdiction over the sale and proposed sale of lots in
the tract involved and to proceed with the administrative hearing.

     Section 11010 of the Business and Professions Code provides that prior to
the time when subdivided lands are to be offered for sale or lease, the owner,
his agent or subdivider shall notify the commissioner in writing of his
intention to sell or lease such offering.  The notice of intention shall contain
the following information: The name and address of the owner; the name and
address of the subdivider; the legal description and area of lands; a true
statement of the condition of title to the land, particularly including all
encumbrances thereon; a true statement of the terms and conditions on which it
is intended to dispose of the land, together with copies of any contracts
intended to be used; a true statement of the provisions, if any, that have been
made for public utilities in the proposed subdivision, including water,
electricity, gas and telephone facilities; and such other information as the
owner, his agent, or subdivider may desire to present.

   Section 11011 provides that after receiving the notice of intention, the
commissioner may require such additional information concerning the project as
he deems necessary, for which purpose he may prepare a questionnaire for the
owner, his agent or subdivider to answer, and that a filing fee of $ 50 shall
accompany the answered questionnaire. Section 11012 provides that it is unlawful
for the owner, his agent or subdivider, of the project, after it is submitted to
the Real Estate Division, to materially change the setup of such offering
without first notifying the Real Estate Division in writing of such intended
change.  Section 11014 provides that the commissioner at the expense of the
owner, his agent, or subdivider, may investigate any subdivision being offered
for sale or lease in this state, and that the total cost of such examination
shall be borne by the owner, his agent or subdivider, of the project.  Section
11018 provides that when the Real Estate Division makes an examination of any
subdivision, the commissioner shall make a public report of his findings
thereon, and may publish the report.  Section 11019 provides that the
commissioner may issue an order prohibiting the sale or lease of the property if
the examination of the project shows that the sale or lease would constitute
misrepresentation to or deceit or fraud of the purchasers of lots or parcels in
the subdivision, and that before such an order of prohibition shall be issued by
the commissioner, a hearing shall be held by the Real Estate Division, and the
same procedure shall be followed as provided in article 3, chapter 2, part 1,
division 4 of said code.  The section further provides that an order of the
commissioner is subject to judicial review in accordance with the law.  Section
11535 of said code defines a subdivision as follows: "(a) 'Subdivision' refers
to any real property, improved or unimproved, or portion thereof,  shown on the
last preceding tax roll as a unit or as contiguous units, which is divided for
the purpose of sale, whether immediate or future, by any subdivider into five or
more parcels within any one year period." And section 11000 of said code reads:
"'Subdivided lands' and 'subdivision' refer to improved or unimproved land or
lands divided or proposed to be divided for the purpose of sale or lease,
whether immediate or future, into five or more lots or parcels. . . ." The
provisions of the foregoing sections are substantially the same as those
formerly contained in Deering's General Laws, 1937, Act 112, section 20a et seq.

   In In re Sidebotham, 12 Cal.2d 434 [85 P.2d 453, 122 A.L.R. 496], the Supreme
Court held that the object of said law, prevention of fraud and sharp practices
in a type of real estate transactions peculiarly open to such abuses, is
obviously legitimate; and the method, involving investigation and disclosure of
certain essential facts, and a protection for an innocent purchaser against loss
of his land by foreclosure of an underlying mortgage, is perfectly reasonable;
that a safeguard against arbitrary action is provided in such act in the
requirement of a public report of the commissioner's investigation and a public
hearing on any contemplated prohibitory order, and that the decisions sustaining
regulatory legislation to prevent fraud are numerous and fully support the law
herein attacked.

   Rule 2796, published as section 2796, title 10, California Administrative
Code, provides as follows:

   "Procedure re Subdivisions Prior to August 11, 1933.  The owner, subdivider
or agent of a subdivision, a map of which was filed of record or which was
originally offered for sale prior to August 11, 1933, shall file a questionnaire
and pay the prescribed fee and secure the Commissioner's public report thereon
prior to offering for sale any parcels in said subdivision subsequent to that
date."

   Plaintiff Chapman contends, and the trial court held, that under the agreed
facts the subdivision law is applicable only to the original subdivider or owner
of subdivided lands and that Chapman,  not being the original owner or
subdivider, was exempt from disclosure and stop-order procedure provided by the
law.  We do not agree with this contention and holding.

    Section 11010 of the Business and Professions Code provides for the filing
of a notice of intention to sell or lease prior to the time when "subdivided"
lands are offered for  sale or lease. The object of the statute is to prevent
fraud in the sale or leasing of property and may apply to lands which have been
previously subdivided. Section 11014 of said code provides that the commission
may investigate "any subdivision being offered for sale in this State" and under
section 11019 an order prohibiting the "sale and lease" of the property may be
issued after a hearing had thereon.  There is nothing in these sections
restricting the commissioner's investigation or stop-order procedure to
situations to which the offering is made by the original subdivider.

   In Cowell v. Clark, 37 Cal.App.2d 255 [99 P.2d 594] and People v. Gallinger,
37 Cal.App.2d 261 [99 P.2d 597], appellants were held to be subdividers and
subject to the provisions of the Real Estate Act where  they divided the subject
matter of the leases and proposed to make several assignments thereof.
Apparently rule 2796 of the Rules and Regulations of the Real Estate Commission,
supra, has been in effect for many years and has been the administrative
agency's conclusion as to the applicability of the law.  As is said in Universal
Eng. Co. v. State Board of Equalization, 118 Cal.App.2d 36, 43 [256 P.2d 1059]:

   "In resolving a question as to the import of a statute, a court attaches
probative weight to the administrative agency's conclusion as to the meaning of
the law, and a court will not ordinarily adopt another construction unless the
determination of the agency or board is shown to have been clearly erroneous or
unauthorized.  10 California Jurisprudence 10-Year Supplement, Taxation, § 427,
p. 533; Coca-Cola Co. v. State Board of Equalization, supra."

   And in City of Los Angeles v. Rancho Homes, Inc., 40 Cal.2d 764, 770-771 [256
P.2d 305], it is said:

   "And 'although not necessarily controlling, as where made without the
authority of or repugnant to the provisions of a statute, the contemporaneous
administrative construction of the enactment by those charged with its
enforcement and interpretation is entitled to great weight, and courts generally
will not depart from such construction unless it is clearly erroneous or
unauthorized.' ( Coca-Cola Co. v. State Board of Equalization, 25 Cal.2d 918,
921 [156 P.2d 1]; Holloway v. Purcell, 35 Cal.2d 220, 226 [217 P.2d 665].)"

   The trial court found and the record shows that prior to the commencement of
this action and in order to facilitate the sales of lots which would otherwise
be inaccessible, the plaintiff and the present owners have constructed contour
roads  over a portion of the subdivision, which roads cut across and traverse
certain of the lots in said tract. This finding is inconsistent with and
contrary to the finding that there was no alteration of the subdivision by
reason of the abandonment of streets or the construction of the contour roads,
which finding is unsupported by the evidence.

    Section 11012 of the Business and Professions Code provides that it is
unlawful for the owners or subdividers to materially change the setup of the
offering without notifying the Real Estate Division in writing of such intended
change, and in Sidebotham, 12 Cal.2d 434, supra, it was held that this provision
of the code was a reasonable exercise of the police power.  In Murphy v. San
Gabriel Mfg. Co., 99 Cal.App.2d 365, 368 [222 P.2d 85], it was held that the
provisions of this section are mandatory.

   The court further found and the record shows that the subdivision map herein
was prepared without reference to the topography of the land involved and the
streets and roads were made out in a rectangular grid type of map without regard
to the mountainous terrain and ravines in the area; that the defendants had
reasonable cause to believe that although offered for sale in 50-foot lots for
residential purposes, the property was unsuitable for such purpose because it
was wholly lacking in water supply, sewage disposal and drainage facilities;
that the county ordinance required 60-foot lots and streets; that the roads and
streets have not been installed to the lots and there is no reasonable or
practical means of ingress or egress to and from them; that the cost of
developing the streets and roads shown on the tract map would far exceed the
value of the lots to be made accessible; that access to certain portions of the
tract is only by use of a contour road which has been rough graded and
constructed without reference to lot lines and constitutes a material alteration
to lots as reflected by the recorded map; and that said road has been
constructed without approval or recording of the maps as required by law.

   We conclude that the subdivision law (Bus. & Prof. Code, §§ 11000 to 11021)
is applicable in the instant case; that plaintiff Chapman and his associates are
subject to the requirements of said  law and that the trial court erred in
concluding that said law applies only to subdivisions made subsequent to the
effective date of said law adopted in 1933.

     The trial court found that the plaintiff and present owners of the property
involved have not exhausted the administrative  remedies provided by law or by
section 11019 of the Business and Professions Code.  However, the court
erroneously concluded that the plaintiff need not exhaust said remedies.  The
administrative proceedings against Chapman's plan to sell the lots involved
provide for notice and full opportunity for him to be heard before any final
administrative order could be made.  ( In re Sidebotham, supra, 435-436.) The
statement of issues and notice of hearing were served on Chapman and his
associates on January 3, 1956, and they at first signified their intention to
appear by filing a notice of defense on January 17, 1956.  On March 21, 1956, a
supplemental statement of issues and notice of hearing thereon was served on
Chapman and he filed a supplemental answer thereto in which it was alleged that
the lots involved have lost their identity as a subdivision within the meaning
of the subdivision law and that the action of the Real Estate Commissioner was
unconstitutional.  On May 17, 1956, before the scheduled hearing on the
supplemental statement of issues, Chapman filed his petition in court and
further administrative proceedings were halted by court order.  The
administrative hearing has not been held and no final administrative order has
been made.  Therefore, it is not known whether the commissioner will or will not
issue a stop-order, since he has not been permitted to take evidence or hear
arguments in the matter.

   In United Ins. Co. v. Maloney, 127 Cal.App.2d 155 [273 P.2d 579], it was held
that the general rule requiring exhaustion of administrative remedies before
equitable relief can be granted is well established; that there is an exception
to the rule to the effect that injunctive relief may be granted against invalid
administrative action if irreparable damage will occur if the person affected
were required to exhaust his administrative remedies; and that the exception is
not applicable where the only administrative action taken was the setting of the
matter for hearing or a hearing thereon.

   In United States v. Superior Court, 19 Cal.2d 189, 194 [120 P.2d 26], it was
held that it is now firmly established in this state that a litigant must invoke
and exhaust an administrative remedy provided by statute before he may resort to
the courts; that jurisdiction to entertain an action for judicial relief is
conditioned upon the completion of the administrative procedure; that it lies
within the power of the administrative agency to determine in the first instance
and before judicial relief may be obtained, whether a given controversy  falls
within the statutory grant of jurisdiction; and that even where the statute
sought to be applied and enforced by the administrative agency is challenged
upon constitutional grounds, completion of the administrative remedy has been
held to be a prerequisite to equitable relief.  (Citing cases.)

   In Hostetter v. Alderson, 38 Cal.2d 499, 500 [241 P.2d 230], it was held that
an action for declaratory relief is not appropriate for a review of an
administrative order.

   Under the facts in the instant case and in view of the rules announced in the
foregoing authorities, it appears that plaintiff Chapman and his associates are
bound by the rule requiring the exhaustion of administrative remedies before
being able to obtain relief in the present action.

   Since we have concluded that the judgment herein must be reversed because of
the errors discussed, it is unnecessary to pass upon other points raised by the
appellant.

   Judgment reversed.


                              51 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          DON E. WINNETT et al., Plaintiffs and Appellants, v. ANDREW
                 J. ROBERTS et al., Defendants and Respondents

                                 Civ. No. 24354

            Court of Appeal of California, Third Appellate District

            179 Cal. App. 3d 909; 225 Cal. Rptr. 82; 1986 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1447


                                 April 8, 1986

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied May 5, 1986, and
Respondents' Petition for Review by the Supreme Court was Denied June 25, 1986.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of El Dorado County, No. 42346, William E.
Byrne and Charles F. Fogerty, Judges.

COUNSEL: Kronick, Moskowitz, Tiedemann & Girard, Leonard M. Friedman, Thomas C.
Hughes, Fred Crane and Michael V. Hesse for Plaintiffs and Appellants.

Daniel G. Nauman for Defendants and Respondents.

JUDGES: Opinion by Puglia, P. J., with Evans, J., and Lytle, J., * concurring.

*   Assigned by the Chairperson of the Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: PUGLIA

OPINION

     Plaintiffs Don and Susan Winnett brought an action to enjoin the
foreclosure sale of real property under a trust deed securing a $ 7,000
promissory note given by plaintiffs to defendants Andrew and Elane Roberts.
Plaintiffs alleged the note was usurious and that no part of it had been paid.
The trial court issued a temporary restraining order halting the sale,
conditioned upon plaintiffs paying defendants the principal within five days.
Although the $ 7,000 principal was paid within five days, the court  denied a
preliminary injunction, declaring: "The note is not usurious because it was
arranged by a licensed real estate broker and is secured by real property."

   After the foreclosure sale was held, plaintiffs amended their complaint,
seeking to set aside the sale and recover damages.  Thereafter, the trial court
granted defendants' motion for summary judgment. Following entry of judgment
plaintiffs moved to set aside the trustee's sale and trustee's deed.  The trial
court denied the motion.  Plaintiffs appeal from the judgment and the order
denying their postjudgment motion.

   On appeal, plaintiffs' principal contention is that the $ 7,000 note, which
calls for interest at an annual rate of 40 percent, is usurious. Defendants
counter that the loan is exempt from the usury law. For the reasons which
follow, we conclude that  the exemption of loans made or arranged by real estate
brokers from the constitutional restrictions relating to usurious loans does not
apply where the borrower is the only real estate broker involved in the loan
transaction. We shall therefore reverse the judgment.

    (1)  Summary judgment is proper only where the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law because all documents submitted and matters
judicially noticed in the proceeding and all inferences reasonably deducible
therefrom raise no triable issues as to any material fact.  ( Code Civ. Proc., §
437c, subd. (c); D'Amico v. Board of Medical Examiners (1974) 11 Cal.3d 1, 20
[112 Cal.Rptr. 786, 520 P.2d 10].) The facts material to this appeal are
undisputed.

   In August 1981, defendants loaned plaintiffs $ 7,000.  In return, plaintiffs
executed a $ 7,000 promissory note secured by a deed of trust on real property.
The note, payable August 17, 1982, bore annual interest of 40 percent.  At the
time of the loan, plaintiff Don Winnett was a licensed real estate broker; he
borrowed the money to pay for personal expenses.  Defendant Andrew Roberts, who
lent the money to plaintiffs, was not a licensed real estate broker.

   The note was not paid when it became due.  In October 1982 defendants
initiated proceedings to foreclose on the real property securing the note.  A
notice of trustee's sale was recorded July 28, 1983.

   On August 9, 1983, plaintiffs made a written tender of the principal sum of $
7,000 plus 10 percent interest as a final settlement of the debt.  Sufficient
funds were available in plaintiffs' bank account to satisfy the tender, but
defendants rejected the offer.  Plaintiffs filed this lawsuit on August 22,
1983, the scheduled date of the foreclosure sale.

    The trustee's sale was delayed by operation of the temporary restraining
order and payment of the $ 7,000 principal.  It was held on September 12, 1983.
The trustee sold the property to defendants for $ 4,415.51

   I

    (2)  Under California Constitution, article XV, section 1 (hereafter article
XV), the maximum interest rate which may be charged on loans in writing for "use
primarily for personal, family, or household purposes" is 10 percent per annum.
Exempted from the interest rate limitation are "any loans, made or arranged by
any person licensed as a real estate broker by the State of California and
secured in whole or in part by liens on real property, . . ." (Italics added.)
1 The loan at issue  here was usurious unless the real  estate broker exemption
applies.  The real estate broker exemption was enacted as part of an initiative
measure, Proposition 2, at the November 1979 special election.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Article
XV reads in relevant part: "The rate of interest upon the loan or forbearance of
any money, goods, or things in action, or on accounts after demand, shall be 7
percent per annum but it shall be competent for the parties to any loan or
forbearance of any money, goods or things in action to contract in writing for a
rate of interest: [para. ] (1) For any loan or forbearance of any money, goods,
or things in action, if the money, goods, or things in action are for use
primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, at a rate not exceeding
10 percent per annum; provided, however, that any loan or forbearance of any
money, goods or things in action the proceeds of which are used primarily for
the purchase, construction or improvement of real property shall not be deemed
to be a use primarily for personal, family or household purposes; or . . .
[para. ] . . . No person, association, copartnership or corporation shall by
charging any fee, bonus, commission, discount or other compensation receive from
a borrower more than the interest authorized by this section upon any loan or
forbearance of any money, goods of things in action.  [para. ] However, none of
the above restrictions shall apply to any obligations of, loans made by, or
forbearances of, any building and loan association as defined in and which is
operated under that certain act known as the 'Building and Loan Association
Act,' approved May 5, 1931, as amended, or to any corporation incorporated in
the manner prescribed in and operating under that certain act entitled 'An act
defining industrial loan companies, providing for their incorporation, powers
and supervision,' approved May 18, 1917, as amended, or any corporation
incorporated in the manner prescribed in and operating under that certain act
entitled 'An act defining credit unions, providing for their incorporation,
powers, management and supervision,' approved March 31, 1927, as amended or any
duly licensed pawnbroker or personal property broker, or any loans, made or
arranged by any person licensed as a real estate broker by the State of
California and secured in whole or in part by liens on real property, or any
bank as defined in and operating under that certain act known as the 'Bank Act,'
approved March 1, 1909, as amended, or any bank created and operating under and
pursuant to any laws of this State or of the United States of America or any
nonprofit cooperative association organized under Chapter 1 (commencing with
Section 54001) of Division 20 of the Food and Agricultural Code in loaning or
advancing money in connection with any activity mentioned in said title or any
corporation, association, syndicate, joint stock company, or partnership engaged
exclusively in the business of marketing agricultural, horticultural,
viticultural, dairy, live stock, poultry and bee products on a cooperative
nonprofit basis in loaning or advancing money to the members thereof or in
connection with any such business or any corporation securing money or credit
from any federal intermediate credit bank, organized and existing pursuant to
the provisions of an act of Congress entitled 'Agricultural Credits Act of
1923,' as amended in loaning or advancing credit so secured, or any other class
of persons authorized by statute, or to any successor in interest to any loan or
forbearance exempted under this article, nor shall any such charge of any said
exempted classes of persons be considered in any action or for any purpose as
increasing or affecting or as connected with the rate of interest hereinbefore
fixed.  The Legislature may from time to time prescribe the maximum rate per
annum of, or provide for the supervision, or the filing of a schedule of, or in
any manner fix, regulate or limit, the fees, bonuses, commissions, discounts or
other compensation which all or any of the said exempted classes of persons may
charge or receive from a borrower in connection with any loan or forbearance of
any money, goods or things in action." (Italics added.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     (3)  Preliminarily, we point out that the meaning of the term "made"
appearing in the real estate broker exemption is not in issue.  In common
parlance, the person who makes the loan of money is the lender. (See, e.g., Civ.
Code, §§ 1916.8, 1916.9, subd. (c), 1917.020, subd. (e); Fin. Code, §§ 24002,
24007, 24009.) The person who receives the loan is the borrower (see, e.g., Fin.
Code, § 18004).  (4a)  By analogy to the language of article XV dealing with
"loans made by" building and loan associations, banks, credit unions, and other
exempt lenders, an exempt loan is "made" under the real estate broker exemption
when the broker acts as a principal in the transaction by lending his own money.
(See Harroch & Dana, The Real Estate Broker Exemption from the California Usury
Law (Cont.Ed.Bar 1985) Selected Articles from the Real Property Law Reporter
171, 173-174; 4 Miller & Starr, Current Law of Cal. Real Estate (1985 supp.) §
28:25, p.  438.) Statutory and decisional law is in accord.  ( Civ. Code, §
1916.1; Stats. 1983, ch. 307, § 1; Orden v. Crawshaw Mortgage & Investment Co.
(1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 141 [167 Cal.Rptr. 62]; Garcia v. Wetzel (1984) 159
Cal.App.3d 1093 [206 Cal.Rptr. 251]; In re Lara (9th Cir. 1984) 731 F.2d 1455,
1462.) Where as here the only participant in the loan transaction who is
licensed as a real estate broker is the borrower, the loan has not been "made"
by the broker within the meaning of the exemption. Defendants do not contend to
the contrary.

   In this appeal the parties debate the meaning of the term "arranged" as used
in the real estate broker exemption. Underlying the summary judgment in favor of
defendants is the trial court's conclusion, in denying the preliminary
injunction, that the $ 7,000 loan from defendants was "arranged" by the
borrower, plaintiff Don Winnett, a licensed real estate broker.

    (5a)  Courts and commentators have observed that the meaning of "arranged"
is unclear.  Standing alone and without explication, "arranged" fails to convey
precisely what activities on the part of a licensed real estate broker
constitute arrangement of a loan.  ( In re Lara, supra, 731 F.2d at pp.
1462-1463; Harroch & Dana, Selected Articles from the Real Property Law
Reporter, supra, at pp. 174-175; 4 Miller & Starr, Current Law of  Cal. Real
Estate, supra, § 28:25, p. 438.) Like many other words in common usage (see
Carman v. Alvord (1982) 31 Cal.3d 318, 326-327 [182 Cal.Rptr. 506, 644 P.2d 192]
; Mills v. County of Trinity (1980) 108 Cal.App.3d 656, 660 [166 Cal.Rptr. 674]
), "arranged" is a term of amorphous dimensions.

    In the present context, defendants submit that the identity of the loan
arranger turns on the relative involvement of the borrower and lender in the
necessary and formal steps culminating in the loan.  This mechanical approach
renders the term "arranged" almost meaningless.  In the sense urged by
defendants, every borrower participates in arranging a loan, if only by signing
a promissory note and holding out his hand to receive the money; every lender
participates in arranging a loan, if only by securing the necessary funds and
tendering the money.

    (6)  Where statutory or constitutional phrases are uncertain, a fundamental
rule of construction is that the courts look to the apparent legislative intent
to effectuate the purpose of the law.  ( Massachusetts Mutual Life Ins. Co. v.
City and County of San Francisco (1982) 129 Cal.App.3d 876, 880 [181 Cal.Rptr.
370].) (7)  As with other constitutional provisions, language in a
constitutional initiative measure should be read in context and given a liberal
and common sense interpretation which will promote rather than defeat the
objectives of the framers.  (Ibid.; Amador Valley Joint Union High Sch. Dist. v.
State Bd. of Equalization (1978) 22 Cal.3d 208, 245 [149 Cal.Rptr. 239, 583 P.2d
1281]; Mills v. County of Trinity, supra, 108 Cal.App.3d at p. 660.) (8)  Where
"'a word of common usage has more than one meaning,'" one that will best serve
the legislative purpose should be adopted, "'even though the ordinary meaning of
the word is thereby enlarged or restricted . . . .'" (Moyer v. Workmen's Comp.
Appeals Bd. (1973) 10 Cal.3d 222, 232 [110 Cal.Rptr. 144, 514 P.2d 1224].) (9)
Also, the courts should "'construe enactments to give specific content to terms
that might otherwise be unconstitutionally vague.  [Citations.]'" (Amador, at p.
245, quoting Associated Home Builders etc., Inc. v. City of Livermore (1976) 18
Cal.3d 582, 598 [135 Cal.Rptr. 41, 557 P.2d 473, 92 A.L.R.3d 1038].)

    (10)  As an aid in discerning the probable intent of uncertain language, it
is appropriate to consider the ballot summary, arguments, and analysis presented
to the electorate in connection with an initiative measure. (Amador, at pp.
245-246.) Since the adopting body is presumed to be aware of existing laws ( In
re Lance W. (1985) 37 Cal.3d 873, 890, fn.  11 [210 Cal.Rptr. 631, 694 P.2d 744]
), it is also proper to construe a term used in the measure in light of related
enactments which by prior judicial or administrative construction have already
invested the term with a special meaning.   ( County of Sacramento v. Hickman
(1967) 66 Cal.2d 841, 850-851 [59 Cal.Rptr. 609, 428 P.2d 593].)

   The ballot pamphlet analysis by the Legislative Analyst accompanying
Proposition 2 explained: "Under existing law, loans made or arranged by any
person licensed as a real estate broker by the State of California and secured
in whole or in part by liens on real property are subject to a 10 percent
interest rate ceiling.  Such loans commonly are made by mortgage brokers and
mortgage bankers.  Under this measure such loans would be exempt from the
constitutional limitations on interest rates that may be charged." (Ballot
Pamp., Special Statewide Elec. (Nov. 6, 1979) p. 10.)

    (11)  When Proposition 2 was enacted in 1979,  Business and Professions Code
sections 10130 and 10131, subdivision (d), required (as they do now) a real
estate brokerage license of anyone who for compensation or in expectation of
compensation "Solicits borrowers or lenders for or negotiates loans or collects
payments or performs services for borrowers or lenders or note owners in
connection with loans secured directly or collaterally by liens on real property
. . . ." This activity is descriptive of that of a mortgage loan broker. (See
Wyatt v. Union Mortgage Co. (1979) 24 Cal.3d 773, 782 [157 Cal.Rptr. 392, 598
P.2d 45].)

    (12)  A basic aspect of mortgage loan brokerage is that the broker act in a
representative capacity on behalf of another.  The agency relationship is a
common denominator of all other activities for which a real  estate brokerage
license is required.  (See Bus. & Prof. Code, §§ 10130, 10131.) Business and
Professions Code section 10133, subdivision (a), specifically exempts from the
definition of a real estate broker "Anyone who directly performs any of the acts
within the scope of this chapter with reference to his own property . . . ."
This statutory provision "codifies a universally accepted rule that a person
dealing with his or her own property is not acting as a broker." ( Garcia v.
Wetzel, supra, 159 Cal.App.3d at p.  1097.) As principals in a loan transaction,
both the lender and the borrower necessarily act on their own behalf and not as
agent for another.

    (13)  Before the enactment of Proposition 2, no exemption contained in
article XV even arguably applied to a special class of borrower. All exempted
classes of persons were particular kinds of lenders otherwise regulated by
statute.  As stated in the analysis by the Legislative Analyst presented to the
electorate in connection with Proposition 2: "The Constitution specifically
exempts the following lenders from the usury law: savings and loan associations,
state and national banks, industrial loan companies, credit unions, pawnbrokers,
personal property brokers and agricultural cooperatives."  (Cal. Ballot
Pamphlet, supra, at p. 10.) With the adoption of Proposition 2, real estate
brokers who "make" loans secured by real property, i.e., who lend, as well as
those who arrange such loans were added as another exempt category of lenders.
That arrangers were not intended to include borrowers is underscored by the
final sentence in the exemption paragraph of article XV, which reads: "The
Legislature may from time to time prescribe the maximum rate per annum of, or
provide for the supervision, or the filing of a schedule of, or in any manner
fix, regulate or limit, the fees . . . commissions, discounts or other
compensation which all or any of the said exempted classes of persons may charge
or receive from a borrower in connection with any loan . . . of . . . money, . .
." (Italics added.)

    (5b)  When Proposition 2 is considered in its historical context, we are
convinced that the exemption for "arranged" loans was not intended to apply to
situations such as the instant one where no third-party intermediary is involved
in the loan transaction. (See Chapman v. Farr (1982) 132 Cal.App.3d 1021, 1026
[183 Cal.Rptr. 606].)

    (14)  Subsequent developments confirm the correctness of our conclusion.
The Legislature initiated Proposition 2 as Assembly Constitutional Amendment No.
52 (Stats 1979 (Reg. Sess.) res. ch. 49).  It has since made a legislative
finding, declaring the justification for the broker exemption to have been ". .
. that real estate brokers are qualified by the state on the basis of education,
experience,  and examination, and that the licenses of real estate brokers can
be revoked or suspended if real estate brokers perform acts involving
dishonesty, fraud, or deceit with intent to substantially benefit themselves or
others, or to substantially injure others." (Stats. 1983, ch. 307, § 2.)
Correlating that justification with the instant circumstances, it is obvious
that the mere fact that a necessitous borrower is licensed as a real estate
broker would not serve to protect him from the exactions of a usurious lender,
nor would his license be subject to revocation simply because he had undertaken
an obligation to pay the lender usurious interest.  (15)  In a usurious
transaction, the borrower, not the lender, is the injured party.

    (4b)  The legislative finding to which we have referred is the uncodified
part of a statute which added section 1916.1 to the Civil Code. As originally
enacted (Stats. 1983, ch. 307, § 1) section 1916.1 clarified that a loan "made"
within the meaning of article XV "includes any loan made by a person licensed as
a real estate broker as a principal or as an agent for others, and whether or
not the person is acting within the course and scope of such license." (5c)  In
1985 section 1916.1 was amended to clarify the circumstances under which a loan
is "arranged" within the meaning of article XV.  The amendment provides: "For
purposes of this section, a loan  or forbearance is  arranged by a person
licensed as a real estate broker when the broker (1) acts for compensation or in
expectation of compensation for soliciting, negotiating, or arranging the loan
for another, (2) acts for compensation or in expectation of compensation for
selling, buying, leasing, exchanging, or negotiating the sale, purchase, lease,
or exchange of real property or a business for another and (A) arranges a loan
to pay all or any portion of the purchase price of, or of an improvement to,
that property or business or (B) arranges a forbearance, extension, or
refinancing of any loan in connection with that sale, purchase, lease, exchange
of, or an improvement to, real property or a business, or (3) arranges or
negotiates for another a forbearance, extension, or refinancing of any loan
secured by real property in connection with a past transaction in which the
broker had acted for compensation or in expectation of compensation for selling,
buying, leasing, exchanging,  or negotiating the sale, purchase, lease, or
exchange of real property or a business." (Stats. 1985, ch. 489, § 1; see In re
Lara, supra, 731 F.2d at p.  1463.)

    (16)  The legislative interpretation of article XV contained in Civil Code
section 1916.1 is not unreasonable.  Accordingly it is entitled to, and we
indulge, a strong presumption in its favor.  ( Methodist Hosp. of Sacramento v.
Saylor (1971) 5 Cal.3d 685, 692-694 [97 Cal.Rptr. 1, 488 P.2d 161]; People v.
Savala (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 41, 59 [171 Cal.Rptr. 882].)

    (5d)  In sum, where the transaction is between borrower and lender, each
acting on his own behalf, and there is no third party licensed real estate
broker acting for compensation as intermediary, the loan is not "arranged" by a
broker within the meaning of the usury law. It follows that the loan at issue
here was not exempt from the proscription of article XV and was therefore
usurious.

   II

    (17)  When a loan is usurious, the creditor is entitled to repayment of the
principal sum only.  He is entitled to no interest whatsoever.  ( Williams v.
Reed (1957) 48 Cal.2d 57, 68 [307 P.2d 353]; Stephans v. Herman (1964) 225
Cal.App.2d 671, 673 [37 Cal.Rptr. 746].) $ (18a)  Prior to the hearing on the
preliminary injunction application, plaintiffs paid defendants the $ 7,000
principal in full.  Even before commencing this action, plaintiffs had made and
defendants had rejected a written tender offering to pay defendants the $ 7,000
principal plus interest at 10 percent (about $ 1,400) although they owed
defendants no interest on the usurious loan.  When rejected, such a tender is
the equivalent to actual production and tender of the money.  ( Code Civ. Proc.,
§ 2074.)

     (19a)  Any time before foreclosure, a tender of the full amount properly
due on a loan secured by a trust deed extinguishes the lien on the property (
Civ. Code, §§ 2903- 2905), calling a halt to the foreclosure proceedings.  (
Kleckner v. Bank of America (1950) 97 Cal.App.2d 30, 33 [217 P.2d 28]; Lichty v.
Whitney (1974) 80 Cal.App.2d 696, 701 [182 P.2d 582]; Bisno v. Sax (1959) 175
Cal.App.2d 714, 724 [346 P.2d 814]; see also Cal. Mortgage and Deed of Trust
Practice (Cont.Ed.Bar 1979) § 6.22, pp.  277-278.) (18b)  Given that plaintiffs
did in fact tender an amount equal to (indeed, in excess of) their legal
obligation to defendants (see Karlsen  v. American Sav. & Loan Assn. (1971) 15
Cal.App.3d 112, 118 [92 Cal.Rptr. 851]), they were released from all subsequent
liability for interests, costs, and attorney fees incurred by defendants in
connection with the foreclosure proceedings.  (See Lichty, at p. 701.) As a deed
of trust exists only as long as there is a valid trust purpose (see Civ.  Code,
§§ 871, 2279), plaintiffs' payment in full of the underlying debt also
discharged both the obligation and the security.  (See Cal. Mortgage and Deed of
Trust Practice, supra, § 2.6, p. 22.) (19b)  When an obligation secured by a
deed of trust has been satisfied, the trustor-obligor is entitled to a full
reconveyance of the property.  ( Civ. Code, § 2941, subd. (b);  Huckell v.
Matranga (1979) 99 Cal.App.3d 471, 476 [160 Cal.Rptr. 177].)

    (18c)  It follows that no valid lien existed against the property at the
time of the foreclosure sale and the trial court erred in granting summary
judgment to defendants after the sale and denying plaintiffs' motion to set
aside the sale and trustee's deed.  (20)  On remand, plaintiffs are not limited
to relief in damages for the wrongful sale (see Civ. Code, § 2941, subd. (d))
but are entitled to redeem the property by having the foreclosure sale set aside
and the property reconveyed to them.  (See generally Cal. Mortgage and Deed of
Trust Practice, supra, §§ 6.58-6.61, pp. 310-314.) 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   The
remedies provided by the usury law (see Deering's Uncodified Measures 1919-1, §§
2, 3) are not exclusive of other remedies available to the borrower at common
law.  ( Stock v. Meek (1950) 35 Cal.2d 809, 816-817 [221 P.2d 15].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Given our resolution of the usury issue, we do not reach plaintiffs'
contention that the foreclosure sale was fatally irregular.

   III

    (21)  The $ 7,000 promissory note contained a clause: "If action be
instituted on this note, I promise to pay such sum as the Court may fix as
attorneys' fees." Both parties claim entitlement to attorney fees under this
contractual provision.

    Since defendants are not the prevailing parties, they are not entitled to an
award of attorney fees.  ( Civ. Code, § 1717.) Civil Code section 1717 grants a
reciprocal right to attorney fees when a contract provides the right to one
party but not the other.  ( International Industries, Inc. v. Olen (1978) 21
Cal.3d 218, 223 [145 Cal.Rptr. 691, 577 P.2d 1031].) An attorney fee provision
in a promissory note is broad enough to encompass a lawsuit attacking the note
as usurious. ( Thunderbird Investment Corp. v. Rothschild (1971) 19 Cal.App.3d
820, 830 [97 Cal.Rptr. 112]; see also Berge v. International Harvester Co.
(1983) 142 Cal.App.3d 152, 164 [190 Cal.Rptr. 815].) On remand, plaintiffs are
entitled to an award of reasonable attorney fees for services rendered on appeal
and at trial, said fees to be fixed by the trial court.  ( Christensen v. Dewor
Developments (1983) 33 Cal.3d 778, 786 [191 Cal.Rptr. 8, 661 P.2d 1088].)

   The judgment is reversed and the cause remanded to the trial court with
directions to declare the $ 7,000 note usurious. The court is also directed to
order cancellation of the trustee's sale, the trustee's deed and the deed of
trust, to quiet plaintiffs' title as against defendants, and to take such other
action as the justice of the case requires.


                              52 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              HELEN R. GRAY, Appellant, v. WALTER W. HORNE et al.,
                                  Respondents

                                 Civ. No. 12671

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SECOND APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION ONE

          48 Cal. App. 2d 372; 119 P.2d 779; 1941 Cal. App. LEXIS 809


                           December 9, 1941, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:      APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County. John Beardsley, Judge. Action by assignee for the value of services
rendered in refinancing and refunding claims and indebtedness, and in securing
reduction, compromise, etc., of claims, judgments and indebtedness, secured by
liens.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Brokers--Regulation--California Real Estate Act--Purpose.  --The primary
purpose of the California Real Estate Act (Deering's Gen. Laws, 1937, Act 112)
is to require real estate brokers and salesmen to be honest, truthful and of
good reputation.

(2) Id.--Regulation--Licenses--Performance of Services in Refinancing Liens.
--Services performed by one person for another in refinancing and refunding
claims, judgments and items of indebtedness which are liens against the property
of the other person are not those which, under California Real Estate Act, §§ 1,
2, 20 (Deering's Gen. Laws, 1937, Act 112), can be rendered only by a licensed
real estate broker. And a complaint to recover therefor is not insufficient by
reason of the failure to allege that the person performing the services had such
a license.

COUNSEL: Ratzer, Bridge & Gebhardt for Appellant.

Hurt & Hurt and Arthur C. Hurt, Jr., for Respondents.

JUDGES: DRAPEAU, J. pro tem. York, P. J., and Doran, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: DRAPEAU

OPINION

     DRAPEAU, J. pro tem. -- Appeal from a judgment against the plaintiff after
demurrer to complaint was sustained without leave to amend.

   The complaint alleges that the plaintiff's assignor rendered services to the
defendants of the reasonable value of $ 3527 in re-financing and refunding of
numerous claims against, and indebtedness of, the defendants; in securing
reduction, compromise and satisfaction of claims, judgments and indebtedness of
the defendants; and in procuring extensions of time for the payment, compromise
and satisfaction of said claims, judgments and items of indebtedness. "That said
claims, judgments and items of indebtedness were, or appeared to be, liens
against certain real property and/or leases thereupon located in the City of
Long Beach, County of Los Angeles, State of California, belonging to
defendants."

   The demurrer raised the sole question to be determined on this appeal,
namely: Whether or not the services described in  the complaint were embraced
within those defined in the California Real Estate Act as services of a real
estate broker. If they are broker's services, concededly, the complaint fails to
allege that the assignor of the plaintiff had a realty broker's license, and,
concededly, the complaint fails to state a cause of action. (California Real
Estate Act, section 20; Davis v. Chipman, 210 Cal. 609 [293 P. 40].)

   But, if the services so described are not within the provisions of the
California Real Estate Act, the complaint does state a cause of action and the
order sustaining the demurrer without leave to amend, and the judgment based
thereon, were improperly made. In such a case, whether the plaintiff's assignor
holds a broker's license or not is immaterial. ( Lewis v. Scazighini, 130 Cal.
App. 722 [20 P.2d 359]; Allen v. Vanderbeck, 132 Cal. App. 242 [22 P.2d  561];
McKenna v. Edwards, 19 Cal. App. 2d 327 [65 P.2d 810].)

   Neither the plaintiff nor the defendants have cited to us any case directly
bearing upon the point involved. Both parties cite and rely upon pertinent
sections of the California Real Estate Act.

     As was said in Koeberle v. Hotchkiss, 8 Cal. App. 2d 634, 640 [48 P.2d 104]
: "The primary purpose of the Real Estate Brokers' Act was to require real
estate brokers and salesmen to be 'honest, truthful, and of good reputation'."

   And not the least important among modern beneficial trends in government has
been the policy of the State of California, licensing realty brokers, and
prescribing standards of professional conduct for them. It is in the light of
this policy that we have considered this appeal.

   The California Real Estate Act (Deering's General Laws, Act 112), makes it
"unlawful for any person . . . to engage in the business, act in the capacity
of, advertise or assume to act as a real estate broker . . . without first
obtaining a license from the State Real Estate Division." (California Real
Estate Act, sec. 1.)

   Then the act, in section 2, defines a real estate broker as "a person who . .
. sells or offers for sale . . . or negotiates the purchase or sale or exchange
of real estate, or who, for compensation, negotiates loans on real estate,
leases, or offers to lease, or negotiates the sale, purchase, or exchange of
leases . . . for another or others."

   And section 20 of the act provides that no broker "shall bring or maintain
any action in the courts of this state for the collection of compensation for
the performance of any of the acts mentioned in section two hereof without
alleging . . . that such person . . . was a duly licensed real estate broker . .
. at the time the alleged cause of action arose."

     A careful review of the act as applied to the facts alleged in the
complaint discloses that the complaint does state a cause of action, and that
the demurrer was improperly sustained. It will be observed that the complaint
alleges that the services rendered by the plaintiff's assignor had to do with
claims, judgments and items of indebtedness which were or appeared to be liens
against real property. The face of the complaint does not necessarily show that
the allegations  thereof must be construed to mean that the plaintiff's assignor
performed such services, and such services only, as can be rendered by a
licensed real estate broker.

   A lien is defined by our Civil Code (section 2872) as a charge imposed in
some mode other than by a transfer in trust upon specific property by which it
is made security for the performance of an act.

   "In its broadest sense and common acceptation, it is understood and used to
denote a legal claim or charge on property, either real or personal, as security
for the payment for some debt or obligation. . . . It includes every case in
which personal or real property is charged with the payment of a debt." (37 C.
J. 306.)

   There are many kinds of liens, among them being mechanics' liens, mortgage
liens, liens arising in the course of judicial proceedings, maritime and tax and
assessment liens. It almost goes without saying that it would be entirely
improper to hold that one having anything to do with every type and character of
lien must first have a real estate broker's license, and this is what we must do
in order to affirm the judgment of the lower court.

   The judgment is reversed with directions to the trial court to overrule the
demurrer and permit the defendants to answer to the complaint if they shall
elect so to do.

   York, P. J., and Doran, J., concurred.


                              53 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              HATTIE S. WALTON, Respondent, v. J. C. CARLY et al.,
              Defendants; COMMERCIAL CASUALTY INSURANCE COMPANY (a
                            Corporation), Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 5304

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, THIRD APPELLATE DISTRICT

           7 Cal. App. 2d 183; 45 P.2d 438; 1935 Cal. App. LEXIS 553


                             May 24, 1935, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:      APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Sacramento
County. Peter J. Shields, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Real Estate Brokers--Sureties--Misappropriation of Funds.  --In this action
against real estate brokers and the surety on the latter's bonds, where
plaintiff established a "revolving fund" with said brokers, with instructions to
invest and reinvest the money in "good first mortgage loans", and paid
commissions on each investment, and in one case the brokers invested in a second
deed of trust which plaintiff had to protect by making a payment, and in another
moneys paid in on a loan were appropriated to their own use, the two irregular
transactions constituted violations of the obligations of the principals as real
estate brokers and rendered the surety liable on its bonds.

(2) Id.--Trust Deeds--Damages--Security.  --In said action, it could not
reasonably or equitably be said that plaintiff was not damaged by the
transaction wherein she had to make a payment to secure release of the property
on which she had a second deed of trust, because she held a trust deed of the
property which would be deemed to furnish her ample security to cover the added
sum she was compelled to pay, where there was no evidence to indicate that she
held security sufficient to cover the original loan and the subsequent payment,
or that the terms of the trust deed covered such additional sum.

(3) Id.--Demand--Interest--Judgments.  --Where no demand for a return of the
misappropriated money was made until the commencement of said action, it was
error to allow interest prior to that date, and the judgment was modified by
striking therefrom the provision for interest prior to the filing of the
complaint.

COUNSEL: Butler, Van Dyke & Harris for Appellant.

Ralph H. Lewis for Respondent.

JUDGES: THOMPSON, J. Pullen, P. J., concurred.

OPINION BY: THOMPSON

OPINION

     The facts are stated in the opinion of the court.

   THOMPSON, J. -- The Commercial Casualty Insurance Company, a corporation, has
appealed from a judgment which was rendered against it in a suit on two surety
bonds which were executed to secure the faithful services of the J. C. Carly
Company and the Carly Investment Company, as real estate brokers.

   In 1928 and 1929, the appellant, an insurance corporation, executed as
surety, two bonds for the sum of $ 2,000 each, for the faithful performance of
the J. C. Carly Company and the Carly Investment Company, as real estate
brokers, under the provisions of the California Real Estate Act for the
licensing and regulation of brokers. (Stats. 1919, p. 1252, and amendments
thereof, Act 112, 1 Deering's Gen. Laws of 1931, p. 25.) J. C. Carly had been
engaged in the real estate business in Sacramento since 1890. He was the manager
and chief stockholder of both of the realty firms which are involved in this
suit. The J. C. Carly Company was incorporated in 1910. The Carly Investment
Company was incorporated in September, 1929. These companies cooperated in the
operation of their real estate business. The J. C. Carly Company purchased from
the plaintiff in 1910 "Curtis Oaks" subdivision of the city of Sacramento for $
50,000, which was paid in instalments. Nearly all of this purchase money was
left with the J. C. Carly Company in what was termed a "revolving fund" with
instructions to invest and reinvest it in "good first mortgage loans". Mrs.
Walton testified that she had known Mr. Carly for many years and that she had
full confidence in his honesty, judgment and ability. She said: "I dealt with
Mr. Carly as representative of the company. . . . The moneys were loaned, as
they were paid in they were reloaned." For several years the Carly Company
handled this fund in that manner, making numerous  loans therefrom on real
estate securities, collecting the principal and interest when due and crediting
them to the plaintiff's account on its books, and reinvesting the money when
there were funds on hand. Sometimes the investments were mere book transactions
of the renewal of existing mortgages. The real estate company charged the
plaintiff commissions for each of these transactions. At first the plaintiff
approved the various investments. Later she spent her time traveling abroad and
she left these investments to the judgment of Mr. Carly, as a representative of
the company in whom she had absolute confidence. Certain instalments of
principal and interest were remitted to her from time to time. Much of this fund
remained in the custody of the J. C. Carly Company to be handled in the manner
stated.

   After purchasing the Curtis Oaks property from the plaintiff, the J.  C.
Carly Company organized another company, called the South Curtis Oaks Company,
of which J. C. Carly was also the manager and chief stockholder. This property
was conveyed to the last-mentioned holding company, and on March 31, 1928, it
was reconveyed by trust deed to the California Trust & Savings Bank to secure a
loan of $ 66,000. In September, 1928, lot number 127 of this mortgaged tract was
sold to R. H. and Katie Febick, in part payment for which they executed a trust
deed to the South Curtis Oaks Company to secure their promissory note of $
4,400. This lot was not then released from the $ 66,000 mortgage on the entire
tract held by the California Trust & Savings Bank.  With full knowledge of this
prior mortgage on the part of the officers of the J. C. Carly Company, the
Febick note and trust deed were transferred to the plaintiff in consideration of
the face value thereof on March 22, 1929, contrary to her instructions to invest
her money only in "good first mortgages". The plaintiff had no knowledge of that
irregular transaction. The South Curtis Oaks Company failed to pay its $ 66,000
note when it became due and foreclosure of the mortgage on the entire tract of
land, including the Febick lot, was threatened. The plaintiff then for the first
time learned that $ 4,400 of her money had been invested by the J. C. Carly
Company, contrary to her instructions, in a second mortgage loan on the Febick
lot. The plaintiff was compelled to, and on April 25, 1932, did pay the
California Trust & Savings Bank the sum of $ 825 to release that property  from
their first deed of trust, and to thus convert her Febick loan into a first
mortgage security.

   In March, 1925, the J. C. Carly Company, pursuant to its former agreement
with the plaintiff, invested $ 2,400 of her money in a loan to E. S. and
Florence M. Turpen, secured by a trust deed on their lot number 375 of
"Homeland" subdivision of Sacramento. That loan was subsequently paid to the
Carly Investment Company, without the plaintiff's knowledge, on April 26, 1930,
and then appropriated to the use of the company. No part of the last-mentioned
sum of money was ever paid to the plaintiff or credited to her account, but on
the contrary it was appropriated by the Carly Investment Company.

   The record contains many other transactions in which funds of the plaintiff
were invested and reinvested by the Carly realty corporations for the plaintiff,
which are not necessary to consider on this appeal. Subsequently the J. C. Carly
Company and the Carly Investment Company failed, and were unable to meet their
obligations.

   This suit was tried by the court sitting without a jury. Findings were
adopted favorable to the plaintiff on all essential issues. Judgment for $ 2,850
and interest thereon was rendered against all of the defendants jointly. The
Commercial Casualty Insurance Company, only, has appealed from that judgment.

     As grounds for reversal of the judgment the appellant contends that the
findings, to the effect that the Febick loan of $ 4,400 and the misappropriation
of the $ 2,400 which was paid on the Turpen loan constituted violations of the
employment of the Carly companies as real estate brokers, are not supported by
the evidence; that the plaintiff was not damaged by the payment of the
additional sum of $ 825 to release the Febick property from the first mortgage
lien of the California Trust & Savings Bank for the reason that her security was
ample to cover the original loan and the subsequent payment. It is also asserted
that interest was erroneously allowed on the amount of the judgment from the
date of the alleged misappropriation of funds, for the reason that no previous
demand was made upon the surety company for reimbursement.

   Considering the entire transaction by means of which the Carly companies were
entrusted with a "revolving fund"  belonging to the plaintiff, to be used for
investment and reinvestment in "good first mortgage securities", we are of the
opinion the two irregular transactions, for which the plaintiff was awarded
damages in this action, constitute violations of the obligations of the
companies as real estate brokers and render the sureties liable on their bonds.

   A real estate broker is defined in the California Real Estate Act above
referred to as "a person, copartnership or corporation who, for a compensation,
sells or offers for sale . . . real estate, or who for compensation, negotiates
loans on real estate, . . ."

   The statute pursuant to which the bonds in this case were executed requires
that they be "conditioned for the honest and faithful performance by such broker
and his salesmen and employees of any undertaking as a licensed real estate
broker . . . at any time when licensed under this act, and the strict compliance
with the provisions of this act, and the honest and faithful application of all
funds received. Said bonds shall be further conditioned upon the payment of all
damages suffered by any person damaged or defrauded by reason of the violation
of any of the provisions of this act, or by reason of the violation of the
obligation of such broker as an agent as such obligations are laid down by the
Civil Code of the State of California, or by reason of any fraud connected with
or growing out of any transaction contemplated by the provisions of this act."

   The entire transaction in which the plaintiff entrusted the Carly real estate
firms with a "revolving fund" to be invested and reinvested for her in "good
first mortgage securities", must be considered in determining whether the
obligations of the companies, as brokers, were violated under the provisions of
the California Real Estate Act. ( Democa v. Barasch, 212 Cal. 293 [298 P. 17].)
In the case last cited, a surety company was held to be liable on its broker's
bond for the embezzlement of funds by a real estate agent which were paid to him
incident to the transfer of a lease. The court said in that regard: "Having
undertaken the exchange of said lease, with other incidental duties, the entire
transaction must be viewed as a whole and regarded as coming within the act and
the terms of the bond. The embezzlement of the above-mentioned sum by said
defendant, therefore, constituted a breach of his obligation as a real estate
broker  within the terms of the act, fixing liability upon defendant surety
under the terms of said bond." ( Clark v. Patterson, 213 Cal. 4 [300 P. 967, 75
A. L. R. 1124]; Muller v. John J.   Davi & Bro., 131 Cal. App. 156 [21 P.2d 121]
.)

   When the J. C. Carly Company invested the plaintiff's money in the $ 4,400
note and second deed of trust on the Febick lot, knowing that it had previously
executed a deed of trust on the entire "Curtis Oaks" tract of land, including
the lot in question, to secure a $ 66,000 loan from the California Trust &
Savings Bank, the Carly Company violated its obligation to loan the plaintiff's
money only on "first mortgage securities". This was certainly a breach of its
obligation as a real estate broker to "honestly and faithfully" negotiate loans
on real estate. For a broker to accept a client's money for the express purpose
of negotiating a loan on first mortgage security, and then appropriate the money
to his own use without security, is certainly a breach of his obligation as a
real estate broker. To the extent of the $ 825, which the plaintiff was
compelled to pay the bank to release the lot from its prior mortgage lien and
give to her a good first mortgage to secure her loan, she was damaged by the
conduct of her agent, and to that extent she is entitled to recover in that
transaction upon the bond of her agent's surety.

     Nor may it be reasonably or equitably said that she was not damaged by that
transaction because she held a trust deed on the property which will be deemed
to furnish her ample security to also cover the added sum of $ 825 which she was
compelled to pay. There is no evidence to indicate that she held security
sufficient to cover the original loan and the subsequent payment of $ 825, or
that the terms of the trust deed cover the last-mentioned sum.

   So, also, it was a violation of the obligations of the Carly Investment
Company to appropriate to its own use the Turpen loan of $ 2,400 which was paid
to that company to be reinvested for the plaintiff.  That was a clear violation
of the provision of the statute which requires a broker to make an "honest and
faithful application of all funds received" for investment in real estate
securities.

     It is properly conceded the court erroneously allowed interest on the
amount of the judgment rendered against the surety company on account of the
misappropriation of the  Turpen loan of $ 2,400, for the reason that it appears
no previous demand for the return of this money was made by the plaintiff until
the commencement of this action. The court said in the case of Democa v. Barasch
, 212 Cal. 293 [298 P. 17], in that regard:

   "The court allowed interest at the legal rate from the date of defalcation.
Inasmuch as the full penalty of the bond is decreed, interest should not begin
until after demand. ( Trumpler v. Cotton, 109 Cal. 250, 256, 257 [41 P. 1033].)
The filing of the original complaint is the only definite date the record fixes
as the time of such demand."

   There appears to be nothing in the case of Schomig v. Keiser, 189 Cal. 596
[209 P. 550], or Kelly v. Ward, (Cal.) 2 F. Supp. 37, upon which the appellant
relies, in conflict with what we have heretofore said regarding the facts of
this case. In the Schomig case, which was a petition for a writ of certiorari to
review the action of the real estate commissioner in revoking a broker's
license, the court said:

   "There is no charge in the complaint, and no evidence to prove the charge if
it were in the complaint, that Schomig was employed for a compensation to do the
acts complained of, or that the acts themselves constituted a part of a contract
for the sale of real estate."

   The transaction complained of in that case was the appropriation of rent
which was collected independently of the broker's contract to procure a sale of
real property. In the present case there is no  question that the realty
companies were paid commissions for each investment of the plaintiff's money
according to agreement, and that they secured the money which was
misappropriated only for the purpose of investment and reinvestment in good
first mortgage securities. The present case is clearly distinguishable from the
Schomig case in that regard.

   In the case of Kelly v. Ward, supra, upon which the appellant also relies,
the United States District Court held that a surety bond was not liable for the
defalcations of a broker who had been separately employed by a client to make
collections of certain loans. The court said: "Plaintiff employed Ward to make
collections on these loans." It is then stated: "These collections were not made
by Ward in his capacity of real estate broker but in his capacity of agent and
trustee of plaintiff." In the present case, however,  the plaintiff's money was
left with the Carly companies to be invested and reinvested in first mortgage
securities. But if the Kelly  v. Ward case be deemed to be in conflict with what
we have previously said regarding the violation of the Carly companies
obligations as real estate brokers, then we are not in accord with that
decision.

   The judgment is modified by striking therefrom the provision for interest to
be computed prior to the time of filing of the complaint in this action, which
was September 14, 1932. As so modified, the judgment is affirmed, respondent to
recover costs on appeal.

   Pullen, P. J., concurred.


                              54 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           JAMES A. EDMONDS, JR., as Real Estate Commissioner, etc.,
          Plaintiff and Respondent, v. JOHN J. AUGUSTYN, Defendant and
                                   Appellant

                                  No. D005358

           Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District,
                                  Division One

           193 Cal. App. 3d 1056; 238 Cal. Rptr. 704; 1987 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1923


                                 July 24, 1987

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied August 12, 1987,
and Respondent's Petition for Review by the Supreme Court was Denied October 22,
1987.  Mosk, J., and Panelli, J., were of the Opinion that the Petition should
be Granted.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of San Diego County, No. 561340, Jack R.
Levitt, Judge.

COUNSEL: John K. Van de Kamp, Attorney General, Edmond B. Mamer and Neal J.
Gobar, Deputy Attorneys General, for Defendant and Appellant.

Klitgaard & Jones and Robert J. Klitgaard for Plaintiff and Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Work, J., with Wiener, Acting P. J., and Butler, J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: WORK

OPINION

     John J. Augustyn appeals a declaratory relief judgment limiting recovery
from the real estate fund (Fund) established by the Real Estate Education,
Research and Recovery Act (Bus. & Prof. Code, 1 § 10470 et seq., the Act) to the
individual $ 100,000 account of real estate broker Wayne Burton and precluding
recovery from any of his licensed subagents' accounts pursuant to sections 10471
and 10474.  The judgment purports to adjudicate the rights of several victimized
investors whose claims are separate from those of Augustyn and apparently
unrelated to each other's.  However, each of these persons was deemed to have
appeared through their counsel, Robert J. Klitgaard.  Accordingly, as a matter
of equity and fairness, we treat Augustyn's appeal as being representative in
nature on behalf of all those victimized investors named in the declaratory
relief judgment.  For the reasons which follow, we conclude Augustyn's factual
and legal challenges to the declaratory relief judgment have merit and reverse
the judgment as to him and the other victimized investors.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   All
statutory references are to the Business and Professions Code.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Factual and Procedural Background 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   As
Augustyn aptly points out, the "nefarious" operations of Burton, a licensed real
estate broker who operated under the fictitious names of Universal Financial and
California Equities Home Loan, are well known to the Courts of Appeal in
California.  (See Augustyn v. Superior Court (1986) 186 Cal.App.3d 1221 [231
Cal.Rptr. 298]; Kirby v. Palos Verdes Escrow Co. (1986) 183 Cal.App.3d 57 [227
Cal.Rptr. 785]; Montoya v. McLeod (1985) 176 Cal.App.3d 57 [221 Cal.Rptr. 353];
Leyva v. Superior Court (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 462 [210 Cal.Rptr. 545]; Monje v.
Thompson (Cal.App.) (May 22, 1987) D005455; Baglia v. Bohannon (Cal.App.) (May
22, 1987) D005454.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The pertinent portion of the stipulated record reveals Burton, a licensed
real estate  broker, began in early 1980 to perpetrate a state-wide Ponzi scheme
persuading investors to purchase second trust deeds allegedly secured by equity
in California real estate which in fact were either not secured at all or far
more risky than had been promised.  Burton operated  several real estate offices
under the fictitious names of Universal Financial and California Equities Home
Loan, among others.  He employed approximately 150 individuals as "investment
counselors", many of whom were not licensed as required to perform the acts
delegated to them by Burton.  He advertised and solicited investors representing
high rates of interest (18 percent and 22 percent) that would be paid on
investments secured by trust deeds on real property which would not exceed 70
percent to 80 percent of the fair market value of the realty.  Upon deposit of
money, an investor would receive a note providing for payment of interest from
date of deposit and advised the invested funds would be held in escrow until
funds were used to acquire a note secured by a trust deed of the nature agreed
upon and the trust deed was properly assigned to the investor and recorded.
Many misrepresentations were made regarding the nature and worth of the
underlying securities.  Trust funds were converted and fraud and deceit
committed.  For example, real properties would be grossly over-appraised and
notes and trust deeds would be created upon these inflated appraisals
substantially exceeding the purchase price and the fair market value of the
underlying property.  Prepaid interest held in trust was also converted.  As a
result of these actions, thousands of investors lost millions of dollars.

   Burton's "investment counselors" solicited, negotiated and otherwise dealt
directly with investors in matters requiring a real estate license; however,
approximately one-third of these individuals never held real estate licenses and
many of the licensed investment counselors worked for Burton when not licensed
to do so.  These investment counselors usually worked in branch offices,
handling personal contacts with investors, passing information and documents
between the main office and San Bernardino and their clients.  Their conduct
requiring a license normally consisted of providing information furnished by the
home office to potential investors; upon receipt of an investment, the filling
out of standard forms reflecting details of the investment and providing for a
deposit in escrow; the giving of a promissory note and the transmitting of money
to the home office; and, following assignment of a trust deed, the forwarding of
a copy of the trust deed, note, assignment, appraisal and title insurance to the
investor.

   A number of the investors obtained judgments against some of Burton's
investment counselors based on their personal negligent misrepresentations or
other breaches of fiduciary duty while engaging in these actions under color of
their own licenses and have sought recovery under section 10471 3  claiming
amounts substantially in excess of $ 100,000 under section 10474, subdivision
(c). 4, 5

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Section
10471, subdivision (a) provides: "When an aggrieved person obtains a final
judgment in a court of competent jurisdiction against a defendant based upon the
defendant's fraud, misrepresentation, deceit, or conversion of trust funds
arising directly out of any transaction in which the defendant, while licensed
under this part, performed acts for which that license was required, the
aggrieved person may, upon the judgment becoming final, file an application with
the Department of Real Estate for payment from the Recovery Account, within the
limitations specified in Section 10474, of the amount unpaid on the judgment
which represents an actual and direct loss to the claimant in the transaction."
4   Section 10474, subdivision (c) provides: "Notwithstanding any other
provision of this chapter and regardless of the number of persons aggrieved or
parcels of real estate involved in a transaction or the number of judgments
against a licensee, the liability of the Recovery Account shall not exceed the
following amounts:

   "(c) For causes of action which occurred on or after January 1, 1980, twenty
thousand dollars ($ 20,000) for any one transaction and one hundred thousand
dollars ($ 100,000) for any one licensee."
5   "Augustyn purchased two promissory notes from Kai I. Gulve, a real estate
licensee acting as investment counselor in Burton's organization.  Augustyn has
secured a judgment against Gulve for losses, but has not sued Burton.  Gulve has
filed bankruptcy.  Unable to recover all of his judgment from Gulve, Augustyn
has also sought recovery against the Gulve recovery account fund, but has not
applied for any recovery from the Burton recovery fund." ( Augustyn v. Superior
Court, supra, 186 Cal.App.3d at p. 1224.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The California State Real Estate Commissioner (Commissioner)  petitioned
under section 10474.5 6 to consolidate all claims against the Fund involving the
alleged fraudulent conduct of broker Burton and his licensed agents and to
prorate the recoveries of individual claimants only against the Burton Fund.
Finding for the Commissioner, the court ruled: "The court decides that under the
stipulated facts negligent misrepresentation and breach of fiduciary duty of the
investment counselor employees of the real estate broker Wayne Burton in passing
information and documents between the broker Burton and investors were integral
to and a part of the activities of the broker, Wayne Burton, and were not
independent fraud, deceit, misrepresentation or conversion of trust funds of the
investment counselors, separate from the fraud, deceit, misrepresentation and
conversion of trust funds by the broker -- Wayne Burton.  Only a single Broker's
license was necessary (i.e., Burton could himself lawfully have done all acts
done by the investment counselors); his use of licensed agents to transmit
authorized information between the broker and his client investors does not
increase the single $ 100,000 limit on the liability of the Recovery Account
under section 10474 of the Business and Professions Code, even though the
investment  counselors are civilly liable to the investors for negligent
misrepresentation or breach of their fiduciary duties as licensed sub-agents."

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   Section
10474.5 provides: "If the amount of liability of the Recovery Account as
provided for in Section 10474 is insufficient to pay in full the valid claims of
all aggrieved persons by whom claims have been filed against any one licensee,
the amount shall be distributed among them in the ratio that their respective
claims bear to the aggregate of the valid claims, or in any other manner as the
court deems equitable.  Distribution of any moneys shall be among the persons
entitled to share therein, without regard to the order of priority in which
their respective judgments may have been obtained or their claims have been
filed.  Upon petition of the commissioner, the court may require all claimants
and prospective claimants against one licensee to be joined in one action, to
the end that the respective rights of all claimants to the Recovery Account may
be equitably adjudicated and settled."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Governing Law

   Section 10470 et seq., establishes a special fund supported by license fees
designed to compensate victims defrauded by real estate licensees. Section
10471, subdivision (a) provides for recovery from the Fund of unpaid judgments
against the licensee for "fraud, misrepresentation, deceit, or conversion of
trust funds arising directly out of any transaction in which the defendant . . .
[was] licensed . . . [and] performed acts for which that license was required .
. ." (See Deas v. Knapp (1981) 29 Cal.3d 69, 73 [171 Cal.Rptr. 823, 623 P.2d
775]; Vinci v. Edmonds (1986) 185 Cal.App.3d 1251, 1254 [230 Cal.Rptr. 308].)
Recovery is available also to those judgment creditors whose claims are based
upon negligent misrepresentation ( Andrepont v. Meeker (1984) 158 Cal.App.3d
878, 884-886 [204 Cal.Rptr. 887]), regardless of whether the judgment debtor is
a licensed real estate broker or a licensed real estate sales person ( Vinci v.
Edmonds, supra, 185 Cal.App.3d at p. 1254; Merrifield v. Edmonds (1983) 146
Cal.App.3d 336, 340-341 [194 Cal.Rptr. 104]).

     Section 10471 is remedial in character, intended to protect the public
against loss arising from misrepresentations and breaches of fiduciary duty by
licensed real estate personnel who are unable to respond to damage awards.  (
Vinci v. Edmonds, supra, 185 Cal.App.3d at p. 1256; Booth v. Robinson (1983) 147
Cal.App.3d 371, 378 [195 Cal.Rptr. 130]; Nordahl v. Department of Real Estate
(1975) 48 Cal.App.3d 657, 663 [121 Cal.Rptr. 794].) Consequently, it is accorded
a liberal construction promoting its purpose in protecting those persons within
its purview, by  granting relief unless to do so is clearly forbidden by the
statutory scheme. ( Vinci v. Edmonds, supra, 185 Cal.App.3d at p. 1256;
Andrepont v. Meeker, supra, 158 Cal.App.3d at p. 884; Booth v. Robinson, supra,
147 Cal.App.3d at p. 378.) In other words, "'[[section] 10471] will be construed
when its meaning is doubtful so as to suppress the mischief at which it is
directed, to advance or extend the remedy provided, and to bring within the
scope of the law every case which comes clearly within its spirit and policy.
[Citations.]'" ( Vinci v. Edmonds, supra, 185 Cal.App.3d at p. 1256, quoting
Booth v. Robinson, supra, 147 Cal.App.3d at p. 378.)

     The underlying purposes of the statutory scheme are twofold.  First, the
primary purpose of the entire act of which this statutory scheme is a part "is
to raise the standards of the real estate profession by requiring its  members
to deal fairly and ethically with their clients." ( Middelsteadt v. Karpe (1975)
52 Cal.App.3d 297, 302 [124 Cal.Rptr. 840]; Andrepont v. Meeker, supra, 158
Cal.App.3d at p. 884; Merrifield v. Edmonds, supra, 146 Cal.App.3d at p. 344.)
Secondly, the specific "purpose of section 10471 is to compensate innocent
members of the public who are victimized by dishonest licensees." ( Merrifield
v. Edmonds, supra, 146 Cal.App.3d at p. 344.) Consequently, the legislation is
designed not only to protect consumers, but also to encourage the real estate
profession to pursue higher standards.  ( Andrepont v. Meeker, supra, 158
Cal.App.3d at p. 884.)

   The Trial Court Erred in Concluding There Was No Independent
Misrepresentation by the Investment Counselors

     Augustyn first contends the trial court unjustifiably characterized the
activities of the investment counselors as "passing information and documents
between the broker Burton and investors", giving rise to no "independent fraud,
deceit, misrepresentation or conversion of trust funds of the investment
counselors, separate from the fraud, deceit, misrepresentation and conversion of
trust funds by the broker . . . ." We agree.

   The stipulated facts establish Burton defrauded investors while acting under
his broker's license by soliciting investments to be secured by real property
(§§ 10130, 10131, subds. (d), (e)) or by issuing his own note to be later
secured by real estate (§ 10131.1).  He further employed "investment
counselors", many of whom were unlicensed, to solicit, negotiate and otherwise
deal directly with the investors on his behalf and as his subagents. They
provided information furnished by the home office, filled out forms, accepted
money, delivered standard documents and forwarded trust deeds from the home
office. In order to perform these activities as Burton's agent, a real estate
license was required.   (See fn. 6.)  Indeed, a real estate salesperson "is a
natural person who, for a compensation or an expectation of a compensation, is
employed by a licensed real estate broker to do one or more of the acts set
forth in Sections 10131, 10131.1, 10131.2, 10131.3 and 10131.6." (§ 10132.) 7

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   "A real
estate salesperson cannot contract in his or her own name or accept compensation
except from the broker under whom he or she is licensed. [Citations.]" (
Merrifield v. Edmonds, supra, 146 Cal.App.3d at p. 342-343.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   We recognized in Montoya v. McLeod, supra, 176 Cal.App.3d at pages 62-63, the
independent responsibilities of a licensed salesperson employed  by a broker
involved in the same Universal Financial/Burton scheme.  We explained that
McLeod's role was best seen as that of a licensed real estate salesperson
employed by Burton, a licensed real estate broker, to solicit lenders and
negotiate ostensibly secured loans.  Her duties thus fell squarely under section
10131, subdivision (d) and, as such, could only be undertaken by a licensed
broker or licensed salesperson employed by a broker.  (§§ 10130, 10131, 10132.)
We noted that even if she simply solicited lenders to make loans secured by real
property, she should have been licensed. (§ 10131, subd. (d).) However, as an
"investment counselor", she did much more by communicating the terms and
conditions of investments with Universal Financial to would-be lenders,
accepting and rejecting offers, transmitting counter-offers, personally paying
finder's fees, and, most importantly, executing the promissory notes underlying
the various transactions.  We explained further: "That McLeod's responsibility
should be narrow because her discretionary authority in these transactions was
less than absolute is an untenable proposition.  Indeed, the real estate law
requires a broker to supervise and control the activities of a licensed
salesman.  [Citation.] Thus, the nature of McLeod's employment does not preclude
her responsibilities and duties as a licensed real estate salesperson, but, in
fact, requires she exercise precisely those duties." ( Montoya, supra, 176
Cal.App.3d at p. 63.) We thus rejected her assertion the fiduciary relationship
with her clients was solely between them and her principal, Burton, not her,
holding such a determination -- "would allow brokers to partition their duties
so completely that no individual employee would need to be licensed nor
undertake the California common and statutory law duties for real estate
brokers. This would subvert the real estate law's purpose to upgrade the
standards of the real estate profession and to provide protections to the
consuming public.  [Citations.]" ( Id. at pp. 63-64.) 8

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -8   We
further examined McLeod's conduct of her duties and responsibilities, declaring:
"'The law imposes on a real estate agent "the same obligation of undivided
service and loyalty that it imposes on a trustee in favor of his beneficiary."
[Citations.]' [Citation.] In particular, 'a real estate licensee is "charged
with the duty of fullest disclosure of all material facts concerning the
transaction that might affect the principal's decision.  [Citations.]"'
[Citations.] This agency is fiduciary in nature and imposes high standards of
good faith.  [Citations.] Additionally, an agent is under a duty to use
reasonable care, but as a professional must use a higher degree of skill and
diligence in the conduct of his duties. [Citations.] Finally, a real estate
agents' ignorance of these duties does not excuse their malfeasance.
[Citation.] [para. ] Here, McLeod never informed the Montoyas that Burton was
himself the borrower and her giving them an unsecured note in exchange for their
investment was prohibited by law.  [Citation.] That McLeod was ignorant of
Burton's status as borrower does not excuse her failure to make reasonable
inquiry.  By her own admission, she undertook more than 100 similar transactions
without inquiring as to the legitimacy of potential borrowers of her clients'
monies.  This conduct is outrageous and, in the present case, breaches her
fiduciary duty to the Montoyas.  Similarly, her violation of section 10231,
while affording no private right of action, further evidences McLeod's disregard
of the law and her professional duties. In this transaction, McLeod profited, by
her eventual commission, from a breach of her fiduciary duty to the Montoyas.
On these facts, she is, at least, liable for their damage on a constructive
fraud theory.  [Citations.]" Montoya v. McLeod, supra, 176 Cal.App.3d at pp.
64-65.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     The Commissioner correctly points out that we are bound on this appeal by
the stipulated facts, not by the facts set forth within the above lengthy
passages from Montoya v. McLeod, supra, 176 Cal.App.3d 57. However, our
characterization of the independent fiduciary responsibilities of the licensed
investment counselors is equally applicable here, as it is undisputed Universal
Financial and Burton employed some licensed investment counselors to solicit,
negotiate and otherwise directly deal with the investors in matters requiring a
real estate license.

   Consequently, based on the foregoing and mindful the Legislature intended the
Fund to compensate victims of negligent misrepresentations or breaches of
fiduciary duty ( Andrepont v. Meeker, supra, 158 Cal.App.3d at p. 885), the
trial court erred in concluding the negligent misrepresentations and breaches of
fiduciary duty by licensed investment counselors employed by Burton and
Universal Financial did not constitute their independent fraud and
misrepresentation. To the contrary, the magnitude and dimensions of this
orchestrated fraudulent scheme was predicated upon the independent negligence
and breaches of fiduciary duty of the licensed  investment counselors. In other
words, the success of this fraudulent scheme was rooted in the investors' trust
in the licensed investment counselors' integrity, conscientiousness and
expertise regarding real estate investment.

   The Trial Court Erred in Concluding Augustyn Must Share in Burton's $ 100,000
Recovery Fund With All Other Applicants Whose Claims are Based upon Burton's
Fraud as a Broker And the Negligent Misrepresentations/Breaches of Fiduciary
Duty by Licensed Investment Counselors

     Reasoning that because only a single broker's license was legally necessary
for Burton to have performed all the acts done by the investment counselors, the
trial court concluded Burton's use of licensed agents to transmit authorized
information between him and interested investors does not increase the single $
100,000 limit on the liability of the recovery account under section 10474, even
though investment counselors are civilly liable to the investors for negligent
misrepresentation or breach of their fiduciary duties as licensed subagents.
Relying on Deas v. Knapp, supra, 29 Cal.3d 69, and Fox v. Prime Ventures, Ltd.
(1978)  86 Cal.App.3d 333 [150 Cal.Rptr. 202], the Commissioner seeks
ratification of the trial court's determination.  The Commissioner's reliance on
Deas and Fox is misplaced.

    In Fox v. Prime Ventures, Ltd., supra, 86 Cal.App.3d at pages 335-337, the
court determined that the limit on liability of the recovery Fund under the
circumstances was that of one license, rather than two, where both judgment
debtors, a corporation and its designated officer, were licensed real estate
brokers. There, the aggregate amount of the outstanding judgments against the
two licenses far exceeded any amounts payable by the Fund pursuant to the Act.
In concluding the limit for only one license was applicable, the court reasoned:
"Section 10471 defines the acts for which the Fund will protect the creditor and
limits the amount payable to any one judgment creditor.  The section
contemplates that the fraud will arise from the acts of the licensee in a real
estate transaction, and that no more than $ 10,000 will be recovered for a
single transaction.  The fact that two or more licenses are involved in a single
transaction does not produce a greater than $ 10,000 recovery.  The Commissioner
argues that there was only a single act from which liability arose, the act of
entrusting funds.  This is correct.  The funds were entrusted to Sather Gate,
which could only act through its qualified officers, in this case through
Heneveld.  The fact that its qualified officer held his own license was a mere
irrelevancy: Heneveld did nothing in his individual capacity he could not have
done without a license. Here in each act of entrustment and misappropriation,
there was still a single real estate transaction, a single license performing
acts requiring a license and, therefore, it is concluded, a single license
within the meaning of section 10474.

   "The limitation of section 10474 is in addition to the transactional
limitation of section 10471, and cannot enhance a recovery already limited by
section 10471.  If one transaction involved one license, two licenses or more,
there can be but $ 10,000 recovery because of section 10471.  In order to give
complete effect to the transaction limit of section 10471, the 'transaction'
limitation must be read into section 10474.  Since the additional license did
not add another 'transaction,' it should not double the $ 20,000 limit of
section 10474, subdivision (a)." ( Id. at p. 336.)

   Consequently, the Fox court's decision rested on the irrelevancy of
Heneveld's license and the fact his conduct required no license at all.  In
fact, it was simply by chance the respondents there were defrauded by a
corporation whose designated officer was individually licensed, causing the
court to declare:  "The victims lost no more by the additional license." ( Id.
at p. 337.)

   Similarly, in Deas v. Knapp, supra, 29 Cal.3d at page 75, the Supreme Court
held that the single license limitation was applicable, explaining: "'It is true
that Knapp had three licenses, the first issued to him in 1949, when  he was
doing business as Investors Exchange; the second in 1967 under the name Mission
Mortgage and Loan; and the third in 1969, as Mutual Mortgage and Loan.
Plaintiffs' judgment, however, was solely against Knapp individually, based upon
allegations in their complaint that he was doing business with them as Investors
Exchange.  The fact that Knapp had other licenses is fortuitous, and in no way
affected the plaintiffs.  This aspect of the case is governed by Fox v. Prime
Ventures, Ltd. (1978)  86 Cal.App.3d 333, 334-337, holding that where the
transaction giving rise to the judgment arose out of acts for which only one
license was required, recovery is limited by the amount stipulated in the
statute "for any one licensee."'"

   Consequently, these decisions caused us to declare in the earlier mandate
petition here that "[each] decision holds that on its facts only one recovery
against the Fund was proper, despite the fortuitous circumstance that more than
one licensee participated in defrauding the buyer." ( Augustyn v. Superior
Court, supra, 186 Cal.App.3d at p. 1225.) However, the holdings of Fox and Deas
are inapplicable here where it is not simply fortuitous that more than one
license is involved in the transaction, because separate licensees participated
in individual conduct which victimized the judgment creditors.

   Mindful of the remedial character of section 10471 and its intent to protect
the public from losses resulting from misrepresentation and breach of fiduciary
duty by licensed real estate personnel who are unable to respond to damage
awards, as well as our obligation to liberally construe it to promote its
purpose and protect the individuals within its purview, we conclude the
statutory scheme does not preclude a judgment debtor from electing which
licensee to recover against where multiple licensees are involved.  Here,
Augustyn elected to pursue his licensed real estate salesperson, Gulve, not
Burton.  In fact, he has neither obtained a judgment against Burton, nor made
any claim against Burton's recovery fund.  Rather, he sought recovery from Gulve
and her individual recovery fund.  Consequently, where multiple licensed real
estate personnel are involved in a transaction performing acts requiring a
license (and thus the existence of multiple licenses is not fortuitous) and
individual conduct of each results in a judgment on a ground stated in section
10471, the victim may seek recovery from the recovery fund 9 of any licensed
judgment debtor.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -9   The
transactional relationship requirement of section 10471, subdivision (a) and
applicable monetary limitation here pursuant to section 10474, subdivision (c)
are not inconsistent with our holding here.  Neither precludes recognition of
the potential of multiple-licensee wrongful or negligent conduct involving acts
requiring a license within the flexible and broad meaning of "transaction" (see
Dombalian v. Fox (1979) 88 Cal.App.3d 763, 765-767 [152 Cal.Rptr. 86]), giving
rise to recovery under the Act from either licensee's individual fund.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     Judgment reversed.


                              55 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             BETTY J. ROBINSON, Plaintiff and Respondent, v. TERRIS
            MURPHY, Defendant and Appellant; REAL ESTATE EDUCATION,
             RESEARCH AND RECOVERY FUND, Real Party in Interest and
                                   Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 43394

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

            96 Cal. App. 3d 763; 158 Cal. Rptr. 246; 1979 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2117


                               September 7, 1979

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Alameda County, No. 433989, Robert H.
Kroninger, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1) Brokers § 25--Duties and Liabilities of Brokers--Reimbursement From Real
Estate Education, Research and Recovery Fund.  --The right to recover from the
Real Estate Education, Research and Recovery Fund is a statutorily created cause
of action, and a plaintiff has the burden of showing compliance with the
provisions of Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10472.

(2a) (2b) Brokers § 25--Duties and Liabilities of Brokers--Reimbursement From
Real Estate Education, Research and Recovery Fund--Sale of Broker's Own
Property.  --Plaintiff was not entitled to recover from the Real Estate
Education, Research and Recovery Fund a judgment for fraud obtained against a
real estate broker who had declared bankruptcy, where the judgment arose out of
a transaction in which the broker had sold his own property to plaintiff. Bus. &
Prof. Code, § 10472, subd. (c), requires plaintiff to show the broker was
licensed and performed acts for which a license is required, but in selling his
own property, the broker did not act in that capacity, and did not come within
the definition of a broker contained in Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10131. Moreover,
Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10133, subd. (a), exempts a broker who performs any of the
acts within the scope of the statute with reference to his own property.

(3) Brokers § 2--Definitions and Distinctions.  --A broker is the agent of his
principal, and his role is to bring buyer and seller together with the aim of
consummating a sale. However, an individual who is by profession a real estate
broker is not, by virtue of this fact, deprived of the right to act as a
principal in the sale of his own property. When one deals with his own property
his negotiations with reference to the sale or exchange thereof do not
constitute him a broker.

COUNSEL: Irving J. Kornfield for Defendant and Appellant.

George Deukmejian, Attorney General, and Tyler P. Pon, Deputy Attorney General,
for Real Party in Interest and Appellant.

Donald L. Pitcock for Plaintiff and Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Rouse, J., with Taylor, P. J., and Miller, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: ROUSE

OPINION

     Defendant, Terris Murphy, and real party in interest, Real Estate
Education, Research and Recovery Fund 1 (hereafter Fund), appeal from an order
directing payment from the Fund of a judgment obtained by plaintiff against
defendant Murphy. 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   The Real
Estate Education, Research and Recovery Fund was abolished effective January 1,
1977 (Stats. 1976, ch. 271, § 2, p. 565; Bus. & Prof.  Code, § 10450.6) and the
unencumbered balance of money in such fund transferred to a separate account in
the Real Estate Fund "for the purposes of real estate education, research and
recovery.  . . ."
2   They also purport to appeal from "the Minute Order . . . dated August 26,
1977, striking the Minute Order of August 12, 1977," which ordered counsel for
plaintiff to prepare findings of fact and conclusions of law. Appellants have
apparently abandoned this portion of their appeal and make no mention of same in
their briefs.  Dismissal is therefore appropriate.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Defendant is a licensed real estate broker, who purchased a house and moved
it to a vacant lot which he also owned.  Defendant hired Mr. Gough, a
contractor, to do the work required to bring the house up to code standards.
Plaintiff was interested in purchasing this house, and discussed the matter with
defendant.  Defendant's real estate sign was placed on the property.  In
response to certain questions asked by plaintiff, defendant represented that he
was not the owner of the property, only the real estate broker. During
negotiations, plaintiff expressed concern about an adequate drainage system, and
was assured by defendant that an adequate drainage system  would be provided.
However, no such system was ever installed on the property.

   On May 8, 1969, plaintiff went to defendant's real estate office to sign a
purchase agreement for the property and to give defendant a deposit on the
property.  She did so, and for the first time learned that defendant, along with
his wife, were the owners of the property.  The purchase agreement which
plaintiff signed stated, "It is understood that one of said sellers is a
licensed agent." The agreement listed Tim Murphy Realty as the broker, and
defendant signed the agreement as an agent.  The agreement also provided that
defendant and his wife, as sellers, agreed to pay Tim Murphy Realty a 6 percent
broker's commission.

    Plaintiff purchased the house on or about August 13, 1969, and moved in.
She later found the drainage to be inadequate, which caused damage to the house
and her belongings.  Defendant did not repair this defect.

   Plaintiff brought an action for damages based on four causes of action: (1)
negligent performance; (2) breach of implied warranty; (3) violation of statute;
and (4) fraudulent deceit. She obtained judgment against defendant individually
and doing business as Tim Murphy Realty, and against defendant's wife
individually, in the amount of $ 14,671.05.  Judgment was entered August 27,
1975.  Findings of fact and conclusions of law were neither requested nor
entered, and the judgment did not specify upon which causes of action it was
based.

   Defendant filed for bankruptcy March 1, 1976, and the total amount of the
judgment remained unsatisfied.  Pursuant to section 10471 of the Business and
Professions Code, 3 plaintiff then initiated the present action by filing an
application for an order directing payment of judgment out of the Fund.  The
Fund was joined as real party in interest.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Unless
otherwise specified, all code section references herein are to the Business and
Professions Code.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   This application was heard on August 4, 1977, and the entire trial transcript
and trial exhibits from the prior proceeding were received in evidence.
Additional oral and documentary evidence was also presented.  The trial court
found that plaintiff had sustained the burden required by section 10472 and
granted her recovery from the Fund in the amount of $ 10,000, which was the
statutory limit.  The Fund and defendant appeal from this judgment, contending
that the trial court erred in finding that plaintiff had satisfied the grounds
for recovery as set forth in sections 10471 and 10472.

   Initially, we observe that while the Fund was established to compensate
aggrieved persons for acts of misconduct committed by members of a profession
licensed by the state who are themselves unable to respond in damages ( Nordahl
v. Department of Real Estate (1975) 48 Cal.App.3d 657, 663 [121 Cal.Rptr. 794]),
the scheme of compensation authorized by statute is not unlimited.  Apart from
the ceiling placed upon the maximum amount recoverable from the Fund, several
hurdles must be surmounted before the Fund is obliged to make payment.

     The right to recover from the Fund is a statutorily created cause of
action, and a plaintiff has the burden of showing compliance with the
provisions of section 10472.  The parties stipulated in the trial court that the
requirements of subdivisions (a), (b), (d), (e), (f) and (g) of section 10472
have been met.  The issue here is compliance with subdivision (c).

   Subdivision (c) requires the aggrieved person to show that he has obtained a
judgment as set out in section 10471.  At the time of the transaction here
involved, that section required "a final judgment in any court of competent
jurisdiction against any person or persons licensed under this part, under
grounds of fraud, misrepresentation or deceit arising directly out of any
transaction where the judgment debtor was licensed and performed acts for which
a license is required under this part.  . . ."

    Section 10131 defines the term "real estate broker," in pertinent part, as
"a person who, for a compensation or in expectation of a compensation, does or
negotiates to do one or more of the following acts for another or others: [para.
] (a) Sells or offers to sell, buys or offers to buy, solicits prospective
sellers or purchasers of, solicits or obtains listings of, or negotiates the
purchase, sale or exchange of real property or a business opportunity."

   Section 10133, subdivision (a), exempts from the definition of a real estate
broker "Anyone who directly performs any of the acts within the scope of this
chapter with reference to his own property . . . ."

     Plaintiff contends that she has satisfied the requirements of section 10471
.  However, her position is refuted by the separate and conjunctive effect of
sections 10131 and 10133, subdivision (a).

   The exemption given a broker who sells his own property is not an innovation,
but reflects an established principle of the law of agency.

     A broker is the agent of his principal, and his role is to bring buyer and
seller together with the aim of consummating a sale ( Rhode v. Bartholomew
(1949) 94 Cal.App.2d 272, 278 [210 P.2d 768]). The normal brokered sale is thus
seen to be a tripartite transaction.  But when a broker wishes to sell his own
property, section 10133, subdivision (a), allows him to utilize his professional
expertise and resources without surrendering his status as a principal.
Although a broker is involved, this role is subsumed within the superseding
characterization of the person as a principal to the transaction: his ancillary
status as a broker is not  sufficient to alter the fundamentally bilateral
nature of such a sale.  Stated differently, an individual who is by profession a
real estate broker is not, by virtue of this fact, deprived of the right to act
as a principal in the sale of his own property. Thus it has been held that "when
one deals with his own property his negotiations with reference to the sale or
exchange thereof do not constitute him a broker. . . ." ( Williams v. Kinsey
(1946) 74 Cal.App.2d 583, 592 [169 P.2d 487]; to the same effect, see 34 Ops.
Cal.Atty.Gen. 146, 147; 10 Cal.Jur.3d, Brokers, § 16, p. 490; Miller & Starr,
Current Law of Cal. Real Estate (rev. ed. 1975) § 6:4, pp. 179-184; 1 Witkin,
Summary of Cal. Law (8th ed.  1973) § 238, p. 824; Bernstein, Licensing of Real
Estate Agents in California (1972) 5 U.C.Davis L.Rev. 130, 150-154.) Section
10133, subdivision (a), codified this universally accepted rule, and it is
apparent that the trial court recognized the applicability of that statute,
since it found that Murphy's sale of his own property was lawful.

     In addition, Murphy, as a vendor-broker, was exempted from the remedial
coverage of the Fund not only by section 10133, subdivision (a), but also
because he does not meet the definition of a broker as set out in section 10131.
It is undisputed that Murphy was selling property in which he had an undivided
interest.  He could not be considered to be a broker who "acts for another or
others" within the meaning of section 10131.  This was the conclusion reached in
the recent case of McGaughey v. Fox (1979) 94 Cal.App.3d 645 [156 Cal.Rptr. 593]
. There, it was held that a corporation (Oren), which was a licensed real estate
broker, was not acting in that capacity within the meaning of section 10471 or
10131 when Oren undertook to sell to the plaintiff certain units in a limited
partnership. At the time, Oren was both a general and a limited partner in the
venture.  Oren pocketed the proceeds of the sale and did not transfer them to
the partnership. (Pp. 648-649.) The appellate court held that since Oren sold to
the plaintiff only those units which Oren itself owned as a limited partner,
recovery could not be had against the Real Estate Fund on the plaintiff's
judgment against Oren.  The court concluded that it could not, "under the guise
of liberal construction, disregard the express provisions of section 10471 which
authorize recovery from the Real Estate Fund only if a broker performed acts for
which a real estate license is required, i.e., if he acted for another in the
fraudulent transaction.  The trial court impliedly  found that Oren acted for
itself, not for the partnership, in selling investment units to plaintiff.  The
evidence supports that finding which, in turn, supports the judgment denying
recovery from the Real Estate Fund." (P. 651.)

    In this instance, the trial court correctly found that the fact that the
property was held in joint tenancy by Murphy and his wife would not affect his
power to sell, stating, "Defendant Terris Murphy sold to plaintiff real property
of which such defendant and his wife were the owners.  As owners they were
allowed by law to act on their own behalf in negotiating and consummating sale
of such property, without the intervention of a real estate broker. The fact
that defendant was a real estate broker did not deprive him of such privilege of
selling on his own account as principal."

   This finding clearly indicates that the trial court accepted the common law
concept that a married couple has one legally cognizable identity.  This
position is correct: a husband-broker can dispose of community property held by
him and his wife.  ( Wolff v. Hoaglund (1970) 11 Cal.App.3d 227, 230-232 [89
Cal.Rptr. 778].) For purposes of real estate transactions,  the nonbroker spouse
would not be "another or others" within the meaning of section 10131.  Any other
construction of the statute would mean, as the Fund observes, that only
unmarried brokers could sell their own property. Such an interpretation would
render section 10133, subdivision (a), meaningless for the great majority of
self-brokered transactions.  It might also raise troublesome questions of equal
protection, for no permissible or compelling state interest would be promoted by
allowing unmarried brokers a greater degree of freedom to contract than that
granted to married brokers. It strains credulity to believe that what the plain
language of section 10133, subdivision (a), gave, the Legislature then
surreptitiously withdrew through section 10131.  Yet this conclusion would
follow if we were to accept the attenuated reasoning which plaintiff attributes
to section 10131.

   Nor was this a transaction performed "for a compensation or in expectation of
a compensation." Although Murphy, as vendor, agreed in the purchase agreement to
pay a commission to the realty company of which he was the sole owner, Murphy's
testimony at the present trial established that he included this provision in
the agreement only because he felt that the income tax laws required him to do
so because he was a licensed real estate broker. It is undisputed that Murphy's
only gain from the sale was that which is realized by any property owner who
sells at a profit.  The trial court so viewed the situation and stated, during
its questioning of Murphy, that it could not see "what difference it made
whether you called part of your gain commission or called it profit from sale."
Murphy replied that he thought that because he was in fact a broker, the income
tax laws required that he treat 6 percent of the sales  price as a commission
payable to the realty company of which he was the sole owner. It is evident that
Murphy's interpretation of the income tax laws has no bearing upon the economic
realities of Murphy's transaction with plaintiff.  Murphy paid himself no
"compensation," nor were his acts performed prior to the signing of the
agreement done "in expectation" of any compensation other than the realization
of a profit on the sale of his own property.

   This analysis has shown that (1) Murphy was not acting as a broker as that
term is defined in section 10131; and that (2) even if it could be said that
Murphy was acting as a broker, section 10133, subdivision (a), made him an
exempted broker in this transaction.  It follows that the trial court's
decision, imposing vicarious liability upon the Fund, was erroneous and cannot
be upheld.

   In view of our conclusion that sections 10131 and 10133, subdivision (a),
preclude recovery against the Fund, it is unnecessary to deal with the question
of whether plaintiff fulfilled the requirements of section 10471 by establishing
that in her original action against Murphy, she recovered a judgment "under
grounds of fraud, misrepresentation or deceit."

    The purported appeal from the minute order of August 26, 1977, is dismissed.
The order directing payment from the Fund of a judgment obtained by plaintiff
against defendant Murphy is reversed.


                              56 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           GREENLAKE CAPITAL, LLC, Plaintiff and Appellant, v. BINGO
             INVESTMENTS, LLC, et al., Defendants and Respondents.

                                    B215487

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SECOND APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION SEVEN

          185 Cal. App. 4th 731; 111 Cal. Rptr. 3d 82; 2010 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 875


                              June 14, 2010, Filed

PRIOR-HISTORY:
   APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles County, No.
BC375204, Paul Gutman, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(4) Brokers § 16--Compensation--Licensing--Scope of Requirement--Financial
Advisors.--A letter agreement between a financial advisor and its client did not
have as a central purpose the provision of illegal services. The advisor was
hired to raise financing of various types; to assist the client in analyzing,
structuring, negotiating, and closing the financing; and to use its best efforts
to execute the financing. At the inception of the relationship, it appeared that
neither party intended the financing to take a form that would necessarily
violate Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10136. Thus, a disputed issue of fact existed as to
whether any of the services provided by the advisor fell within the scope of
Bus. & Prof.  Code, § 10131, and, if so, whether the letter agreement should be
enforced to the extent it was not barred by § 10136.

   [Cal. Real Estate Law & Practice (2010) ch. 64, § 64.05; Cal. Forms of
Pleading and Practice (2010) ch. 103, Brokers, § 103.20; 3 Witkin, Summary of
Cal. Law (10th ed. 2005) Agency and Employment, §§ 56, 77.]

COUNSEL: Law Offices of John Belcher, John A. Belcher and Nicholas W. Song for
Plaintiff and Appellant.

Parker, Milliken, Clark, O'Hara & Samuelian, Brenton F. Goodrich and Gary
Ganchrow for Defendants and Respondents.

JUDGES: Opinion by Perluss, P. J., with Zelon and Jackson, JJ., concurring.

OPINION BY: Perluss

OPINION

    PERLUSS, P. J.--GreenLake Capital, LLC (GreenLake) appeals from the judgment
entered after the trial court granted summary judgment in favor of Bingo
Investments, LLC and Centurion Financial Group, LLC (collectively Bingo) in this
action brought by GreenLake to recover its fee for identifying and procuring a $
150 million credit facility in favor of Bingo. Bingo contends GreenLake
forfeited its right to recover the agreed-upon $ 3 million fee  because it did
not hold a California real estate broker's license. (See Bus. & Prof. Code, §
10131.) 1 We reverse.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Statutory
references are to the Business and Professions Code unless otherwise indicated.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

   In November 2006 Bingo retained GreenLake to assist in identifying and
raising financing to support its business activities. 2 According to the letter
agreement  between the parties, Bingo intended to create a separate affiliated
investment entity with an initial debt capitalization of $ 150 million and was
seeking financing sources to provide capital to "its new or existing entities."
GreenLake was hired to "act as [Bingo's] advisor" in raising the financing,
which was authorized to consist of, but not limited to, "cash, equity,
quasi-equity, mezzanine financing, revolving line of credit, term loan, general
credit facility, mortgage facility, warehouse credit facilities, purchase
facilities, participation facilities, portfolio acquisitions or any combination
thereof." GreenLake was also intended to "assist [Bingo] in analyzing,
structuring, negotiating, and closing each Financing" and to "use its best
efforts" to execute the financing. Bingo was to engage its own legal counsel
and, if necessary, an accounting firm to comply with the due diligence
requirements of any financing source.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Bingo
Investments describes itself as a "mezzanine" or "bridge" lender offering a
specialized type of real estate secured loan consisting of short-term "bridge"
loans that provide funding based on the value of the real estate being
collateralized for the loan. According to Bingo Investments, its loan portfolio
consists of "loans for which it has taken a security interest in the real
property it is loaning against." Centurion Financial acts as Bingo Investments's
originating agent and services its loans.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In a paragraph entitled "Success Fees," Bingo agreed to pay GreenLake "in
cash, due immediately upon closing, Success Fees equal to two percent (2.00%) of
the total proceed or amount" that is "made available and/or funded" to Bingo
from the financing. "If the Financing is based upon a facility or drawdown type
structure, then the Success Fees will be based upon the Amount that is offered
or made available by the Financing Sources to [Bingo] and not the Amount that
[Bingo] elects to draw down." The parties agreed their relationship would be
governed by California law. The agreement was signed by Peter T. Chang on behalf
of GreenLake and David S. Bingham and Scott G. Switzer on behalf of the Bingo
entities.

   In January 2007 GreenLake introduced Bingo to FCC, LLC (doing business as
First Capital Western Region (First Capital)), a potential source of financing
for Bingo. Bingo and First Capital, plus another bank, West LB AG, New York
Branch (West LB), executed a funding proposal letter on January 23, 2007 that
contemplated extension of a $ 150 million credit facility to  Bingo Investments
II, LLC (Bingo II), a new "bankruptcy-remote," special purpose entity to be
formed by the principals of Bingo. With Chang's help, Bingo negotiated a term
sheet for a credit facility agreement with First Capital and West LB. Once
negotiated, the term sheet was provided to the lawyers for Bingo, on the one
hand, and the lenders, on the other, to draft supporting documents for the
credit facility. On May 31, 2007 Bingo II entered into a credit and security
agreement (CSA) with First Capital and West LB that created a credit facility in
favor of Bingo II. To support the contemplated (but not yet executed) loans,
Bingo II granted a security interest in its existing assets in favor of First
Capital and West LB. 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   On the
same date, Bingo and Bingo II entered into a purchase and sale agreement
transferring Bingo's interest in the mortgages and mortgaged properties in its
existing real estate portfolio to Bingo II; Bingo, Bingo II and West LB executed
a servicing agreement and a custodial agreement related to the loans
contemplated by the CSA.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Once the transaction closed, GreenLake requested payment of its 2 percent
fee, which, under the terms of the letter agreement, totaled $ 3 million. In
June 2007 Bingo made partial payments totaling $ 300,000 but refused to make
further payments, claiming no fees were due until Bingo II began to draw down on
its credit facility. On August 1, 2007 GreenLake filed this lawsuit, asserting
causes of action for breach of contract and unjust enrichment. Bingo
unsuccessfully demurred to the complaint on the ground Chang was  not a licensed
real estate broker in California. (See § 10136.) On September 12, 2008, however,
the trial court granted Bingo's motion for summary judgment based on the same
theory.

DISCUSSION

1. Standard of Review

   A motion for summary judgment is properly granted only when "all the papers
submitted show that there is no triable issue as to any material fact and that
the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." (Code Civ.
Proc., § 437c, subd. (c).) We review a grant of summary judgment de novo and
decide independently whether the facts not subject to triable dispute warrant
judgment for the moving party as a matter of law. (Intel Corp. v. Hamidi (2003)
30 Cal.4th 1342, 1348 [1 Cal. Rptr. 3d 32, 71 P.3d 296].) We view the evidence
in the light most favorable to the opposing party, liberally construing the
opposing party's evidence and strictly scrutinizing the moving party's. (
O'Riordan v. Federal Kemper Life Assurance Co. (2005) 36 Cal.4th 281, 284 [30
Cal. Rptr. 3d 507, 114 P.3d 753].)

2. The Statutory Scheme Governing Licensing of Real Estate Brokers

   Under California's Real Estate Law (§ 10000 et seq.), "[i]t is unlawful for
any person to engage in the business, act in the capacity of, advertise or
assume to act as a real estate broker or a real estate salesman within this
state without first obtaining a real estate license ... ." (§ 10130.) "The
purpose of the licensing requirement is to protect the public from the perils
incident to dealing with incompetent or untrustworthy real estate
practitioners." (Schantz v. Ellsworth (1971) 19 Cal.App.3d 289, 292-293 [96 Cal.
Rptr. 783].) Indeed, an unlicensed person who acts as a real estate broker is
subject to penal consequences. (See §§ 10139, 10185.) Moreover, section 10136
bars a person "engaged in the business or acting in the capacity of a real
estate broker or a real estate salesman" from bringing or maintaining an action
"for the collection of compensation for the performance of any of the acts
mentioned in this article without alleging and proving he was a duly licensed
real estate broker ... at the time the alleged cause of action arose."

   Section 10131 defines a "real estate broker" as one who "does or negotiates
to do one or more of the following acts for another or others: [¶] (a) ...
solicits prospective sellers or purchasers of ... or negotiates the purchase,
sale or exchange of real property ... . [¶] ... [¶] (d) Solicits borrowers or
lenders for or negotiates loans ... or performs services for borrowers or
lenders or note owners in connection with loans secured directly or collaterally
by liens on real property ... . [¶] (e) Sells or offers to sell, buys or offers
to buy, or exchanges or offers to exchange a real property sales contract, or a
promissory note secured directly or collaterally by a lien on real property ...
."

   Historically, the only exception to the statutory bar to recovering fees for
unlicensed brokerage activities concerned those "who simply find[] and
introduce[] two parties to a real estate transaction ... . Such an intermediary
or middleman is protected by the finder's exception to the real estate licensing
laws ... ." (Tyrone v. Kelley (1973) 9 Cal.3d 1, 8 [106 Cal. Rptr. 761, 507 P.2d
65].) Under the finder's exception a person who simply finds and introduces
prospective parties to a real estate transaction may obtain a commission for his
or her services without a real estate license. The fee is forfeited, however, if
he or she has played any role in negotiating the transaction, no matter how
slight. (Id. at p. 9;  accord, Preach v. Monter Rainbow (1993) 12 Cal.App.4th
1441, 1452 [16 Cal. Rptr. 2d 320]; Lyons v. Stevenson (1977) 65 Cal.App.3d 595,
604-605 [135 Cal. Rptr. 457].) This is the authority relied upon by the trial
court in granting summary judgment to Bingo II.

3. The Parties' Contentions

   Bingo contends judgment was proper because GreenLake, by its own admission,
acted as a broker in negotiating the CSA on Bingo's behalf. According to Bingo,
and as documented in its motion, GreenLake actively negotiated the terms of the
CSA and the resulting financing was "secured directly or collaterally" by a
security interest in Bingo II's assets (assertedly composed of "equity
positions" in real property). (See § 10131, subd. (d).) Accordingly, the
finder's exception does not apply, and GreenLake is not entitled to recover any
fee for its services.

   GreenLake defends its entitlement to the fee on two grounds: First, section
10131 does not apply to the services it provided to Bingo because the CSA
established only a drawdown credit facility that itself did not make any loans,
instead providing only a structure for Bingo II to obtain loans for particular
projects that remained subject to the lenders' review. Because Bingo II has yet
to present a qualifying loan to the lenders to draw down the credit facility,
section 10136 does not bar an action to recover the fee due under the letter
agreement. Second, even if some of the services it provided fall within the
scope of section 10131, the intervening decision in Venturi & Co. LLC v. Pacific
Malibu Development Corp. (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 1417 [92 Cal. Rptr. 3d 123] (
Venturi) requires a factual inquiry to determine whether GreenLake is entitled
to recover a fee for services falling outside the scope of section 10131.

4. Summary Judgment Was Improperly Granted Because a Triable Issue of Fact
Exists as to the Services Provided by GreenLake

   In Venturi, supra, 172 Cal.App.4th 1417 our colleagues in Division Eight of
this court reversed the trial court's entry of summary judgment in favor of a
developer that, likewise relying on sections 10130 and 10136, refused to pay the
fee of a financial advisor it had retained to assist in locating financing for a
large project. Relying on the decision of the Supreme Court in Marathon
Entertainment, Inc. v. Blasi (2008) 42 Cal.4th 974 [70 Cal. Rptr. 3d 727, 174
P.3d 741] (Marathon), Division Eight concluded the trial court had correctly
ruled the advisor could not recover compensation for providing real estate
broker services to the developer but had erred in denying compensation for those
services not falling within the scope of section 10130. (Venturi, at p. 1421.)
Consequently, triable issues of fact relating to which services were barred by
section 10136 and which were compensable under the parties' agreement precluded
summary judgment. (Venturi, at p. 1422.)

   Rather than analyze the advisor's claim under the bright-line rule
articulated in earlier decisions applying the finder's exception, Venturi
remanded  the case and directed the lower court to engage in a severability
analysis under Marathon, supra, 42 Cal.4th 974. (Venturi, supra, 172 Cal.App.4th
at pp. 1422-1423.) In Marathon the Supreme Court reversed summary judgment
entered against a talent manager whose actress client had refused to pay his 15
percent managerial fee on the ground he had violated  the Talent Agencies Act (
Lab. Code, § 1700 et seq.) by soliciting and procuring employment for her
without a talent agent's license. (Marathon, at p. 982.) After reviewing the
language and legislative history of the Talent Agencies Act, the Supreme Court
concluded personal managers "remain exempt from regulation insofar as they do
those things that personal managers do, but they are regulated under the Act to
the extent they stray into doing the things that make one a talent agency under
the Act." (Marathon, at p. 989.) Consequently, the court evaluated the manager's
contract under the doctrine of severability, codified in Civil Code section 1599
, 4 which "preserves and enforces any lawful portion of [the] parties' contract
that feasibly may be severed." (Marathon, at p. 991.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   Civil
Code section 1599 provides, "Where a contract has several distinct objects, of
which one at least is lawful, and one at least is unlawful, in whole or in part,
the contract is void as to the latter and valid as to the rest."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   As the court explained, in deciding whether severance is available to save
particular portions of a contract, " '[t]he overarching inquiry is whether '
"the interests of justice ... would be furthered" ' by severance.' " (Marathon,
supra, 42 Cal.4th at p. 996, quoting Armendariz v. Foundation Health Psychcare
Services, Inc. (2000) 24 Cal.4th 83, 124 [99 Cal. Rptr. 2d 745, 6 P.3d 669] (
Armendariz).) " 'Courts are to look to the various purposes of the contract. If
the central purpose of the contract is tainted with illegality, then the
contract as a whole cannot be enforced. If the illegality is collateral to the
main purpose of the contract, and the illegal provision can be extirpated from
the contract by means of severance or restriction, then such severance and
restriction are appropriate.' " (Marathon, at p. 996.) As the court had
previously explained in Armendariz, "Two reasons for severing or restricting
illegal terms rather than voiding the entire contract appear implicit in case
law. The first is to prevent parties from gaining undeserved benefit or
suffering undeserved detriment as a result of voiding the entire
agreement--particularly when there has been full or partial performance of the
contract. [Citations.] Second, more generally, the doctrine of severance
attempts to conserve a contractual relationship if to do so would not be
condoning an illegal scheme. [Citations.] The overarching inquiry is whether '
"the interests of justice ... would be furthered" ' by severance." (Armendariz,
at pp. 123-124; accord, Marathon, at p. 996.) Applying these principles, the
Marathon court concluded the talent manager's contract was susceptible to
severance and remanded the case for further proceedings. (Marathon, at p. 997.)

   Applying Marathon as Division Eight had in  Venturi, Division Three of this
court recently reversed a judgment entered in favor of an apartment owner who
had refused to pay the fees of the apartment's property management company
because it did not have a real estate broker's license. (MKB Management, Inc. v.
Melikian (2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 796 [108 Cal.Rptr.3d 899] (MKB Management).) The
trial court had concluded the property management agreement was unlawful because
its principal object contemplated the provision of services for which a real
estate broker's license was required. (Id. at p. 801, fn. 1.) Reviewing that
ruling in light of the severability  principles articulated in Marathon, the
court concluded the real estate licensing statutes "do not state that an
unlicensed real estate broker cannot maintain an action to recover compensation
for acts for which no license was required, and there is no indication that the
Legislature intended to preclude the recovery of compensation for such services
or to repudiate the generally applicable doctrine of severability. Moreover, we
cannot conclude as a matter of law ... all of the services provided under the
property management agreement were dependent upon or inextricably related to the
acts for which a real estate broker license was required." (Id. at pp. 804-805.)
The court remanded the case for the trial court to consider whether the doctrine
of severability applied to the property management agreement, and, if so, which
services were compensable. 5 (MKB Management, 184 Cal.App.4th at pp. 805-806.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   The court
also reinstated the property management company's cause of action for quantum
meruit on the ground the company was permitted to recover fees for services not
requiring a real estate broker's license. (MKB Management, supra, 184
Cal.App.4th at p. 805.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   We agree with our colleagues in Divisions Three and Eight that section 10136
does not bar the recovery of fees for services for which no real estate license
was required. 6 Moreover, in the context of this case, we conclude the letter
agreement between GreenLake and Bingo did not have as a "central purpose" the
provision of illegal services. (See Marathon, supra, 42 Cal.4th at p. 996.) As
described above, GreenLake was hired to "act as [Bingo's] advisor" in raising
"financing," which was authorized to consist of, but not limited to, "cash,
equity, quasi-equity, mezzanine financing, revolving  line of credit, term loan,
general credit facility, mortgage facility, warehouse credit facilities,
purchase facilities, participation facilities, portfolio acquisitions or any
combination thereof." GreenLake was also required to "assist [Bingo] in
analyzing, structuring, negotiating, and closing each Financing" and to "use its
best efforts" to execute the financing. At the inception of the relationship, it
appears neither Bingo nor GreenLake intended the financing to take a form that
would necessarily violate section 10136.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   Bingo
contends GreenLake has forfeited the argument the letter agreement is
susceptible to severance analysis by failing to raise it in the trial court.
GreenLake did, however, contend the services provided under the agreement did
not fall within the scope of section 10131. In addition, whether the letter
agreement itself is susceptible to severance analysis is a question of law we
may properly consider for the first time on appeal. (See, e.g., Sheller v.
Superior Court (2008) 158 Cal.App.4th 1697, 1709 [71 Cal. Rptr. 3d 207] [parties
permitted to raise new issues on appeal involving question of law; "application
of the forfeiture rule is not automatic; appellate courts have discretion to
excuse such forfeiture"].) Appellate courts are more inclined to find an
exception to the general rule of forfeiture when there has been a change in
decisional law that affects the rights of the parties. (See In re Marriage of
Moschetta (1994) 25 Cal.App.4th 1218, 1227 & fn. 12 [30 Cal. Rptr. 2d 893].) The
decisions in Venturi and MKB Management were issued long after the trial court
granted Bingo's motion for summary judgment.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Thus, a disputed issue of fact exists as to whether any of the services
provided by GreenLake fell within the scope of section 10131 and, if so, whether
the letter agreement should be enforced to the extent it is not barred by
section 10136. As Division Three directed in MKB Management, "If a contract is
capable of severance, the decision whether to sever the illegal portions and
enforce the remainder is a discretionary decision for the trial court to make
based on equitable considerations." (MKB Management, supra,  184 Cal.App.4th at
p. 803, citing Marathon, supra, 42 Cal.4th at pp. 992, 996, 998.)

5. Additional Factual and Policy Considerations on Remand

   The most difficult question on remand remains how the court can determine
whether a particular service provided by GreenLake ran afoul of section 10136.
Section 10131 itself offers little help in determining whether, for instance, a
particular service is made "in connection with loans secured directly or
collaterally by liens on real property." (§ 10131, subd. (d).) Typically courts
construe remedial statutes broadly to achieve their purpose--here, the
protection of consumers from unprincipled or ignorant brokers. (See, e.g.,
California Assn. of Health Facilities v. Department of Health Services (1997) 16
Cal.4th 284, 294 [65 Cal. Rptr. 2d 872, 940 P.2d 323].) Construed broadly,
however, this subdivision, which would appear to have been directed at mortgage
loan brokers, 7 could swallow virtually any financing arrangement if the
security proffered contains an equity position in real estate. In addition, a
violation of section 10136 exposes the violator to criminal penalties (see §§
10139, 10185), a punitive consequence that also cautions against an expansive
reading of the categories listed in section 10131. (See, e.g., Conrad v.
Superior Court (1962) 209 Cal.App.2d 143, 150 [25 Cal. Rptr. 670] ["legislation
which imposes a penalty, and particularly those defining crimes must do so with
'a reasonable degree of certainty' "], quoting In re Newbern (1960) 53 Cal.2d
786, 792 [3 Cal. Rptr. 364, 350 P.2d 116].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   See,
e.g., section 10166.01, subdivision (b)(1) (" 'Mortgage loan originator' means
an individual who takes a residential mortgage loan application or offers or
negotiates terms of a residential mortgage loan for compensation or gain. An
individual real estate licensee acting within the meaning of paragraph (d) of
Section 10131 is a mortgage loan originator for purposes of this article with
respect to activities involving residential mortgage loans.").
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Thus, it will be essential for the trial court to unravel the relationship
between GreenLake, as the finder and facilitator of the financing, and the
underlying security interest contemplated by the CSA. To begin with, GreenLake
correctly points out a revolving credit facility is not the same as a standard
commercial mortgage loan. Like the CSA here, a revolving credit facility
typically functions as a structure within which a series of loans will be made.
(See generally Stern, Structuring and Drafting Commercial Loan Agreements (A.S.
Pratt & Sons 2009) ¶ 1.02[2] et seq.) However, the mere fact no loans have yet
been made under the CSA does not mean the state does not have an interest in the
structure under which qualifying real estate loans were contemplated to have
been made, nor that the licensing requirements of section 10131 are necessarily
inapplicable.

   Based on the record before us, it is by no means clear loans made under the
CSA were necessarily intended or required to be "secured directly or
collaterally by liens on real property" (§ 10131, subd. (d)) in a manner that
would implicate the state's interest in protecting the public from unprincipled
or inept real estate professionals. (See Schantz v. Ellsworth, supra, 19
Cal.App.3d at pp. 292-293.) For instance, it is difficult to see Bingo as a
vulnerable consumer; Bingo was to engage its own legal counsel and, if
necessary, an accounting firm to comply with the due diligence requirements of
any financing source. Moreover, given Bingo's theory in this case and its
acknowledged participation in mezzanine (or bridge) financing, it is likely one
(or more) of the  Bingo entities holds a real estate broker's license. Indeed,
the record here is devoid of any factual description of the so-called equity
positions Bingo has proffered as collateral for the CSA--"positions" we assume
fund its business of mezzanine financing.

   As explained by one commentator, "[t]ypically, ... all mezzanine financing
refers to debt that is subordinate to another type or class of debt but senior
to equity. ... [¶] In the real estate capital markets, the term 'mezzanine
financing' ... refers to debt that sits between senior debt and the borrower's
equity. In this case, mezzanine debt is junior to the mortgage loan but senior
to the borrower's equity. A mezzanine loan in the real estate industry typically
refers to debt that is secured solely by the mezzanine borrower's indirect
ownership of the mortgage borrower--the entity that actually owns the income
producing real property. This same underlying real property also serves as
collateral for the senior mortgage lender. [¶] In a mezzanine loan, neither the
mezzanine borrower nor lender actually holds any direct real property interest
in the underlying land serving as collateral. Rather, their respective interests
are derived solely from the mezzanine borrower's (direct or indirect) ownership
of the equity in the underlying mortgage borrower. The mezzanine borrower grants
to the mezzanine lender a lien on its equity in the mortgage borrower pursuant
to a written instrument (typically a security agreement), and thereafter the
mezzanine lender holds an effective lien on the  collateral at least vis-á-vis
the mezzanine borrower. [¶] ... [¶] Since the mezzanine lender's collateral is
equity in another entity, the collateral is technically personal property;
therefore Article 9 of the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) applies rather than
local mortgage law." (Berman, "Once a Mortgage, Always a Mortgage"--The Use (and
Misuse of) Mezzanine Loans and Preferred Equity Investments (2005) 11 Stan. J.L.
Bus. & Fin. 76, 105-107, fns. omitted, italics added (Berman).)

   Bingo II's alleged equity positions in real estate, therefore, may themselves
exempt GreenLake from the requirements of section 10136, simply because, as a
mezzanine lender, Bingo II has no direct equity interest in the underlying real
property. 8 The CSA in turn inserts yet another layer in that the security
interest granted to the lending banks is nothing more than an interest in Bingo
II's assets, which likely are equity interests in the mezzanine borrowers--not
the real property owned by the mezzanine borrowers. There is California
authority that collateral so remote from an actual lien on real property is not
subject to the strictures of the Real Estate Law. (See, e.g., Gray v. Horne
(1941) 48 Cal.App.2d 372, 374-375 [119 P.2d 779] [lack of real estate license
did not prevent advisor from collecting fee for efforts in resolving
indebtedness of defendant even if indebtedness consisted of liens on real
property; "it would be entirely improper to hold that one having anything to do
with every type and character of lien must first have a real estate broker's
license"]; Layne v. Malmgren (1929) 99 Cal.App. 742, 745 [279 P. 670] [sale of
promissory note secured by deed of trust did not constitute sale or negotiation
for sale of real estate within meaning of the Real  Estate Law].) Citing this
authority, the California Attorney General opined under an earlier version of
section 10131 that a person negotiating a loan in which the collateral was a
promissory note secured by a lien on real property need not be a licensed real
estate broker. (30 Ops.Cal.Atty.Gen. 247, 249-250 (1957) ["[w]e conclude that
the fact that a bona fide loan transaction involves as security a promissory
note secured by a lien on real property will subject the transaction to no
additional licensing requirements than would be the case where the promissory
note is not so secured"].) 9

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -8   Berman
argues forcefully the equity position of the mezzanine lender should in fact be
treated as a second mortgage position, largely to eliminate the confusion courts
and regulatory entities have in monitoring these investments and to avoid the
intricate and costly layers of documentation typically used to insulate the
lender from the risks associated with the investment, but also to protect the
borrower who lacks the right of redemption under the Uniform Commercial Code it
would otherwise have under real property law. (See Berman, supra, 11 Stan. J.L.
Bus. & Fin. at pp. 112-126.)
9   Interestingly, and persuasively, New York law, which governs the CSA,
recognizes the same distinction. (See, e.g., Eaton Associates v. Highland
Broadcasting Corp. (N.Y.App.Div. 1981) 81 A.D.2d 603, 604 [437 N.Y.S.2d 715]
[enforcing fee agreement for financial advisor who prepared refinancing package
including mortgage loans; New York equivalent to § 10136 does not "encompass
every situation in which an interest in real estate may be part of the
transaction"]; Kreuter v. Tsucalas (N.Y.App.Div. 2001) 287 A.D.2d 50 [734
N.Y.S.2d 185] [enforcing unlicensed broker's fee agreement for negotiating
reduced payoff on existing mortgage]; Seckendorff v. Halsey Stuart & Co., Inc.
(N.Y.App.Div. 1930) 229 A.D. 318, 320 [241 N.Y.S. 300] ["The securities
ultimately issued were of two kinds--mortgage bonds and debentures. Defendants
had the right to select the form of securities to be issued if they undertook
the financing. It may not be held that they are without liability ... to pay an
originating commission merely, because they subsequently decided that the
financing was to be in part through bonds secured by a mortgage lien. ...
Obviously, if plaintiff did not ... negotiate for a loan on real estate secured
or to be secured by a mortgage, his right to compensation is not defeated by the
statute."].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Accordingly, on remand a complete factual investigation of the nature of the
obligations created by the CSA, as well as the policies and equities at play in
enforcing section 10136 against GreenLake in this case, is required.

DISPOSITION

   The judgment is reversed. The case is remanded for further proceedings not
inconsistent with this opinion. GreenLake is to recover its costs on appeal.

   Zelon, J., and Jackson, J., concurred.


                              57 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            DAVID E. PHILLIPPE, Plaintiff and Appellant, v. SHAPELL
                   INDUSTRIES, INC., Defendant and Appellant.

                                Civ. No. 70078.

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SECOND APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION SEVEN

            161 Cal. App. 3d 293; 207 Cal. Rptr. 483; 1984 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2658


                                October 26, 1984

NOTICE:    NOT CITABLE - SUPERSEDED BY GRANT OF REVIEW

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Hg. granted Jan. 31, 1985 (L.A. 32034)

COUNSEL: Fleischman & Rigdon and Robert N. Rigdon for Plaintiff and Appellant.

 Cox, Castle & Nicholson and Kenneth B. Bley for Defendant and Appellant.

OPINION BY: THOMPSON

OPINION

    THOMPSON, J.

   Defendant, Shapell Industries, Inc., (hereafter Shapell), appeals from a
judgment of $125,000 in favor of plaintiff, David E. Phillippe, doing business
as Management Trend Company (hereafter Phillippe), entered after a jury verdict
which found Shapell liable for breach of an agreement to pay a real estate
broker's commission, one of three theories of recovery presented. The other two
theories, which were rejected by the jury in special findings, were (1) an oral
agreement to pay a finder's fee, and (2) an oral agreement to share a real
estate broker's commission.

   Shapell contends on appeal that: (1) enforcement of the oral agreement
between Shapell and Phillippe is barred by the statute of frauds in that, (a)
Phillippe acted as a real estate broker in the instant case to assist in the
purchase of the Great Lakes property, (b) the statute of frauds applies in the
instant case even though Shapell was a buyer rather than a seller, and was also
a licensed real estate broker, and (c) the written correspondence between
Shapell and Phillippe, taken as a whole, does not establish Phillippe's
employment to act as a real estate broker in connection with the Great Lakes
property; (2) under the circumstances of this case, Shapell is not estopped from
asserting the statute of frauds; and (3) the trial court erroneously instructed
the jury on estoppel. 1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1    In view
of our conclusion in this case to reverse the judgment with directions, we find
it unnecessary to reach the other contentions of Shapell.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Phillippe cross-appeals from the judgment, claiming that the jury failed to
award him all the damages to which he is entitled. 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2    Although
Phillippe also appeals from that part of the judgment which denies recovery on
the theories of a finder's fee and splitting a commission, we will treat his
failure to present any argument on these points as an abandonment of them.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   We have concluded that the contentions of Shapell have merit and will
accordingly reverse the judgment with directions.

   STATEMENT OF THE FACTS

   Viewed in a light most favorable to Phillippe, who prevailed, the evidence at
trial established the following:

    Shapell is a corporation engaged in the construction of housing tracts and
is constantly in the market to buy land for such construction. Shapell is also
licensed as a real estate broker.

   In early 1972, Shapell first came in contact with Phillippe in its efforts to
acquire 78 acres of land located in the San Diego area and owned by a limited
partnership in which Phillippe had an interest. Tom Sifferman of Shapell dealt
with Phillippe who was acting as the real estate broker for the limited
partnership in the sale of this land. Later, Ron Prince, an employee in the land
acquisition department of Shapell, helped Sifferman in connection with the
purchase of this land from the limited partnership.  Escrow on this purchase
closed in December 1972. Shapell paid Phillippe $153,100 for his services.

   In January 1973, Shapell through Prince orally employed Phillippe to assist
it in locating and purchasing property on the Palos Verdes Peninsula. At the
time, Phillippe explained to Prince that he had no listings on the peninsula and
that, if he were to accept the employment, his commission was to be paid by
Shapell as buyer. Prince orally promised Phillippe that Shapell would pay him a
commission of 6 percent of the total cost of any land submitted by Phillippe and
purchased by Shapell, and that his commission would be included in any written
offer made by Shapell.

   In April 1973, Phillippe wrote to Prince about a parcel of land owned by
Filiorum Company. He informed Prince that he was "waiting for a price quote on
the property" and suggested that Prince take a look at the property. In
connection with his commission, Phillippe stated: "We present the property to
Shapell with the understanding that Buyer will pay our firm a commission, which,
when added to the net price of the land, will equal 6% of the total
consideration." Thereafter, Shapell submitted to Phillippe a written offer in
letter form dated May 4, 1973, to purchase the Filiorum property and stated in
connection with Phillippe's commission that "Buyer agrees to pay the Management
Trend Company a commission when added to the net price of the land will equal 6%
of the total consideration. This commission should be paid at the close of
escrow." However, the sale fell through because of geology problems and no
commission was paid to Phillippe.

   On August 9, 1973, Phillippe again wrote to Prince informing him about the
location of four properties on the Palos Verdes Peninsula and their owners,
including a 94-acre parcel owned by Great Lakes Properties (hereafter Great
Lakes property). He also stated in this letter that "[i]n the event properties
are purchased from any of the above companies, these properties are presented
with the understanding that Buyer agrees to pay Management Trend Company, or
assignee, a commission which when added to the net purchase price of the land
will equal 6% of the total consideration to be paid at close of escrow."
However, Shapell did not go forward with the purchase of the Great Lakes
property at that time because the zoning on the property was too restrictive for
Shapell's construction purposes.

   However, throughout the late 1973 and early 1974 period, Phillippe continued
in his efforts to structure a deal between Shapell and the owner of Great Lakes
property. He continued to negotiate with M. J. Steponovich, the owner of the
Great Lakes property, by suggesting prices which would be acceptable to Shapell
and by pointing out the strength of Shapell to close a deal. He also wrote
several letters to Shapell, the last of which was on April 30, 1974, and
addressed to Joe Aaron, vice president of Shapell. In this April letter,
Phillippe reviewed his efforts to assist Shapell in its attempt to locate and
purchase land on the Peninsula, including the Great Lakes property, and, in
connection with his commission, stated: "The commission arrangement on these
properties between our firm and Shapell is spelled out in the August 9, 1973
letter." Also, in February 1974, the Great Lakes property was rezoned from one
dwelling unit per two acres to two dwelling units per acre.

   Nothing more happened until the end of 1975, when Aaron telephoned
Steponovich and learned that 63 acres of the Great Lakes property were
available. After some discussions and negotiations, in March 1976, Shapell
signed a purchase and sale agreement for 63 of the 94 acres. This sale closed on
August 27, 1976, for $2,718,750.

   When Phillippe learned that Shapell had agreed to purchase 63 acres of the
Great Lakes property, he wrote to Aaron on June 9, 1976, requesting his
commission. In this letter, he reminded Aaron that he had agreed to work for
Shapell "with the understanding that our firm was working  for and represented
Shapell, the buyer, as brokers and would be paid a brokerage commission from
buyer of 6% of the total consideration paid for the acquired property." He also
reviewed the efforts his firm had made. Thereafter, on June 16, 1976, Aaron
responded by letter in which he informed Phillippe that Shapell would not pay
him a commission. Nor did Shapell include Phillippe's commission in its written
offer to purchase the 63 acres.

   The case went to the jury on three theories of recovery. First, Phillippe
sought recovery of a 6 percent commission on the basis of either a written
agreement of employment or memorandum thereof sufficient to satisfy the statute
of frauds or an estoppel to bar Shapell from asserting the statute of frauds.
Second, Phillippe sought to recover a 6 percent finder's fee based on an alleged
agreement. Third, Phillippe sought to recover a 6 percent commission based on an
alleged agreement between brokers to share a commission.

   The jury by special verdict found in favor of Phillippe on the first theory
of recovery, but rejected the other two theories of recovery and awarded him
$125,000.

   Thereafter, the trial court denied Shapell's motion for a new trial and these
appeals followed.

   DISCUSSION

   I

   ENFORCEMENT OF THE ORAL AGREEMENT BETWEEN SHAPELL

   AND PHILLIPPE IS BARRED BY THE STATUTE OF FRAUDS

   An agreement authorizing or employing an agent, broker, or any other person
to purchase or sell real estate, or to lease real estate for a longer period
than one year, or to procure, introduce, or find a purchaser or seller of real
estate or a lessee or lessor of real estate where such lease is for a longer
period than one year, for compensation or a commission, is invalid, unless the
same, or some note or memorandum thereof, is in writing and subscribed by the
party to be charged. (Civ. Code, § 1624, subd. 5; see, e.g., Pac. etc. Dev.
Corp.  v. Western Pac. R. R. Co. (1956) 47 Cal.2d 62 [301 P.2d 825].)

   With this principle in mind, we will now consider Shapell's first contention
that its agreement to pay Phillippe a commission is barred by the statute of
frauds.

   A. Phillippe Acted as a Real Estate Broker in the Instant Case to Assist in
the Purchase of the Great Lakes Property

   Phillippe argues that Shapell did not employ him to negotiate or to assist in
effecting a purchase of real property for a commission. Rather, he argues, he
was retained by Shapell essentially as a professional consultant in the field of
subdivision land acquisition to locate a suitable site on the Palos Verdes
Peninsula for residential subdivision and thus he can recover even on an oral
agreement, citing Owen v. National Container Corp. of Cal. (1952) 115 Cal.App.2d
21 [251 P.2d 765].

   However, Phillippe's reliance on Owen is misplaced. There the court held that
a broker could recover under an oral agreement or in quantum meruit for
services, such as making surveys, locating suitable sites and the like, which do
not come within the purview of the statute of frauds. ( Id., at pp. 25-26.) And
in connection with the correspondence between the parties, the Owen court stated
that it merely showed "the nature of plaintiff's services, and defendants'
request for further information." ( Id., at p. 25.) Furthermore, the court
stated that "the letters from plaintiff conveyed information as to various sites
but none of the letters from either side disclosed any negotiations or authority
to negotiate with any of the owners. . . ." ( Id., at p. 26; italics added.)

   Here, the evidence presents quite a different picture. First, in reference to
the Filiorum property, in his letter of April 5, 1973, to Prince, Phillippe
stated that he  was "waiting for a price quote on the property." Second, and
more importantly, when Phillippe wrote to Aaron on June 9, 1976, about his
commission from the purchase of the Great Lakes property by Shapell, he
described his relationship with Shapell and the nature of his services as
follows: "Let us refresh your memory concerning the circumstances. Early in 1973
our firm was asked by Ron Prince of Shapell to do an extensive survey of
properties available for sale on the Palos Verdes Peninsula. We agreed to do so
on the condition and with the understanding that our firm was working for and
representing Shapell, the buyer, as brokers and would be paid a brokerage
commission from buyer of 6% of the total consideration paid for the acquired
property." (Italics added.) Thus, it appears that any service which Phillippe
may have rendered to Shapell, and upon which he relies for application of the
Owen holding, was merely incidental to Phillippe's efforts to bring about a
purchase of the property by Shapell. (See Owen v. National Container Corp. of
Cal., supra, 115 Cal.App.2d at p. 28.)

   Moreover, Phillippe's argument would require us to determine Shapell's
liability not on the basis of an agreement to pay a broker's commission in
effecting a purchase of real property, the theory upon which the case was tried
in the trial court, but rather on the basis that Phillippe was employed to
locate a suitable site, without any duty on his part to bring the parties
together or to negotiate or assist in the purchase of any property. However, we
find that the record in this case will not permit Phillippe to argue this theory
of liability. Under the general rule, a party to an action may not for the first
time on appeal change his theory of the cause, except where after trial there is
a change in judicially declared law which validates a theory on which the case
could have been tried, or where the theory presented for the first time on
appeal involves only a question of law determinable from a factual situation
present in the record. ( Marsango v. Automobile Club of So. Cal. (1969) 1
Cal.App.3d 688, 694 [82 Cal.Rptr. 92].) From our examination of the record, we
find that neither exception to the general rule applies in the instant case.

   We conclude therefore that Phillippe was employed in the instant case as a
real estate broker by Shapell to assist it in effecting the purchase of a parcel
of property on the Peninsula.

   B. The Statute of Frauds Applies in the Instant Case Even Though Shapell Was
a Buyer and Licensed as a Real Estate Broker

   Phillippe further argues that the statute of frauds should not be applicable
to the circumstances of this case because Phillippe as a broker acted on behalf
of Shapell as buyer rather than as seller. Furthermore, he argues, Shapell as a
real estate broker does not need the protection of the statute of frauds, since
an agreement of this nature between brokers need not be reduced to writing to be
enforceable. Phillippe cites Robinson v. Potter (1928) 94 Cal.App. 614 [271 P.
539], and Jenkins v. Locke-Paddon Co. (1916) 30 Cal.App. 52 [157 P. 537], in
support of his argument.

   We start our analysis with the principle that legislative enactments should
be construed in accordance with the common or ordinary meaning of the language
used. ( Estate of Richartz (1955) 45 Cal.2d 292, 294 [288 P.2d 857].) Civil Code
section 1624, subdivision 5, requires a writing subscribed by the party to be
charged for "[a]n agreement authorizing or employing an agent, broker, or any
other person to purchase or sell real estate, . . . or to procure, introduce, or
find a purchaser or seller of real estate . . . for compensation or a
commission." (Italics added.) A fair reading of the statute clearly shows that
it is intended to cover both the situation where a broker is employed to effect
the purchase of real estate as well as where he or she represents the seller.
Thus, Phillippe's argument that the statute should apply only  to the situation
where a real estate broker represents a seller does not comport with the common
or ordinary meaning of the language used in the statute. (See Buckaloo v.
Johnson (1975) 14 Cal.3d 815, 821 [122 Cal.Rptr. 745, 537 P.2d 865].) We
conclude therefore that the statute of frauds is applicable in the instant case
even though Shapell is a buyer rather than a seller.

   The more difficult question, however, is whether the statute of frauds should
apply where the seller or buyer is also a licensed real estate broker.

   We have determined that neither Robinson v. Potter, supra, 94 Cal.App. 614,
nor Jenkins v. Locke-Paddon Co., supra, 30 Cal.App.  52, the two cases cited by
Phillippe in support of his argument, is helpful in our resolution of this
question. In both of those cases, real estate brokers sought the division of a
real estate commission based on an oral agreement. Such an agreement has no
reference to either the purchase or the sale of real estate for compensation.
Thus, the agreement is not covered by the statute of frauds. (See, e.g.  Iusi v.
Chase (1959) 169 Cal.App.2d 83, 86 [337 P.2d 79]; Holland v. Morgan & Peacock
Properties (1959) 168 Cal.App.2d 206, 210 [335 P.2d 769].) However, the record
shows that the jury rejected this theory of recovery by special finding and we
conclude that the record sustains this finding.

   One of the primary purposes of the statute of frauds is to protect real
estate sellers and purchasers from the assertion of false claims by brokers and
agents. ( Pac. etc. Dev. Corp.  v. Western Pac. R. R. Co., supra, 47 Cal.2d at
p. 67.) We can see no reason why a licensee who is acting as a seller or
purchaser of real property should not be considered a member of the public for
purposes of the statute of frauds. The acts of a seller or purchaser in this
situation do not require a real estate license. We therefore conclude that the
fact he or she is also licensed should be irrelevant to the application of the
statute of frauds.

   C. The Written Correspondence Between Shapell and Phillippe, Taken as a
Whole, Does Not Establish Phillippe's Employment as a Real Estate Broker in
Connection With the Great Lakes Property

   The rule is well settled that in an action by a broker to recover a real
estate commission in order to show compliance with the statute of frauds the
writing signed by the party to be charged must unequivocally show on its face
the fact of employment of the broker. ( Franklin v. Hansen (1963) 59 Cal.2d 570,
573 [30 Cal.Rptr. 530, 381 P.2d 386].) As our Supreme Court stated in Pac. etc.
Dev. Corp.  v. Western Pac. R. R. Co., supra, 47 Cal.2d at page 68: "The chief
element required to be shown in writing is the fact of employment of the broker
to act for the principal in the transaction."

   To satisfy this requirement, Phillippe refers to the considerable
correspondence between Shapell and himself. However, there is only one letter in
this exchange which is signed by Shapell and refers to Phillippe's employment.
That is the letter of May 4, 1973, from Ron Prince, director of land acquisition
for Shapell, to Phillippe in which Shapell made an offer to buy the Filiorum
property and then stated: "Buyer agrees to pay the Management Trend Company a
commission when added to the net price of the land will equal 6% of the total
consideration. This commission should be paid at the close of escrow." The
evidence shows, however, that this sale was never consummated due to geology
problems. The evidence further shows that thereafter on August 9, 1973,
Phillippe submitted to Shapell in letter form the location of four other
properties on the Peninsula, including the Great Lakes property. It is in this
letter that Phillippe set forth the fact of his employment with reference to
these four properties and, in this regard, he stated: "In the event properties
are purchased from any of the above companies, these properties are presented
with the understanding that Buyer agrees to pay Management Trend Company, or
assignee, a commission which when added to  the net purchase price of the land
will equal 6% of the total consideration to be paid at close of escrow." The
evidence then shows that, after Shapell had entered an agreement to purchase 63
acres of the Great Lakes property, Phillippe made demand on Shapell on June 9,
1976, for the payment of his commission by writing a letter to Aaron, vice
president of Shapell. In this letter after reviewing his employment arrangement
with Shapell, Phillippe stated: "We therefore are entitled to receive, and
hereby make demand for payment of our commissions, as specified by our letter to
Ron Prince dated August 9, 1973."

   We conclude therefore that there is no evidence of a writing signed by
Shapell showing the fact of Phillippe's employment to act as a broker for
Shapell in connection with the Great Lakes property present in the instant case.
Where a broker's only agreement with his principal relates solely to
specifically described property, as with the Filiorum property, the principal is
not liable to the broker for a commission on the purchase of different property
unless the broker's written employment covers the other property. (See, e.g.,
Frederick v. Curtright (1955) 137 Cal.App.2d 610, 614 [290 P.2d 875].) Thus, it
must be concluded that the writings are insufficient under the statute of frauds
to sustain Phillippe's claim.

    II

   UNDER THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THIS CASE, SHAPELL IS NOT

   ESTOPPED FROM ASSERTING THE STATUTE OF FRAUDS

   A. The Mere Refusal to Comply With an Oral Promise to Pay a Broker's
Commission Does Not Give Rise to an Estoppel to Assert the Statute of Frauds

   Phillippe argues, citing Monarco v. Lo Greco (1950) 35 Cal.2d 621 [220 P.2d
737], that in order to avoid unconscionable injury to him or unjust enrichment
to Shapell, Shapell should be precluded from asserting the statute of frauds
since he changed his position in reliance on Shapell's oral promise to pay a
commission.

   In Monarco, which did not involve the enforcement of an oral agreement to pay
a broker's commission, our Supreme Court stated: "The doctrine of estoppel to
assert the statute of frauds has been consistently applied by the courts of this
state to prevent fraud that would result from refusal to enforce oral contracts
in certain circumstances. Such fraud may inhere in the unconscionable injury
that would result from denying enforcement of the contract after one party has
been induced by the other seriously to change his position in reliance on the
contract . . . or in the unjust enrichment that would result if a party who has
received the benefits of the other's performance were allowed to rely upon the
statute." (35 Cal.2d at pp. 623-624.)

   However, in Pac. etc. Dev. Corp.  v. Western Pac. R. R. Co., supra, 47 Cal.2d
at page 70, our Supreme Court refused to extend the application of Monarco to
enforce an oral agreement to pay a broker's commission. There the court stated:
"This is not a case of unconscionable injury to plaintiff because of a change of
position in reliance upon the alleged contract of employment [citation] or an
unjust enrichment of defendant through acceptance of the benefits of the alleged
contract without itself being obligated thereunder. [Citation.] The fact that
plaintiff rendered services . . . does not constitute a change of position to
plaintiff's detriment, nor does the fact that defendant refused to pay plaintiff
a real estate commission . . .  constitute an unjust enrichment within the
meaning of the estoppel doctrine." (Ibid.) Thus, Phillippe's reliance on Monarco
is misplaced. Moreover, the Monarco ruling has not been generally applied to
oral contracts to pay a real estate broker's commission, except in two narrow
situations:  (1) where the broker cancelled an otherwise written contract with
the sellers of the property in reliance upon the oral promise of the buyer that
he would pay his commission ( LeBlond v. Wolfe (1948) 83 Cal.App.2d 282 [188
P.2d  278]), and (2) where the principal has told the broker that his
authorization was in writing, whereas in fact it was not ( Owens v. Foundation
For Ocean Research (1980) 107 Cal.App.3d 179 [165 Cal.Rptr. 571]). 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3    We
recognize, however, that some commentators have urged the application of the
Monarco ruling to enforce oral promises to pay a real estate commission. (See,
e.g., 1 Miller & Starr, Current Law of Cal. Real Estate (1975) § 1:54, p. 72,
fn. 8; Englund, Oral Employment Contracts and Equitable Estoppel: The Real
Estate Broker As Victim  (1975) 26 Hastings L.J. 1503.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   We find that the evidence in the instant case does not support either of
those exceptions. There is no evidence that Phillippe cancelled a written
contract with the owner of the Great Lakes property in reliance on any promise
of Shapell, nor does the evidence suggest that any such written contract ever
existed. Moreover, there is no suggestion in the record either directly or
inferentially that Shapell ever represented to Phillippe that his authorization
regarding the Great Lakes property was in writing. The evidence is to the
contrary. The record shows that the only writings concerning the employment of
Phillippe with regard to the Great Lakes property were his letters to Shapell,
starting with the letter of August 9, 1973. There is only one letter from
Shapell to Phillippe after this August 9, 1973 letter.  That letter was the one
from Aaron, the vice president of Shapell, to inform Phillippe that Shapell
would not pay him a commission.

   Phillippe further argues that the instant case should be resolved by rules
applicable to the custom and practice of the professional land merchant rather
than by rules applicable to agreements between ordinary principals and brokers.
He relies on Iusi v. Chase, supra, 169 Cal.App.2d 83, in support of his
argument. However, his reliance on Iusi is misplaced. There the court held that
the trial court in an action between brokers to split a commission could look to
local customs among brokers to determine how the real estate commission should
be divided. ( Id., at p. 87.)

   We construe Phillippe's argument as a suggestion to create another exception
to the statute of frauds, which we decline to do. Phillippe "is a licensed real
estate broker and, as such, is presumed to know that contracts for real estate
commissions are invalid and unenforceable unless put in writing and subscribed
by the person to be charged." ( Pac. etc. Dev. Corp. v. Western Pac. R. R. Co.,
supra, 47 Cal.2d at p. 70.)

   Other than its failure to perform the oral contract, our examination of the
record does not reveal any other impropriety by Shapell. We therefore conclude
that there is insufficient evidence in the record to support the finding of an
estoppel to preclude Shapell from asserting the statute of frauds.

   B. The Trial Court Erroneously Instructed the Jury on Estoppel

   Shapell contends that under the circumstances of this case the court trial
erroneously instructed the jury on estoppel. We agree.

   The trial court gave the following instruction on estoppel: "Under the
following circumstances, the law permits an exception to the general rule
requiring a real estate broker's commission agreement to be in writing:

   "If you find all of the following to be true then this exception would apply:

   "1. That the defendant promised plaintiff to reduce their employment
agreement to a writing at the time when a definite offer to purchase land was
made by defendant, and

   "2. That plaintiff relied on that promise and rendered services and changed
his legal position to his detriment, and

   "3. That the defendant was unjustly enriched by later refusing to reduce the
agreement to writing.

   "Under these circumstances, the defendant can not avail itself of the general
requirement of a writing to prove a real estate broker's commission agreement as
a defense to plaintiff's claim. In this event, no such writing is required to
prove the making of such an agreement."

    Phillippe concedes that this instruction on estoppel was taken directly from
Monarco v. Lo Greco, supra, 35 Cal.2d 621. However, as we noted before, the
Monarco ruling has not been generally applied to oral contracts to pay a real
estate broker's commission, except in two limited situations which are not
present here.

   Turning to the prejudicial effect of this instruction, "if it appears that
error in giving an improper instruction was likely to mislead the jury and thus
to become a factor in its verdict, it is prejudicial and ground for reversal." (
Henderson v. Harnischfeger Corp. (1974) 12 Cal.3d 663, 670 [117 Cal.Rptr. 1, 527
P.2d 353].) Here, there is simply no evidence in the record of an estoppel.
Under these circumstances, the giving of this instruction would clearly mislead
the jury and did play a factor in its verdict. The fact that the trial court
determined during the hearing on Shapell's motion for a new trial that the only
basis of the jury verdict was estoppel leaves no doubt about the effect of this
instruction. The trial court made the following comment: "THE COURT: And so the
only cause of action that the jury came in on was a broker's commission; and we
obviously didn't have a broker's commission in writing, and so it had to be
under the instruction about estoppel. In effect, performance based on promises,
and performance to the extent of where the seller, or in this case the buyer, is
precluded from using the nonexistence of a written commission, contract, for
defense."

   We conclude therefore that it was reversible error for the trial court to
give this instruction on estoppel under the circumstances of this case.

   CONCLUSION

    We have carefully examined the record in this case and, based such
examination, have determined that only one judgment is proper under the law and
facts. We have determined that a new trial under the theory upon which the
present judgment is based would be a waste of effort and that there is no
evidence in this record to support the theories of either a finder's fee or an
agreement to split a commission, theories which the jury rejected by special
findings.

   Accordingly, the judgment is reversed with directions to the trial court to
enter judgment in favor of Shapell.

   Lillie, P. J., concurred.

   Johnson, J., concurred in the judgment only.


                              58 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          PARK TERRACE LIMITED, Plaintiff and Appellant, v. ROBERT D.
                  TEASDALE et al., Defendants and Respondents.

                                  No. G029283.

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FOURTH APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION THREE

          100 Cal. App. 4th 802; 122 Cal. Rptr. 2d 797; 2002 Cal. App.
            LEXIS 4449; 2002 Cal. Daily Op. Service 6813; 2002 Daily
                                Journal DAR 8595


                             July 30, 2002, Decided
                              July 30, 2002, Filed

NOTICE:     And four other cases.  *

*   Colton General v. Teasdale (No. 00CC03183); Intervest Chino Investors, Ltd.
v. Teasdale (No. 00CC03188); IVR Peartree Limited v. Teasdale (No. 00CC03190);
Mini I. Ltd. v. Teasdale (No. 00CC03193).

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:    Review Denied November 20, 2002, Reported at: 2002 Cal.
LEXIS 7989.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Appeal from a judgment of the Superior Court of Orange County.
Super. Ct. No. 00 CC02855. Robert H. Gallivan, Judge.

COUNSEL: Dennis V. Menke and James D. Menke for Plaintiff and Appellant.

Prenovost, Normandin, Bergh & Dawe and Michael G. Dawe for Defendants and
Respondents.

JUDGES: (Opinion by Rylaarsdam, J., with Sills, P. J., and Moore, J.,
concurring.)

OPINION BY: RYLAARSDAM

OPINION

    RYLAARSDAM, J.

    This appeal is from summary judgments in consolidated actions wherein five
real estate partnerships sought damages from and declaratory relief against a
lender for loaning them money at allegedly usurious interest rates. The trial
court granted summary judgment in all five actions, based on the exemption for
loans arranged by a licensed real estate broker. (Cal. Const., art. XV, § 1,
subd. (2); Civ. Code, § 1916.1.) We agree the exemption applies and affirm the
judgment.

   FACTS

   Plaintiffs, Park Terrace Limited, Colton General, Intervest Chino Investors,
Ltd., IVR Peartree Limited, and Mini I. Ltd., are limited partnerships which
hold and manage real estate. John Minar is a licensed real estate broker, and a
general partner of these five entities as well as of Park Village Limited. The
latter limited partnership is not a party to this action. Defendants Robert D.
and Audrey B. Teasdale were sued as trustees of defendant Teasdale Family Trust.

   Park Village wanted to refinance debts secured by its property, including a
note held by defendants. Defendants, reluctant to take a discounted payoff, and,
acting through Minar, suggested "mov[ing] the trust deed on to something else."
Ultimately, Park Village paid off defendants with proceeds from a new loan
secured by property owned by the Intervest partnership. The note evidencing this
loan provided for an initial annual interest rate of 10 percent, later
increasing to 13.5 percent.

   As part of this transaction, Intervest's partners signed a certificate that
stated: "The Partnership designated general partner John Minar, a real estate
broker licensed by the State of California . . . to act on the partnership's
behalf in soliciting, negotiating and arranging the Loan with the Lender. In
accordance with such designation, John Minar commenced discussions with the
Lender . . . .  In consideration for such services, general partner John Minar
will receive compensation from the Partnership as a general partner, in
accordance with the Partnership Agreement. Based on the foregoing activities of
general partner John Minar, the undersigned hereby certify to the Lender that,
in accordance with California Civil Code section 1916.1 the Loan is not
usurious. The undersigned further certify that they understand that the
certification contained in this paragraph was a material inducement to the
Lender in making the Loan."

   Defendants also made secured loans to the other four plaintiffs with interest
exceeding the maximum legal rate. Each note provided: "This loan has been
arranged through a licensed Real Estate Person."

   Subsequently, plaintiff filed complaints alleging defendants loaned them
money at interest rates that were "usurious and violate[d] the California
Constitution . . . ." Defendants moved for summary judgment, claiming the usury
limitations did not apply because "[t]he loans were arranged by a real estate
broker for compensation . . . ."

    DISCUSSION

   Introduction

   Article XV, section 1, subdivision 2 of the Constitution limits the interest
rate which may be charged on nonpersonal loans. But exempted are "any loans made
or arranged by any person licensed as a real estate broker by the State of
California and secured in whole or in part by liens on real property . . . ." (
Ibid.)

   To clarify the scope of that exemption, the Legislature enacted Civil Code
section 1916.1 (section 1916.1). ( Winnett v. Roberts (1986) 179 Cal. App. 3d
909, 920, [225 Cal. Rptr. 82].) That section provides: "The restrictions upon
rates of interest contained in . . . the California Constitution shall not apply
to any loan or forbearance made or arranged by any person licensed as a real
estate broker by the State of California, and secured, directly or collaterally,
in whole or in part by liens on real property. For purposes of this section, a
loan or forbearance is arranged by a person licensed as a real estate broker
when the broker (1) acts for compensation or in expectation of compensation for
soliciting, negotiating, or arranging the loan for another, . . . . The term
'made or arranged' includes any loan made by a person licensed as a real estate
broker as a principal or as an agent for others, and whether or not the person
is acting within the course and scope of such license." (§ 1916.1.)

    The notes charged interest exceeding the constitutional maximum. But Minar
held a California real estate broker's license, and defendants rely on this and
his participation in the loan transactions to exempt the loans from the interest
rate cap. Relying in part on Minar's declaration he did not arrange the loans,
plaintiffs contend the exemption does not apply because Minar neither "arranged"
the loans nor performed acts requiring him to have a license. Both arguments
lack merit.

   Minar Arranged the Loans

     First, we conclusively presume the truth of the provision in each note that
a licensed real estate person "arranged" the obligation. (Evid. Code, § 622.)
Even were we not to rely on this conclusive presumption, the evidence supports
such a conclusion. In the Intervest transaction, Minar approached defendants,
seeking their assistance in refinancing the Park Village parcel. When Teasdale
suggested moving the trust deed to another property, it was Minar who proposed
using Intervest's property and it was he who then negotiated the terms of the
new obligation. Minar participated similarly in the other loan transactions.

   We construe the term "arrange" according to its common and ordinary meaning.
( Del Mar v. Caspe (1990) 222 Cal. App. 3d 1316, 1328, [272 Cal. Rptr. 446].) A
licensed real estate broker arranges a loan if he or she acts for another and
receives or expects to receive compensation for it. ( Stickel v. Harris (1987)
196 Cal. App. 3d 575, 583, [242 Cal. Rptr. 88]; Green v. Future Two (1986) 179
Cal. App. 3d 738, 742-743, [225 Cal. Rptr. 3].) Plaintiffs argue that, as a
general partner for each of them, Minar did not act for others. They also
contend that, because his only payment was a share of each partnership's
profits, he failed to satisfy the compensation requirement. The two cases that
considered these arguments under analogous factual circumstances reached
opposite results.

   In Green v. Future Two, supra, 179 Cal. App. 3d 738, Evans, a licensed broker
and partner in a real property partnership, contacted Reisner, who arranged a
meeting between the Greens and Evans. The Greens made a secured loan to the
partnership that bore annual interest of 25 percent. In a subsequent foreclosure
action, the trial court found the loan was usurious. The Court of Appeal
affirmed, rejecting the claim Evans arranged the loan. It could not state that,
"as a matter of law, a secured loan to a real estate broker acting on his own
behalf is 'arranged' by the broker and therefore exempt from the usury
restrictions." ( Green v. Future Two, supra, 179 Cal. App. 3d at p. 742.)
"[N]either lending nor borrowing necessarily involves  'arranging.' " (Ibid.)
Noting the two requisite elements for arranging a loan, the court held that a
broker who "acts for himself" or "does not receive or expect to receive
compensation" is excluded from the exemption. ( Id. at p. 743.)

   But Stickel v. Harris, supra, 196 Cal. App. 3d 575 came to a different
conclusion. There, after a licensed broker approached Stickel about investing in
a real estate development by a yet-to-be-formed joint venture, she loaned funds
at 30 percent. When the borrowers defaulted, Stickel successfully sued to
recover the principal and interest at the agreed-upon rate. The appellate court
upheld the lender's recovery, finding the broker did not solicit the loan on his
own behalf but arranged the loan as a representative of the joint venture. He
did not forfeit his exempt status just because he joined the joint venture. (
Stickel v. Harris, supra, 196 Cal. App. 3d at p. 585.) By obtaining the
necessary capital for the joint venture, he provided "a vital service from which
all involved[, including himself,] would benefit." (Ibid.) The broker expected
to be paid from the profits of the venture, and "[a]nticipated profits qualify
as compensation. [Citations.]" (Ibid.)

   We agree with Stickel in determining the exemption applies in this case.
Acting as an intermediary, Minar negotiated the loans for each partnership's
benefit, not merely for his own. (Compare Winnett v. Roberts, supra, 179 Cal.
App. 3d at pp. 917-921 [exemption inapplicable where broker acts on his own
behalf] with Chapman v. Farr (1982) 132 Cal. App. 3d 1021, 1026, [183 Cal. Rptr.
606] [exemption for arranging loan applied where broker structured loan made by
others].) Minar's right to participate in partnership profits satisfied the
requirement he expect compensation for his efforts.

   Our conclusion comports with the policies underlying usury statutes and the
real estate broker exemption.  "Usury laws are designed to protect the public
from sharp operators who would take advantage of 'unwary and necessitous
borrowers.' [Citations.]" ( Del Mar v. Caspe, supra, 222 Cal. App. 3d at p.
1326, fn. 4.) Plaintiffs, limited partnerships that own and manage real estate,
are not unsophisticated borrowers, and Minar contacted defendants about the
loans, not vice versa. In adopting California Constitution, article XV and in
enacting section 1916.1, "[t]he electorate and Legislature . . . considered the
licensing requirements for and regulatory control over real estate brokers
sufficient to protect the borrowing public from usury and dishonest real estate
brokers." (Del Mar at p. 1326, fn. omitted.)

   Plaintiffs try to distinguish Stickel, arguing its finding that substantial
evidence, adduced during a trial, supported the judgment differs from the
summary judgment procedure employed here. While Stickel did affirm on that
basis, it also held, "[The broker] was not acting exclusively as a borrower; he
was simultaneously acting as an agent soliciting the loan on behalf of others .
. . ." ( Stickel v. Harris, supra, 196 Cal. App. 3d at p. 587.) Stickel also
rejected the claim that "there can be no exemption unless [the broker] either
received or expected to receive compensation for soliciting the loans . . .
separate and independent from his entitlement to a share of the joint venture's
profits." ( Id. at p. 589, fn. omitted.)

     Minar acted on behalf of each plaintiff when negotiating the loans; his
membership in each of the partnerships entitled him to receive part of the
profits generated. Thus, applying Stickel, the requirement Minar "arranged" the
loan was satisfied.

   Section 1916.1 Is Not Limited to Brokers Who Act in a Capacity Requiring a
License

     Plaintiffs argue the real estate broker exemption does not apply because it
is limited to a broker who engages in an activity requiring a license and, they
contend, a license is not required unless the broker acts in "expectation of
special compensation." Thus, plaintiffs argue, Minar did not act in a capacity
requiring he be licensed because his compensation derived from his status as a
partner and thus was not "special." Plaintiffs base these arguments on Business
and Professions Code section 10133 which, in part, declares the "acts for which
a real estate license is required" do not include conduct by "a general partner
of a partnership with respect to real property owned or leased by the . . .
partnership, . . . if the acts are not performed by the . . . partner in
expectation of special compensation." (Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10133, subd. (a)(1)
.)

   The Constitution exempts from the usury law all loans "arranged by any person
licensed as a real estate broker . . . ." (Cal. Const., art. XV, § 1, subd. (2)
.) It does not limit the exemption to brokers who act in a licensed capacity.
Neither does section 1916.1 so limit the exemption. In fact, the statute
expressly provides that the phrase "made or arranged" applies even if the broker
is not acting "within the course and scope of such license." (Ibid.)

   Stickel, in dicta, rejected a similar attempt to graft Business and
Professions Code section 10133's special compensation element onto section
1916.1. "[T]he concept of 'special compensation' found in [Business and
Professions Code section 10133 subdivision (a)(1)  must be confined to that
statute. The Legislature had the opportunity to import that concept into section
1916.1, but it must be presumed that it consciously and deliberately refused to
do so . . . ." ( Stickel v. Harris, supra, 196 Cal. App. 3d at p. 591.) Although
dicta, Stickel's discussion of Business and Professions Code section 10133's
inapplicability when construing section 1916.1 is persuasive. This defeats
plaintiffs' contention that, because the law did not require Minar to have a
license when arranging the loan, the exemption cannot apply.

   Legislative history also confirms Stickel's and our construction. An
uncodified provision of section 1916.1 noted the broker exemption was added "on
the basis that real estate brokers are qualified by the state on the basis of
education, experience, and examination, and that the licenses of real estate
brokers can be revoked or suspended if real estate brokers perform acts
involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit with intent to substantially benefit
themselves or others, or to substantially injure others." (Stats. 1983, ch. 307,
§ 2, p. 899.) Because the state may discipline real estate brokers for
wrongdoing unrelated to their status as licensees ( Stickel v. Harris, supra,
196 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 588-589), there is no reason why section 1916.1 should
not be applied even to brokers who act in a capacity which does not require they
be licensed.

   A further reason why the Constitution and section 1916.1 should not be
construed as being limited to activities requiring the broker be licensed is the
language in both enactments that exempts brokers who "make" loans. (See Garcia
v. Wetzel (1984) 159 Cal. App. 3d 1093, 1097-1098, 206 Cal. Rptr. 251; In re
Lara (9th Cir., 1984) 731 F.2d 1455, 1459, 1462.) There are no public policy
reasons to treat the making of a loan by a licensed real estate broker different
from his or her arranging a loan.

   Plaintiff relies on In re Lara, supra, 731 F.2d 1455 which reached a contrary
result in holding the exemption does not apply when a broker arranges a loan
under circumstances where the law does not require a license. ( Id. at p. 1463.)
No California decision has followed Lara on this point. We disagree with its
analysis of the issue and decline to follow it. Furthermore, as pointed out in
In re Hein (Bankr. S.D.Cal. 1986) 60 B.R. 769, 774-775, the opinion in Lara was
based on an earlier version of section 1916.1 and the statutory definition of a
real estate broker. The exemption applies even though the law did not require
Minar be licensed when he arranged the loans.

    DISPOSITION

   The judgment is affirmed. Respondents shall recover their costs on appeal.

   Sills, P. J., and Moore, J., concurred.

   A petition for a rehearing was denied August 28, 2002, and appellant's
petition for review by the Supreme Court was denied November 20, 2002.


                              59 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              JOSEPH WILLIAM ELLIS MANNING et al., Plaintiffs and
           Respondents, v. DAVID H. FOX, as Real Estate Commissioner,
                         etc., Defendant and Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 22586

            Court of Appeal of California, Third Appellate District

            151 Cal. App. 3d 531; 198 Cal. Rptr. 558; 1984 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1574


                                January 3, 1984

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     As Modified February 1, 1984.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of El Dorado County, No. 38493, Charles F.
Fogerty, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1) Administrative Law § 124--Judicial Review--Scope and Extent--Evidence--
Standard of Review.  --Where the substantial evidence standard applies, the
trial court must defer to an administrative agency's factual determinations
where they are supported by substantial evidence; where the independent judgment
test applies, the trial court must itself weigh the evidence. The standard of
review affects only the review of factual findings and does not extend to other
administrative determinations. Thus, where the facts are not in conflict, the
result must be the same, regardless whether the court applies a substantial
evidence or an independent judgment form of review.

(2) Real Estate Sales § 116--Subdivisions--Subdivided Lands Act--Wilful
Disregard--Real Estate Licensees--Discipline.  --A real estate licensee need not
be the "owner, his agent or subdivider," within the meaning of Bus. & Prof.
Code, § 11010 (requiring such persons to give notice of the intention to sell
subdivided lands prior to the time such lands are to be offered for sale), in
order to disregard the provisions of Bus. & Prof. Code, § 11018.2 (providing
that no person may offer for sale subdivided land without first obtaining a
public report); a licensee who wilfully disregards the provisions of the real
estate law relating to subdivisions (Bus. & Prof. Code, § 11000 et seq.) is
properly subject to administrative discipline. Thus, in a proceeding to set
aside an administrative decision imposing discipline against real estate
licensees, the trial court erred in granting such relief. The licensees were
extensively involved in the subdivision of the land in question and failed to
provide prospective purchasers with a public report which, of course, they knew
had not be obtained. Their failure was a primary reason that others were able to
evade the Subdivided Lands Act, and that failure rendered the licensees liable
as aiders and abetters.

(3) Brokers § 5--Regulation of Brokers--Grounds for Discipline and Defenses.
--A real estate broker who arranges a transaction in violation of the law may be
disciplined by the Real Estate Commissioner, regardless of the fact that the
illegal transaction, once consummated, is not void but only voidable.

(4) Real Estate Sales § 116--Subdivisions--Subdivided Lands Act--Purpose.  --The
purpose of the Subdivided Lands Act (Bus. & Prof. Code, § 11000 et seq.) is to
protect individual members of the public who purchase lots or homes from
subdividers and to make sure that full information will be given to all
purchasers concerning public utility facilities and other essential facts with
reference to the land. The law seeks to prevent fraud and sharp practices in a
type of real estate transaction which is peculiarly open to such abuses.
Moreover, Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10177, subd. (d) (suspension or revocation of
real estate licensee), is designed to protect the public not only from conniving
real estate salesmen but also from the uninformed, negligent, or unknowledgeable
salesman.

COUNSEL: John K. Van de Kamp, Attorney General, Edward P. Hollingshead and Derry
L. Knight, Deputy Attorneys General, for Defendant and Appellant.

Brunello & Cline and James L. Brunello for Plaintiffs and Respondents.

JUDGES: Opinion by Sparks, J., with Evans, Acting P. J., and Dawson, J., *
concurring.

*   Assigned by the Chairperson of the Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: SPARKS

OPINION

     In this case we consider the circumstances under which real estate
licensees may be subject to discipline for wilfully disregarding the Subdivided
Lands Act. David H. Fox, as Commissioner of the Department of Real Estate,
appeals from a judgment of the Superior Court of El Dorado County, which
directed him to set aside an administrative decision imposing  discipline
against the real estate licenses of Joseph William Ellis Manning, Golden Chain
Enterprises, Inc. (Golden Chain), and Kenneth DeArment Milner,  and to enter a
new decision imposing no discipline against Manning and Golden Chain, and to
reconsider the discipline imposed against Milner.  The commissioner contends the
discipline was properly imposed against Manning and Golden Chain for their
participation in the creation of an illegal subdivision in 1977 and 1978, and
against Milner for negligent supervision of Manning.  We agree and shall reverse
the judgment.

1. The Cast of Characters

   Plaintiff Manning was, at the time of these events, a licensed real estate
salesperson.  His license was restricted pursuant to Business and Professions
Code section 10156.5, since he had been the subject of four previous
disciplinary proceedings by the Department. 1 Manning's broker was plaintiff
Milner, who was the designated officer for plaintiff Golden Chain.  Although in
contemplation of the law Manning was the agent of Milner ( Gipson v. Davis
Realty Co. (1963) 215 Cal.App.2d 190, 207 [30 Cal.Rptr. 253]), Manning acted as
sales manager for Golden Chain.  Gary Lindstrom was the owner and president of
Golden Chain.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1    Business
and Professions Code section 10156.5, subdivision (a) provides: "The
commissioner may issue a restricted license to a person: [para. ] (a) Who . . .
has been licensed under this chapter and who has been found by the commissioner
after a hearing to have violated provisions of Division 4 of this code where
such violation would justify the suspension or revocation of the license."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    John O'Ban is a real estate investor.  He has been married to Eugenia B.
Tedrowe since 1972.  O'Ban had prior business dealings with Manning and
Lindstrom when they incorporated Lin Man-O Ranches Inc., for the purpose of
buying the B O B Ranch.  O'Ban also owns Longview Ranch, Inc. (Longview).  Lee
McGuire is a general engineering contractor who had done construction work for
Longview and O'Ban prior to 1977.

2. The Operation

   In 1977 O'Ban became interested in purchasing, for Longview, a 110 (or 113)
acre ranch property in El Dorado County owned by Carroll and Marie Peebles.
Manning, as manager of Golden Chain, participated in the negotiations.
Ultimately the Peebles sold the property to Longview, and took back a deed of
trust with provision for partial release and reconveyance of 10-acre parcels
under specified conditions.  When this contract was concluded Golden Chain did
not receive its commission; instead, Golden Chain and Longview entered into an
agreement on March 3, 1977, which provided: "Golden Chain agrees to loan their
share of the commission, being $ 2250 --  to Longview Ranch Inc. in order to
close this sale.  [para. ] Longview Ranch, Inc. agrees to give Golden Chain Inc.
an exclusive listing on said 110 acre parcels in the form of 10-acre parcels."
The agreement was signed by O'Ban as president of Longview, and by Manning as
manager of Golden Chain.

   On the same day this agreement was entered into, Manning took on behalf of
Golden Chain a listing from Longview for two 10-acre parcels from the subject
property.  At the same time Manning took a listing from Tedrowe for four other
parcels from the property.  Manning was aware that Tedrowe was O'Ban's wife.

    O'Ban contacted McGuire and asked him to cut some roads on the subject
property.  McGuire was still owed money from the last work he had done for
Longview (O'Ban) and would not perform more work without security.  It was
agreed that McGuire would take property as collateral for payment, and he was to
be paid as the property was sold.  O'Ban and McGuire agreed that the collateral
was to consist of 40 acres, which would be sold in four 10-acre parcels. On
March 10, 1977, Manning took a listing from McGuire on four 10-acre parcels.
Manning was aware that McGuire held his property only as security.

   Manning prepared and utilized a map of the subject property which showed its
division into at least 10 parcels. In the ensuing months the property purchased
by Longview was effectively subdivided into 10 parcels. This was accomplished
through a process known as "four by fouring." (See People v. Byers (1979) 90
Cal.App.3d 140, 146, fn. 1 [153 Cal.Rptr. 249].) In this process Longview
divided the property into four parcels and sold two 10-acre parcels to
consumers, 2 and two larger parcels were conveyed to McGuire and Tedrowe.
McGuire's parcel was divided into four 10-acre parcels and sold to consumers.
Tedrowe's parcel was divided into smaller parcels and sold to four consumers. In
some of these transactions McGuire and Tedrowe took promissory notes secured by
deeds of trust for the purchase price, and they assigned the notes and deeds of
trust to Longview.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   We use
the term "consumers" here since there is no evidence that any of the purchasers
of the 10-acre subparcels were related to or involved with any of the parties to
this action.  It appears in the record that many of these "consumers" purchased
their parcels for investment and with the intention of further dividing the
land, and that Manning in fact told them that the land could be further split.
For purposes of this action, however, the purchasers of the smaller parcels may
be considered consumers.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Golden Chain did not receive commissions on the conveyances by Longview to
McGuire and Tedrowe, but acted as selling agent and received commissions on all
of the sales of the smaller parcels to the consumers. The  total commissions
received by Golden Chain on these transactions including the commission on the
Peebles to Longview sale, amounted to $ 31,975.

3. The Law

   The subdivision of real property is the subject of governmental regulation in
California.  (See People v. Byers, supra, 90 Cal.App.3d at p. 146.) The
Subdivided Lands Act ( Bus. & Prof. Code, § 11000 et seq.; unless otherwise
indicated all further statutory references are to that code), sets forth the
requirements which must be met in the process of subdivision and sale of
subdivided lands.  Of particular concern here is section 11010, which provided
at the time in issue that prior to the time when subdivided lands are to be
offered for sale or lease, the owner, his agent or subdivider must notify the
commissioner in writing of the intention to sell or lease such offering, and
must supply certain information in the notice. Also of interest is section
11018.2, which at the time of the events in this case provided that no person
shall sell or lease, or offer for sale or lease any lots or parcels in a
subdivision without first obtaining a public report from the commissioner.

   During the transactions which are the subject of this action no one informed
the commissioner of an intent to sell or lease subdivided lands and a public
report was not obtained.  This was because the mechanism chosen for subdivision
of the land, "four by fouring," resulted in no single "owner" dividing a parcel
into more than four parcels. Four by fouring, however, is not a legitimate
procedure for evasion of the subdivided lands act.  (See People v. Byers, supra,
90 Cal.App.3d at p.  146.)

   Section 10177, subdivision (d) provides that the commissioner may suspend or
revoke the license of any real estate licensee who has "Willfully disregarded or
violated any of the provisions of the Real Estate Law (commencing with Section
10000 of this code) or of Chapter 1 (commencing  with Section 11000) of Part 2
of this division or of the rules and regulations of the commissioner for the
administration and enforcement of the Real Estate Law and Chapter 1 of Part 2 of
this division."

4. The Administrative Proceeding

   An accusation was filed against Manning, Golden Chain, and Milner in December
1978 in connection with the illegal subdivision of the Peebles Ranch.  Grounds
for suspension or revocation of Manning's license were alleged under section
10177, subdivision (d), in conjunction with sections 11010 and 11018.2.  Grounds
for suspension or revocation of Golden Chain's license were alleged under
section 10177, subdivision (d), in conjunction with sections 11010 and 11018.2,
and under section 10177, subdivisions  (h), and (g) in conjunction with sections
11010 and 11018.2. 3 The same grounds were alleged as to Milner.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   In 1977,
these sections read as follows:

   Section 10177, subdivisions (d), (g) and (h): "The commissioner may suspend
or revoke the license of any real estate licensee, or may deny the issuance of a
license to an applicant, who has done any of the following: . . . (d) Willfully
disregarded or violated any of the provisions of the Real Estate Law (commencing
with Section 10000 of this code) or of Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 11000)
of Part 2 of this division or of the rules and regulations of the commissioner
for the administration and enforcement of the Real Estate Law and Chapter 1 of
Part 2 of this division . . . .  [para. ] (g) Demonstrated negligence or
incompetence in performing any act for which he is required to hold a license.
[para. ] (h) If, as a broker licensee, failed to exercise reasonable supervision
over the activities of his salesmen . . . ." (Stats. 1976, ch. 1346, § 7, p.
6133.)

   Section 11010: "Prior to the time when subdivided lands are to be offered for
sale or lease, the owner, his agent or subdivider shall notify the commissioner
in writing of his intention to sell or lease such offering.  [para. ] The notice
of intention shall contain the following information: [Subdivisions (a)-(n) set
forth in detail the information which must be contained in this notice.]"
(Stats. 1975, ch. 879, § 1, p.  1959.)

   Section 11018.2: "No person shall sell or lease, or offer for sale or lease
in this state any lots or parcels in a subdivision without first obtaining a
public report from the commissioner, except that the commissioner shall waive
the provisions of this section, in writing, for expressly zoned industrial
subdivisions which are limited in use to industrial purposes and expressly zoned
commercial subdivisions which are limited in use to commercial purposes."
(Stats. 1974, ch. 606, § 1, p.  1450.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    An administrative law judge of the office of administrative hearings heard
the matter and issued a proposed decision which was adopted by the commissioner.
In that decision the administrative law judge found that the agreement reached
on March 3d to sell the 110-acre parcel and divide it into 10-acre parcels, and
the subsequent sales of the property, created a subdivision; that neither
Manning nor Golden Chain nor anyone else ever applied for, or received, a
subdivision report; that Manning knew the entire transaction was in violation of
the subdivision act and that he acted in accordance with the policy of Golden
Chain.  That judge further found that although Milner did not know of these
violations, he should have known what was going on in the office where he was
the designated broker. The decision further found that Manning had violated
sections 11010 and 11018.2, and that cause for discipline was established under
section 10177, subdivision (d).  Golden Chain was found to have violated
sections 11010, and 11018.2, and 10177, subdivision (h), and cause for
discipline was found under section 10177, subdivisions (d) and (h).  Milner was
not found to have violated sections 11010and 11018.2, but was found to have been
negligent and incompetent under section 10177, subdivision (g) and to have
failed to exercise proper supervision over Manning in violation of section
10177, subdivision (h).  The license rights of all three respondents were
ordered revoked.  Milner was to be allowed a restricted broker's license under
section 10156.5.

    5. The Superior Court Action

   Manning, Golden Chain and Milner petitioned for a writ of mandate.  The trial
court considered the certified administrative record and issued an intended
decision.  It noted that there is little factual dispute involved, and concluded
that the issue was the meaning of the Subdivided Lands Act, and in particular,
"who is a subdivider for  purposes of that Act." The court reasoned that the
phrase "no person" in section 11018.2 must be construed in light of the phrase
"the owner, his agent or subdivider" in section 11010.  It then ruled that the
prohibition of section 11018.2 against the illegal sale of subdivision lots only
applies to "the owner, his agent or subdivider," and that respondents were none
of these.  Instead, the court concluded that Manning and Golden Chain were
merely the listing real estate agents for the subdivider, and were not
responsible for O'Ban and Longview's failure to comply with sections 11010 and
11018.2.  The court determined to issue a writ of mandate.

   A judgment was entered and a peremptory writ of mandate issued, directing the
commissioner to vacate his decision and to enter a new decision taking no
disciplinary action against Manning and Golden Chain, and to reconsider the
discipline imposed against Milner.  The commissioner appeals.

   Discussion

   The commissioner concedes that Golden Chain and Milner were entitled to the
exercise of the trial court's independent judgment on a petition for a writ of
mandate.  He contends, however, that since Manning held only a restricted
license he was only entitled to a review to determine whether the decision of
the commissioner was supported by substantial evidence. This contention is based
upon section 10156.7, which provides that a restricted license does not confer
any property right to the holder, and provides no right to renewal.  Manning
contends that the restricted license permitted him to engage in earning a living
in his chosen profession and must be regarded as a fundamental right,  thus
entitling him to an independent judgment on the evidence.

   We need not determine the appropriate standard of trial court review in a
decision imposing discipline upon the holder of a restricted real estate
license. The standard of review is the manner in which the trial court reviews a
resolution of conflicts in the evidence.   Where the substantial evidence
standard applies the court must defer to the administrative agency's factual
determinations where they are supported by substantial evidence; where the
independent judgment test applies the trial court must itself weigh  the
evidence.  ( Strumsky v. San Diego County Employees Retirement Assn. (1974) 11
Cal.3d 28, 44-45 [112 Cal.Rptr.  805, 520 P.2d 29].) The standard of review
affects only the review of factual findings; it does not extend to other
administrative determinations.  ( Zink v. City of Sausalito (1977) 70 Cal.App.3d
662, 665 [139 Cal.Rptr. 59].) Thus where the facts are not in conflict the
result must be the same regardless whether the court applies a substantial
evidence or an independent judgment form of review.

   The trial court did not reject the commissioner's factual findings. It
expressly noted that there is "very little dispute as to factual events; rather,
the controversy relates to the legal import of those facts." The trial court
disagreed with the commissioner's decision because it believed that under the
facts presented Manning and Golden Chain were nothing more than selling real
estate agents, and as such could not violate the Subdivided Lands Act. This was
the resolution of a question of law and not a factual determination and the
scope of review of factual findings is not at issue.

     As we shall demonstrate, a real estate licensee need not be the "owner, his
agent or subdivider" in order to disregard the provisions of section 11018.2.  A
licensee who wilfully disregards the provisions of the real estate law relating
to subdivisions is properly subject to discipline by the commissioner. 4

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   We need
not determine, therefore, whether as a matter of law under these undisputed
facts respondents were either the "subdivider" or the agents of the owner or
subdivider.

   We also need not here determine whether a real estate licensee is an agent
within the meaning of the Subdivided Lands Act where he engages in only an
occasional or isolated transaction with regard to the subject land.  In this
case Manning and Golden Chain's participation was pervasive; they acted as sales
agent for the subdivider in every transaction through which the land was
subdivided. Their participation in the subdivision of the land was thus
established despite the fact they did not actually own or hold title to any
portion of the land.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     Section 11018.2 provides that "no person" may offer for sale subdivided
land without first obtaining a public report from the commissioner.  Section
11010 provides that prior to the time subdivided lands are to be offered for
sale the owner, his agent, or subdivider must notify the commissioner of the
intention to sell such lands.  The trial court reasoned that Manning and Golden
Chain were not the subdivider and therefore were not responsible under those
provisions.  Their involvement, however, was extensive.  They negotiated the
purchase of the land by Longview with full knowledge that it was to be
subdivided. They lent their commission to Longview to enable it to complete the
deal.  They entered into an agreement for an exclusive listing for the
subdivided parcels, and took exclusive listings for those parcels from Longview
and its "straws." They successfully procured buyers  for the subdivided parcels.
Finally, they knew that these transactions were illegal.

   A person may not assist another in violating the Subdivided Lands Act and yet
escape liability under the act simply because he was not personally the owner or
subdivider of the land.  In People v. Byers, supra, 90 Cal.App.3d 140, it
appeared that one Warren Byers had subdivided a parcel of land by "four by
fouring." Defendant Herbert Byers, the son of Warren, worked with his father and
showed the land to prospective purchasers. Defendant Edmundson allowed his name
to be used as a grantor.  Defendant Higgins signed deeds showing her to be the
owner of some of the parcels. Defendants Herbert Byers, Edmundson and Higgins
were convicted of violations of the Subdivided Lands Act and on appeal
contended, among other things, that their participation did not render them
guilty of violating the act.  We rejected the contention, stating: "A person who
assists in making sales without conforming to the statute prohibiting such
conduct may be found guilty of violating that statute regardless of a belief
that assistance in such sales is lawful." ( Id., at p. 150, citations omitted.)
In such a case the defendant is guilty of aiding and abetting the violation of
the act.  (Ibid.; see also People v. Rubens (1936) 11 Cal.App.2d 576, 584-585
[54 P.2d 98].)

   It is conceded by all concerned that no notice was ever given the
commissioner of an intent to sell subdividedland and no public report was
obtained.  (§§ 11010, 11018.2.) Manning and Golden Chain contend, and the trial
court agreed, that they were not responsible for notifying the commissioner or
for obtaining the public report. Even assuming that respondents had no such
obligation, the record establishes that it was Manning and Golden Chain's own
personal violation of provisions of the Subdivided Lands Act which enabled O'Ban
and Longview to successfully evade the provisions of the act.  Once a public
report is obtained pursuant to section 11018.2, the obligation to prospective
purchasers does not cease.  Pursuant to section 11018.1, a copy of the public
report must be given to prospective purchasers prior to the execution of a
binding contract or agreement.  In order to implement this provision the real
estate commissioner promulgated a regulation which forbids the acceptance of an
offer or deposit until the prospective purchaser has been given an opportunity
to read the public report and his receipt has been taken.  (former Cal. Admin.
Code, tit. 10, § 2795, the provisions of which are now contained in § 2794.) In
Stillman Pond, Inc. v. Watson (1953) 115 Cal.App.2d 440, at pages446-449 [252
P.2d 717], the Court of Appeal held that the failure of a real estate salesman
to give a prospective purchaser a copy of the public report is a cause for
discipline against the salesman. The licensees in that case were expressly found
not to have been the owners of the subdivided land, and their licenses  were
revoked for, among other things, negotiating sales of the land without giving
prospective purchasers a  copy of the public report. (Ibid.) Like the agents in
Stillman Pond, Inc. v. Watson, supra, Manning and Golden Chain were extensively
involved in the subdivision of the land and failed to provide prospective
purchasers with a public report, which, of course, they knew had not been
obtained.  Their failure was a primary reason that O'Ban and Longview were able
to evade the Subdivided Lands Act, and that failure rendered them liable as
aiders and abettors of O'Ban and Longview.

   Finally, it is clear that a real estate licensee need not be criminally
liable for a violation of the Subdivided Lands Act in order to subject to
discipline. The Subdivided Lands Act contains numerous provisions regarding the
subdivision and sale of subdivided lands.  Violation of some but not all of
those provisions may result in criminal penalties.  (§ 11023.) Violation of some
but not all of the provisions may result in civil penalties.  (§ 11029.1.) And
some violations may result in both criminal and civil penalties.  (§§ 11023,
11029.1.) A real estate license may be suspended or revoked, however, whenever
the licensee wilfully disregards or violates any of the provisions of the act,
or any of the rules and regulations of the commissioner for the administration
and enforcement of the act.  (§ 10177, subd. (d).)

   In Parkman v. Savage (1964) 227 Cal.App.2d 436 [38 Cal.Rptr. 664], a real
estate broker arranged a sale of property from a probate estate to the executor
of the estate through the use of a "dummy" in order to evade Probate Code
section 583, which forbids such a transaction.  Section 583 had been judicially
construed to render such a transaction not void, but only voidable at the behest
of those interested in the estate.  The broker who arranged the transaction
contended that she should not be subject to discipline because the heirs
approved of the transaction, and it was therefore not illegal or void. The Court
of Appeal upheld the revocation of the broker's license, reasoning that the
purpose of a disciplinary proceeding is the protection of the public from the
unethical or dishonest conduct of a real estate agent and it is not controlling
that the "victim" suffers no harm.   "It therefore appears that a real estate
broker who arranges a transaction in violation of the law may be disciplined by
the Real Estate Commissioner, regardless of the fact that the illegal
transaction, once consummated, is not void but only voidable. [Citation.]" ( Id
., at p. 439.)

     The purpose of the Subdivided Lands Act "is to protect individual members
of the public who purchase lots or homes from subdividers and to make sure that
full information will be given to all purchasers concerning public utility
facilities and other essential facts with reference to the land."  ( Westbrook
v. Summerfield, Roberts etc., Inc. (1957) 154 Cal.App.2d 761, 766 [316 P.2d 691]
.) The law seeks to prevent fraud and sharp practices in a type of real estate
transaction which is peculiarly open to such abuses.  (  People v. Byers, supra,
90 Cal.App.3d at p.  148.) Section 10177, subdivision (d), is designed "to
protect the public not only from conniving real estate salesmen but also from
the uninformed, negligent, or unknowledgeable salesman." ( Handeland v.
Department of Real Estate (1976) 58 Cal.App.3d 513, 518 [129 Cal.Rptr. 810].) An
interpretation of section 10177, subdivision (d) which would impose discipline
upon a real estate licensee where the Subdivided Lands Act is violated only if
he was in fact the owner, the agent or the subdivider would effectively
emasculate the law.  Where, as here, the uncontroverted facts establish that the
real estate licensees acted in total and wilful disregard of the provisions of
the Subdivided Lands Act, a cause for discipline is established.  We do not
regard it as prejudicial that the commissioner summarized their conduct as a
"violation" of the act rather than wilful disregard thereof, for on the facts
established the basis for discipline cannot be denied.

    We conclude that cause for discipline was established against Manning and
Golden Chain under section 10177, subdivision (d), both for violations of the
Subdivided Lands Act, and for wilful disregard of the act.  The trial court's
judgment must therefore be reversed as to Manning and Golden Chain.  Since the
judgment with regard to Milner was based entirely upon the trial court's
conclusion with regard to Manning and Golden Chain, that portion of the judgment
must also be reversed.

   The judgment is reversed and the cause remanded to the trial court with
directions to enter new judgment denying the peremptory writ of mandate.


                              60 of 100 DOCUMENTS

                VIRGIL E. PARR, Appellant, v. MAYSEL REYMAN, as
                        Administratrix, etc., Respondent

                                L. A. No. 13274

                          Supreme Court of California

                 215 Cal. 616; 12 P.2d 440; 1932 Cal. LEXIS 462


                                 June 16, 1932

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Rehearing denied.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of San Bernardino
County.  Charles L. Allison, Judge.

COUNSEL: Hert & Withington and Hert, Mussell & Withington for Appellant.

O'Connor & Findlay for Respondent.

JUDGES: In Bank. Curtis, J.  Shenk, J., Waste, C. J., Preston, J., Tyler, J.,
pro tem., Langdon, J., and Seawell, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: CURTIS

OPINION

     Action against the defendant as administratrix with the will annexed of the
estate of Willard A. Parr, deceased, to declare an oral trust in certain real
and personal property. Plaintiff and Willard A. Parr were brothers.  Their
mother, Elizabeth Parr, died on or about May 3, 1916, leaving as her heirs at
law the plaintiff, Virgil E. Parr, the deceased, Willard A. Parr, a third son,
Enoch D. Parr, and a daughter, Emma A. Brady.  She also left a last will and
testament which was admitted to probate. By the terms of said will her entire
estate was left to her two sons, Virgil and Enoch, and to her daughter, Emma A.
Brady.  Willard A. Parr took nothing under the will of his mother, and Virgil E.
Parr was named as executor of said will.  On June 12, 1917, pending the
administration of said estate, by a deed absolute in form, Virgil E. Parr
conveyed all of his interest in his mother's estate to his brother, Willard A.
Parr.  Thereafter, by a decree of distribution the interest in said estate
conveyed by Virgil to Willard was distributed to Willard.  At that time the
residue of the estate consisted of both real and personal property, and the
plaintiff now seeks to have declared a trust in so much of said real and
personal property as the decedent Willard A. Parr acquired by virtue of the deed
from Virgil to Willard of the date June 12, 1917.  It is the contention of
Virgil, and he so alleges that fact in his pleadings, that he conveyed his
interest in the estate of his mother to his brother, Willard, "To hold and use
all of said real and  personal property until such time as this plaintiff should
require the reconveyance and delivery of said real and personal property to the
plaintiff herein, and the said Willard A. Parr, as aforesaid, was to use the
same and to have the income thereof until said time." Willard A. Parr died in
January, 1929, almost twelve years after said conveyance,  during which time he
exercised complete control and dominion over said real and personal property in
all respects as if he were the absolute owner thereof.  No demand was made by
Virgil Parr during the lifetime of his brother, Willard, that the latter
reconvey to him any part of said real and personal property, nor, so far as the
record reveals, was any claim made by Virgil during the lifetime of his brother,
Willard, that he (Virgil) was the owner or claimed any interest in said real and
personal property, Some four months after the  death of Willard, and after
Virgil had been appointed the administrator with the will annexed of his brother
Willard's estate, the original executrix, Ida M. Mather, having died after her
appointment as such executrix, the plaintiff first made claim to some interest
in his brother's estate.  This claim was in the form of a regular creditor's
claim presented against said estate for a definite amount of money which he
claimed was the value of the interest in said real and personal property,
conveyed by him to Willard.  This claim was subsequently withdrawn, and on
December 5, 1929, Virgil commenced this action, he having resigned in the
meantime as administrator and the defendant having been appointed in his place.
The case was tried by the court and findings were made and judgment rendered in
favor of the defendant.  The plaintiff has appealed upon the judgment-roll.

   The finding of the trial court as to the circumstances under which the
conveyance of the interest in his mother's estate was made by Virgil to Willard,
although somewhat equivocal and uncertain, appears to be favorable to the claim
of Virgil that said conveyance was made under a verbal agreement that Willard
should hold and use the property conveyed until such time as Virgil should
require a reconveyance thereof to himself, when Willard was to reconvey said
property to Virgil upon Virgil's demand.  We are assuming that this finding is
sufficient to sustain the agreement as alleged and set forth in plaintiff's
pleadings.  The court further found that by the decree of distribution said real
and personal property was distributed to Willard.  As conclusions of law from
these facts the court held "that the terms and conditions of previous
agreements, if any there were, were all merged in said decree of distribution in
the estate of Elizabeth Parr, and bearing date the 2nd day of February, 1918,
and that said decree, never having been appealed from, is now final and
conclusive in the premises and that the defendant is entitled to judgment herein
together with her costs herein incurred".

     Appellant contends that the court misconstrued the law as applicable to the
facts set forth in the findings, and that the decree of distribution is not
final and conclusive as to the agreement entered into between Virgil and Willard
at the time Virgil conveyed said real and personal property  to Willard.  It is
the position of the appellant that his agreement with Willard at the time of
said conveyance is not merged in the decree of distribution in his mother's
estate, and that his rights under said agreement are in no way controlled or
affected by said decree of distribution.

   This contention of appellant must be sustained.  The precise point was before
this court in the case of Chever v. Ching Hong Poy, 82 Cal. 68 [22 Pac. 1081,
1082]. In that case certain real property descended from the father to five
sons, subject to an estate therein to their mother during her widowhood.  One of
said sons, during the administration of his father's estate,  conveyed his fifth
interest in said real property to his mother.  Thereafter the decree of
distribution in his father's estate distributed said real property to the mother
during her widowhood, the remainder to her five sons, notwithstanding the deed
of one of said sons of his interest in said real property to his mother.
Thereafter a controversy arose as to the ownership of said one-fifth interest in
said real property which said son had conveyed to his mother between this son
and the administrator of his mother's estate.  The trial court decided the
controversy in favor of the administrator, and the son appealed.  Quoting from
the opinion the issue is stated as follows: "Upon this state of facts the
contention of appellant is, that, notwithstanding his said deed to his mother of
May 10, 1860, by which he conveyed her all his right and title to the property,
the subsequent decree of distribution entirely destroyed the effect of that
deed, and conclusively established the title in appellant as of the date of this
decree." In holding against this contention of appellant this court held (p.
71), " Section 1666 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides that a decree of
distribution 'is conclusive as to the rights of heirs, legatees, or devisees';
but it is conclusive against them as heirs, legatees, or devisees -- only so far
as they claim in such capacities.  The probate court has jurisdiction to
determine who are the legal heirs of a deceased person who died intestate, and
who are the devisees or legatees of one who died testate; but its determination
of such matters does not create any new title; it merely declares the title
which accrued under the law of descents or under the provisions of the will.
The decree of distribution has nothing to do  with contracts or conveyances
which may have been made by  heirs, devisees, or legatees of or about their
shares of the estate, either among themselves or with others; such matters are
not before the probate court, and over them it has no jurisdiction.  An heir may
contract about or convey the title which the law had cast upon him on the death
of his ancestor; and the validity or force of such contract is not affected by
the fact that a probate court afterwards, by its decree of distribution,
declares his asserted heirship and title to be valid." Our courts have in
innumerable cases affirmed this doctrine.  ( Estate of Burton, 93 Cal. 459, 461
[29 Pac. 36]; Estate of Burdick, 112 Cal. 387, 391 [44 Pac. 734]; Estate of
Crooks, 125 Cal. 459 [58 Pac. 89]; Martinovich v. Marsicano, 137 Cal. 354, 356
[70 Pac. 459]; Estate of Ryder, 141 Cal. 366 [74 Pac. 993]; Cooley v. Miller &
Lux, 156 Cal. 510 [105 Pac. 981]; Estate of Howe, 161 Cal. 152 [118 Pac. 515];
Estate of Lyon, 163 Cal. 803 [127 Pac. 75]; Archer v. Harvey, 164 Cal. 274 [128
Pac. 410]; Shaw v. Palmer, 65 Cal. App. 441 [224 Pac. 106].)

   In the case of Martinovich v. Marsicano, supra, this court stated the law
applicable to the question now under discussion as follows: "'Matters of
probate' include the ascertainment and determination of the persons who succeed
to the estate of a decedent, either as heir, devisee, or legatee, as well as the
amount or proportion of the estate to which each is entitled, and also the
construction or effect to be given to the language of a will, but do not include
a determination of claims against the heir or devisee for his portion of the
estate arising subsequent to the death of the ancestor, whether such claim
arises by virtue of his contract or in invitum; nor is the determination of
conflicting claims to the estate of an heir or devisee, or whether he has
conveyed or assigned his share of the estate, a 'matter of probate'."

   An attempt is made to distinguish the line of authorities just cited from the
present case.  In the first place, it is contended that the appellant in this
action is not claiming under the decree of distribution, but adversely to it,
while in certain of the authorities relied upon above the claimant is a grantor
claiming under a decree of distribution adversely to the terms of his prior
grant.  In the other authorities cited above it is pointed out that the claimant
was not an heir, legatee or devisee of the deceased, and had  obtained his title
during the pendency of the probate proceedings through a deed or other legal
conveyance from an heir, devisee or legatee, while in the present action each of
the parties to the deed from Virgil to Willard was an heir of his deceased
mother, and was properly before the probate court at the time of the
distribution of her estate.  As to the first of these attempted differentiations
between this case and the authorities cited, we are unable to see any difference
in principle, in so far as the question of the conclusive effect of a decree of
distribution is concerned between parties where the grantor is claiming under a
decree of distribution notwithstanding his grant deed divesting himself of all
interest in the estate, and a grantor claiming adversely to the decree of
distribution, which distributes the property conveyed by him in accordance with
the terms of his grant.  It is claimed that in cases where a grantor is claiming
under a decree of distribution adversely to his deed, they might have rested
upon the broad principle of law that a grant deed passes subsequently acquired
title.  Admitting for the present purpose that those cases might have been so
decided, the decisions therein show that they were not.  The decisions rested
upon another equally well-recognized principle of law that the probate court has
no jurisdiction over "contracts or conveyances which may have been made by
heirs, devisees, or legatees of or about their shares of the estate, either
among themselves or with others; such matters are not before the probate court,
and over them it has no jurisdiction." ( Chever  v. Ching Hong Poy, supra.) Or,
as was said in Martinovich v. Marsicano, supra, "'Matters of probate' . . . do
not include a determination of claims against the heir or devisee for his
portion of the estate arising subsequent to the death of the ancestor, whether
such claim arises by virtue of his contract or in invitum. . . . "

   The second of the attempted differentiations between the cited cases and the
present case is equally unavailing.  The quotations from the authorities cited
above and the cases themselves plainly show that the probate court has no
jurisdiction over contracts or conveyances made by heirs, devisees, or legatees,
"either among themselves or with others".

    The following authorities are relied upon in support of the ruling of the
trial court that the decree of distribution is conclusive of the rights of the
parties under the agreement to reconvey the real and personal property involved
herein: Miller v. Pitman, 180 Cal. 540 [182 Pac. 50]; Newport v. Hatton, 195
Cal. 132 [231 Pac. 987]; Estate of Finch, 202 Cal. 612 [262 Pac. 34]; Shipley v.
Jordan, 206 Cal. 439 [274 Pac. 745]. We have carefully examined these cases and
we find nothing in them which supports respondent's contention that the decree
of distribution is conclusive of the rights of the parties under the agreement
of reconveyance. The case of Miller v. Pitman, supra, appears to be relied upon
more firmly than any of the other cases cited by respondent.  In that case the
facts showed that Elias W. Pitman at the time of his death was the owner of
certain real property. He left a wife and children.  By his will he bequeathed a
life interest in said real property "to his wife, with remainders in fee to
their children and to the heirs of their children's bodies".  Under the terms of
the will the plaintiff  was entitled to receive one-sixth interest in the
remainder estate.  The estate was probated, and by the decree of distribution
the whole of the estate was decreed and distributed to his widow. No appeal was
ever taken from this decree. After the death of the widow the plaintiff brought
an action to quiet title to a one-sixth interest in said real property. His
claim was contested, and it was held that the decree of distribution was final
and conclusive of his rights, and that under this decree of distribution all of
the estate of Elias W. Pitman was decreed and distributed to his widow. That
case can be readily distinguished from the instant case.  As stated therein (p.
543), "Clearly, the probate court had jurisdiction of the subject-matter of the
decree of distribution, and the fact that the decree erroneously construed the
terms of the will did not operate to render the decree void." In the case before
us, as we have stated before, contracts or conveyances which have been made by
the heirs, devisees or legatees are not matters "before the probate court and
over them it has no jurisdiction".  ( Chever v. Ching Hong Poy, supra.) It is
not necessary for us to discuss further the other cases cited in support of the
judgment of the trial court.  The most favorable of them from respondent's point
of view are simply along the line of Miller v. Pitman, supra, and none of them
bears out the contention of respondent.  It follows from the views expressed
that the decree of distribution in the estate of Elizabeth Parr, deceased, is
not conclusive of the rights of the parties hereto under the agreement made by
Willard Parr to reconvey the real and personal property involved herein to his
brother Virgil.

     However, we are not of the opinion that the judgment should be reversed.
Respondent makes the further contention that the appellant's cause of action is
barred by his laches. This contention, we think, must be sustained.  As already
noted, almost twelve years elapsed between the date of the verbal promise of
Willard to reconvey the property to Virgil and the death of Willard, during
which time Virgil never made any demand or request upon Willard for a
reconveyance of said property, nor did Virgil during this time ever make any
claim to said property, or to any part thereof.  Relative to this matter the
court found: "That the said Virgil E. Parr, the plaintiff herein, did not,
during the lifetime of the said Willard A. Parr, ever make demand upon the said
Willard A. Parr for the return to him of the real property theretofore conveyed
to said Willard A. Parr by the said Virgil E. Parr, although the said Willard A.
Parr had, during his lifetime and in expectation of death, called his said
brother Virgil E. Parr to his bedside and asked him if there was any unsettled
business between them and if there was any obligation owing from him to his said
brother." In the face of this finding of fact it would appear that a conclusive
case of laches had been made out by the respondent as against Virgil E. Parr,
and that it would be most unjust and inequitable to permit the appellant after
this long period of silence and inaction to now assert a claim against the
estate of his deceased brother.  Stale claims are abhorred by equity.  Claims
against deceased persons, especially when they have been of long standing, are
always looked upon with distrust by courts of law as well as courts of equity.
The weakness of appellant's claim is further emphasized by his failure to
respond to the request made by his brother, we would infer while the latter was
upon his deathbed, that Virgil make known and declare any unsettled business
between them or any obligation which  Willard might owe to his brother Virgil.
To allow the appellant to remain silent during the lifetime of his brother, even
to refuse upon request to disclose any claim he might have against the latter,
and then, when death had sealed the lips of his brother, to permit him to
enforce a claim resting in parol and made some twelve years previously is asking
a court to run counter to all rules of equity and to all principles of justice
and fair dealings.  The findings unquestionably make out a complete defense of
laches.

   The judgment is affirmed.


                              61 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          Conservatorship of the Person and Estate of EDWARD S. HUME,
          SR.  JOHN S. WILLIAMS, as Public Guardian, etc., Petitioner
               and Respondent, v. WILLIAM SNOW HUME, Objector and
                                   Appellant,

                                    G035599

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FOURTH APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION THREE

          139 Cal. App. 4th 393; 42 Cal. Rptr. 3d 796; 2006 Cal. App.
            LEXIS 695; 2006 Cal. Daily Op. Service 3887; 2006 Daily
                                Journal DAR 5650


                              May 10, 2006, Filed

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY: Related proceeding at Conservatorship of Hume, 140 Cal. App.
4th 1385, 44 Cal. Rptr. 3d 906, 2006 Cal. App. LEXIS 990 (Cal. App. 4th Dist.,
2006)
Request denied by Conservatorship of the Pers. & Estate of Hume v. Hume, 2006
Cal. LEXIS 9540 (Cal., Aug. 16, 2006)

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Orange County, No. A219295, Thomas H.
Schulte, Temporary Judge. (Pursuant to Cal. Const., art. VI, § 21.).

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports

(2) Guardianship and Conservatorship § 49--Conservators--Powers and Duties--
Accounting--Estate--Out-of-state Real Property.--Under Prob. Code, §§ 2610 &
2620, a conservator had a duty to include the conservatee's Tennessee real
property in his final accounting.

   [14 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (10th ed. 2005) Wills and Probate, § 1036.]

COUNSEL: William Snow Hume, in pro. per., for Objector and Appellant.

Benjamin P. de Mayo, County Counsel, and James C. Harvey, Deputy County Counsel,
for Petitioner and Respondent.

JUDGES: Sills, P. J., with Bedsworth and Fybel, JJ., concurring.

OPINION BY: Sills

OPINION

    SILLS, P. J.--

I. BACKGROUND

   William Snow Hume has appealed from the order of the trial court approving a
final accounting by the county public guardian as conservator for Hume's
now-deceased father. 1 His main complaint, and one which we must conclude is
well-taken, is that the accounting failed to include his father's interests in
certain real property in Tennessee. 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1    Since
most of our discussion involves contentions made by son William Snow, and all
references to his father or mother can be readily made clear by context or the
generic term "conservatee," we are able in this opinion to refer to appellant by
his last name, rather than resort to the convention, often used by courts in
cases where several actors have the same last name, of referring to all the
parties by their first names. Of course, no disrespect is meant when the latter
convention is used (e.g., In re Marriage of Jacobsen (2004) 121 Cal.App.4th
1187, 1189, fn. 1 [18 Cal. Rptr. 3d 162]), but it is nice when the nature of a
family-intensive case is such that the first-name convention is not needed.
2    As we make clear post the question of whether a conservator is obliged to
include out-of-state real property in an accounting is a legal one.
Consequently, Hume's argument that the trial court was required to hold a
contested evidentiary hearing on the issue simply because it was raised in
formal objections filed by Hume to the accounting is not correct.

   Hume has also abandoned the issue raised in his opening brief as regards the
conservatorship established for his mother, Laura Snow Austin (i.e., whether a
statement of decision was required). That leaves only one other issue properly
raised in Hume's opening brief by way of separate heading or subheading, which
is that the trial court lacked jurisdiction to rule on the inventory because of
a prior pending proceeding--the mother's conservatorship. The problem with that
argument is that Hume provides insufficient detail in his opening brief about
the mother's conservatorship and accounting to even begin to entertain the
notion that his mother's conservatorship somehow constituted a prior pending
proceeding as regards his father's conservatorship. Since it is the duty of an
appellant to provide a record showing error (Maria P. v. Riles (1987) 43 Cal.3d
1281, 1295 [240 Cal. Rptr. 872, 743 P.2d 932]) and explain how that error
occurred and how it is prejudicial (In re Marriage of McLaughlin (2000) 82
Cal.App.4th 327, 337 [98 Cal. Rptr. 2d 136]), we are forced to consider the
prior pending proceeding argument as waived.

   While Hume's brief also makes reference to a number of specific objections
beyond the noninclusion of the Tennessee property to the accounting, the failure
to explain specifically how the trial court's overruling of these objections was
error and the further failure to identify them in a separate headings or
subheadings also means these issues are waived on appeal. (See Heavenly Valley
v. El Dorado County Bd. of Equalization (2000) 84 Cal.App.4th 1323, 1345, fn. 17
[101 Cal. Rptr. 2d 591] [refusing to address argument appearing under subheading
inappropriate to that argument]; Opdyk v. California Horse Racing Bd. (1995) 34
Cal.App.4th 1826, 1830-1831, fn. 4 [41 Cal. Rptr. 2d 263] [rejecting contention
made in petition for rehearing that due process claim had been properly raised
because it was not mentioned in separate heading and "The failure to head an
argument as required by California Rules of Court ... constitutes a waiver."].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    There is no question that the conservatee actually did own real property in
Tennessee-- the public guardian's accounting in fact listed the conservatee's
one-half community interest in crop rents received from the property. Those
rents didn't just fall off a pear tree. They were derived from a substantial
asset owned by the conservatee.

   Hume's own interest, as he voiced toward the end of the trial court hearing
on the accounting, is that he is afraid that certain siblings are in possession
of an "unrecorded trust instrument" on the property which--though he didn't
quite come out and say it--might in some unspecified way be used to deprive him
of his share in the property that he might otherwise receive by way of
inheritance. Given that a conservator's accounting can be incorporated by
reference in "traditional" (after-death) probate proceedings and the personal
representative of the decedent has no duty to independently investigate the
transactions in the accounting, 3 we cannot a priori dismiss Hume's fears as
insubstantial. In any event, the public guardian makes no argument that Hume is
not a party aggrieved by the trial court's order.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3    The
Rutter Group probate practice guide states: "When a personal representative
receives assets from a deceased conservatee's conservator or deceased ward's
guardian, the representative may incorporate by reference any accounting
provided by the conservator or guardian for the decedent for the period
subsequent to the date of death. Moreover, the personal representative is
entitled to rely on the accounting and has no duty to independently investigate
or verify the transactions reported therein." (Ross & Moore, Cal. Practice
Guide: Probate (The Rutter Group 2005) ¶ 16:139.5, p. 16-41 (hereinafter The
Rutter Group Probate), citing Prob. Code, § 10902.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    While the record is sketchy, by way of background it is enough to say that
sometime on or before June 2002, the Orange County Public Guardian was appointed
conservator of Hume's father. Hume's father died in late 2003. 4 In October 2004
the public guardian filed his first and final accounting and report for the
period June 2002 through September 2004, and a petition for its approval. The
accounting did not list any Tennessee property as an asset of the estate (the
assets of which were otherwise about $ 540,000), though it did list the
conservatee's one-half community interest in crop rents "from Tennessee
property." Hume filed objections to the petition. One thing he managed to make
crystal clear was that the public guardian was under a legal obligation to list
out-of-state real property and had failed to do so. (On appeal, the public
guardian offers no argument that Hume's objection on this point was otherwise
procedurally defective so as to relieve us of the need to address its merits.)
The trial court took the matter under submission, and made an order in March
2005 overruling Hume's objections and approving the public guardian's petition.
Hume has timely appealed from the formal order settling and approving the public
guardian's first and final account filed May 6, 2005.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4    The
record is so sketchy that this fact is derived from taking judicial notice of a
related unpublished opinion involving fees charged by an attorney appointed to
represent the conservatee, Conservatorship of Hume (Oct. 31. 2005, G035035)
[nonpub. opn.].
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

II. DISCUSSION

A. The Relevant Statutes

   A conservator's accounting duties are set forth in sections 2610 and 2620 of
the Probate Code. 5

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5    All
statutory references in this opinion are to the Probate Code unless otherwise
specified.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Section 2610, subdivision (a) provides: "Within 90 days after appointment,
or within such further time as the court for reasonable cause upon ex parte
petition of the guardian or conservator may allow, the guardian or conservator
shall file with the clerk of the court an inventory and appraisal of the estate,
made as of the date of the appointment of the guardian or conservator." (Italics
added.)

   Section 2610, subdivision (b) provides: "The guardian or conservator shall
take and subscribe to an oath that the inventory contains a true statement of
all of the estate of the ward or conservatee of which the guardian or
conservator has possession or knowledge. The oath shall be endorsed upon or
annexed to the inventory." (Italics added.)

   Section 2620, subdivision (a) provides: "At the expiration of one year from
the time of appointment and thereafter not less frequently than biennially,
unless otherwise ordered by the court, the guardian or conservator shall present
the accounting of the assets of the estate of the ward or conservatee to the
court for settlement and allowance in the manner provided in Chapter 4
(commencing with Section 1060) of Part 1 of Division 3." (Italics added.)

   Interestingly enough, the word "estate" is not specially defined in the
general definitions sections of the Probate Code. (See §§ 21-88 [defining
various terms of art in the probate code]; see also § 20 ["Unless the provision
or context otherwise requires, the definitions in this part govern the
construction of this code."].) Nor is the word specifically defined in the
portions of the Probate Code dealing with conservatorships. The only words that
appear specifically defined for conservatorship law (or guardianship law, since
the two subjects are treated together) are "Conservator" and "Guardian" in
section 2600. Conservator is defined in section 2600 with reference to the
"estate" of a conservatee, but, again, estate itself is not defined, though it
is clear that conservators are concerned with "the estate." (" 'Conservator'
means (1) the conservator of the estate or (2) the limited conservator of the
estate to the extent that the powers and duties of the limited conservator are
specifically and expressly provided by the order appointing the limited
conservator.")

   The closest specific definition of the word "estate" as used in the
conservatorship accounting statutes is the reference in section 2620 to the
"manner" of accounting specified in section 1060 et seq. Section 1060 et seq.
generally deals with contents of accounts.

   Section 1061, subdivision (a)(1), requires all property to be accounted for,
without exclusion for out-of-state real property: "All accounts shall state the
period covered by the account and contain a summary showing all of the
following, to the extent applicable: [¶] (1) The property on hand at the
beginning of the period covered by the account, which shall be the value of the
property initially received by the fiduciary if this is the first account, and
shall be the property on hand at the end of the prior account if this is a
subsequent account." Property is defined in the Probate Code, in section 62, in
way that includes out-of-state real property: " 'Property' means anything that
may be the subject of ownership and includes both real and personal property and
any interest therein."

   Thus even without a specified definition for "estate" then, it would appear
that the manner of accounting for conservatorships in section 2620 as further
delineated in section 1061 et seq. contemplates inclusion of out-of-state real
property.

   When one looks at the ordinary meaning of the word "estate" as it must be
construed under the statute, the inclusion of out-of-state property is
confirmed. (Since "estate" is not given a particular definition in the statutes,
courts should look to the common and ordinary meaning of the term. (See Baxter
Healthcare Corp. v. California Ins. Guarantee Assn. (2000) 85 Cal.App.4th 306,
314 [102 Cal. Rptr. 2d 87] ["That term is not defined or qualified by the act.
It must be read in the context of the entire statute and given the meaning it
bears in ordinary usage."].))

   Granted, even for lawyers the word "estate" may carry the musty associations
of first year property law, and for others the word is redolent of medieval
hierarchies--think of Shakespeare's line about "when I came to man's estate"
from Twelfth Night. In fact, in that regard, the very first set of definitions
in the American Webster's Third New International Dictionary (1981 ed.) at page
778 gives the word "estate" a modern meaning equivalent to Shakespeare's, i.e.,
the word describes an overall condition or totality of circumstances. ("1:
State, condition: a: the form of existence or state of being something ... b:
circumstances or situation in life ... .") That itself is some indication that
the Legislature intended the accounting of an estate to include everything,
i.e., the totality of a conservatee's circumstances.

   That conclusion becomes clearer when Webster's finally gets to the word in a
context of property ownership. There, the focus is specifically on the aggregate
or totality of one's property. The dictionary begins generally ("4. a: the
property or a piece or aggregation of property in lands or tenements and
sometimes personalty: fortune, possessions <<a man of small estate>") and then
gives the definition in which someone reading a probate code might be most
interested: "b (1): the aggregate of property of all kinds that a person leaves
for disposal at his death ... such an aggregate considered as a legal entity
<<the recoverable portion of the debt does not go to the decedent's estate but
to his heirs> ... ." (Webster's 3d New Internat. Dict. (1981) p. 778, italics
added.)

   The Oxford English dictionary follows the same pattern, beginning with
definitions focusing on the idea of circumstance or condition, but when it gets
to legal and accounting definitions, again provides a sense of aggregation: "11.
Law. a. The interest which any one has in lands, tenements or any other effects
... . 12. a. Property, possessions, fortune, capital. b. Accounts. The
collective assets and liabilities of a person ... ." (Oxford English Dict. (2d
ed. 1989) pp. 407-408, italics added.)

   Finally, Black's Law Dictionary is very to the point on aggregation. It
begins by defining "estate" as: "1. The amount, degree, nature, and quality of a
person's interest in land or other property. 2. All that a person or entity owns
, including both real and personal property. 3. The property that one leaves
after death; the collective assets and liabilities of a dead person. ..."
(Black's Law Dict. (7th ed. 1999) p. 567, italics added.)

   In short, since the Probate Code does not define "estate" specially to
exclude real property held outside a given jurisdiction, recourse to the
ordinary meaning of the word indicates that the word "estate," as it is used in
sections 2610 and 2620, imposes a duty on the conservator to account for all the
conservatee's property, including out-of-state real property.

B. Analogous Law

1. Family Law and Bankruptcy

   Our conclusion accords with two of the most common usages of the word
"estate" in law--family law (as in "community estate") or bankruptcy (as in
"bankruptcy estate"). The Family Code defines "community estate" as including
"both community property and quasi-community property" (Fam. Code, § 63) and
then goes on to define "community property" as "all property" acquired by a
married person during the marriage domiciled in this state (Fam. Code, § 760)
except as "otherwise provided by statute." There is nothing in the definition of
separate property that differentiates in-state from out-of-state real property;
both the definition of community property and the definition of separate
property are concerned with "[a]ll property." (Cf. Fam. Code, §§ 760 & 770,
subd. (a)(1)-(2).) Likewise, bankruptcy law defines the bankruptcy estate to
include "all legal or equitable interests of the debtor in property as of the
commencement of the [bankruptcy] case." (11 U.S.C. § 541(a)(1).)

2. Probate Law

   Traditional probate law follows the same pattern, but with a slight twist.
The personal representative of the estate of a dead person has, as one of his or
her responsibilities, the marshalling of all assets and property interests of
the dead person. Section 9650, subdivision (a)(1) provides: "The personal
representative has the right to, and shall take possession or control of, all
the property of the decedent to be administered in the decedent's estate and
shall collect all debts due to the decedent or the estate." (Italics added.)

   Now, it is true that out-of-state real property is traditionally handled
through ancillary probate administrations in the foreign jurisdiction, the
theory being that those jurisdictions subject local assets to their own probate
administration to protect local creditors. (See generally The Rutter Group
Probate, supra, ¶ 14:291, p. 14-63 ["But often a decedent leaves property in
other states (or countries) as well. Those other states have jurisdiction to
subject local assets to their own probate administration in order to protect
local creditors ... ."].) Concomitantly, the Rutter practice guide concludes
that out-of-state property should not be listed on the inventory of real
property specifically required under section 13103, 6 but that is of only
tangential significance in this case, since section 13103, by its terms, is only
concerned with real property inside California. 7

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6    "Real
property located in another state should not be listed on the inventory. It is
handled through ancillary administration." (The Rutter Group Probate, supra, ¶
6:98, p. 6-648.)
7    Here is the entire text of the statute: "If the estate of the decedent
includes any real property in this state, the affidavit or declaration shall be
accompanied by an inventory and appraisal of the real property. The inventory
and appraisal of the real property shall be made as provided in Part 3
(commencing with Section 8800) of Division 7. The appraisal shall be made by a
probate referee selected by the affiant or declarant from those probate referees
appointed by the Controller under Section 400 to appraise property in the county
where the real property is located." (Italics added.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   More to the point, the fact that there may be no need to list out-of-state
real property in a traditional probate inventory because it is subject to an
ancillary administration 8 does not mean that it is not an asset of the estate
available for eventual distribution by the personal representative administering
the primary probate. (See  The Rutter Group Probate, supra, ¶ 14:293, p. 14-64
["An ancillary administrator generally collects those assets of decedent within
the state, pays local creditors and then, under court order, typically transfers
the remaining property to the out-of-state representative administering the
primary probate."].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -8    In fact,
The Rutter Group Probate guide advises practitioners to avoid ancillary
administrations if possible. (See The Rutter Group Probate, supra, ¶ 14:294. p.
14-64 [since ancillary administrations "raise the cost to all concerned ... the
first consideration should always be whether an ancillary probate is avoidable
"].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The cases of In re Ortiz (1890) 86 Cal. 306 [24 P. 1034] and Estate of
Massaglia (1974) 38 Cal. App. 3d 767 [113 Cal. Rptr. 751] are both particularly
instructive for us in this regard, because both are clear that California estate
executors or personal representatives have duties to marshal out-of-state
property for the benefit of the probate estate.

   Ortiz arose when a San Francisco resident died, leaving a large amount of
money in San Francisco, but also leaving one-half of a house and lot and some
personal property in Spain, plus some otherwise undescribed property in Mexico.
He left a will executed in Spain, appointing his son-in-law, who was a Spanish
citizen, as executor. He took possession of the "assets of the estate which were
then in Spain, and converted all the personal property into money" and then
removed to California with the purpose of administering the California assets. (
In re Ortiz, supra, 86 Cal. at pp. 309-310.) He filed an inventory of all the
property of the estate, including that "situate in Spain" but failed to charge
himself with the assets in Spain, and prayed that the residue of the estate be
distributed. Two beneficiaries of the will who resided in California filed
objections on the ground that the Spanish executor had "failed to charge himself
with the assets of which he, in his character of ancillary administrator, took
possession in Spain." (Id. at p. 311.) The net result of the hearing was that
the trial court charged the executor about $ 10,000 which it found to be "the
residuum of the Spanish assets after deducting all proper demands and charges
against the estate in Spain." (Ibid.)

   As against an appeal on the theory that the administration of the Spanish
assets was still open (see In re Ortiz, supra, 86 Cal. at p. 311), our Supreme
Court affirmed. Noting, among other things, that there was substantial evidence
that the administrator had deliberately not closed the Spanish administration
("intending not to account for or to distribute [the Spanish] residuum in this
state, but to account for and distribute it, if at all, in Spain," (id. at p.
312)), our high court quoted a long passage from a late-19th century treatise on
estate administration, the principal point of which is that administrators can't
just ignore out-of-state assets, but have a duty to collect them for the benefit
of the beneficiaries of the estate (at least the net residue). (Id. at p. 313.)
Here is the key passage: "If, therefore, assets cannot be collected and realized
for the benefit of the estate without a foreign ancillary appointment, the
executor or administrator of the decedent's last domicile ought, so far as may
be consistent with his information, the means of the estate at his disposal, and
the exercise of a sound discretion, to see that foreign letters are taken out,
and that those assets are collected and realized, and the surplus transmitted to
him." (Id. at p. 314, quoting Schouler, Executors and Administrators (2d ed.
1889) § 175, italics added.)

    Much the same thought is found in Massaglia, that is, in-state
administrators of estates can't just ignore foreign real property. They must
exercise reasonable diligence to collect and to realize it for the benefit of
the estate. In Massaglia, the decedent left a two-thirds interest in a hotel in
New Mexico, plus he owned a garage abutting the hotel outright. The
administrator of the estate was a California bank, which brought in a New Mexico
bank to commence ancillary proceedings there. (Estate of Massaglia, supra, 38
Cal. App. 3d at pp. 771-772.) As it turned out, though, the hotel had been
allowed to go into foreclosure and the California bank advanced money, about $
36,000, from the California estate, but only $ 2,500 of that sum was authorized
by a California court. The trial court said that the California bank had no duty
with respect to the New Mexico assets "other than to see that the ancillary
administrator was appointed" and went so far as to conclude that "it was the
primary duty of the special ancillary administrator," not the California bank,
to "redeem the estate's interest" in the hotel. Thus the trial court surcharged
the California bank the difference between the sums $ 36,000 advanced and the $
2,500 approved, though it also, consistent with its idea that the California
bank was not responsible for the hotel, rejected a request to surcharge the
California bank for damages alleged from a failure to redeem the hotel in
foreclosure proceedings. (Id. at pp. 772-773.)

   On appeal, the California bank took issue with the trial court's notion that
it had no responsibility to preserve the estate's equity in the New Mexico
property (other than to see that an ancillary administrator was appointed), and
the appellate court agreed. (Estate of Massaglia, supra, 38 Cal. App. 3d at p.
773 ["Security asserts that, contrary to the finding of the trial court that it
had no duty with respect to the New Mexico property except to see to the
appointment of a special ancillary administrator there, it had a responsibility
to preserve the estate's equity in the New Mexico assets. We agree."].)

   It supported its conclusion in this passage: "It is true, as all parties all
recognize, that one of the purposes of an ancillary probate proceeding is to
collect and conserve assets in other jurisdictions for the benefit of creditors
there ... . It is also true that costs of administration of the ancillary estate
should ordinarily be borne out of the assets of that estate ... . But these
considerations cannot in any way detract from the duty of a domiciliary executor
or administrator such as [the California bank] to look to the next step involved
in an ancillary probate administration after the ancillary creditors have been
paid: the gathering in to the domiciliary estate of the excess assets properly
belonging to it ... . There is a duty on a domiciliary executor or administrator
also with respect to real property located in a foreign jurisdiction. As in the
present case, both real and personal assets were located in another jurisdiction
in In re Ortiz ... . [¶] " 'As was said in Ortiz ... 'And yet, to let external
assets knowingly escape his control, and be lost to the estate, when with
reasonable diligence they might have been procured,  seems a plain dereliction
of duty in the principal or domiciliary representative, whose function, as
rightly understood, is to grasp the whole fortune, as the decedent did during
his life, save so far as the obstructive law of foreign situs, or the
limitations of his own appointment, may restrain him.' " ( Estate of Massaglia,
supra, 38 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 773-774, italics added, some original italics
deleted.)

   The net result was that the case had to be remanded, because it was clear
that the trial court had erred in concluding that the California bank "had no
duty at all in connection with the New Mexico property" and the trial court
would need to determine whether to ratify the bank's expenditures (in excess of
$ 2,500) made with regard to that property. (Estate of Massaglia, supra, 38 Cal.
App. 3d at p. 775.)

   Thus, to the degree that an executor in probate can be analogized to a
conservator, the duties of the executor not to let foreign real property escape
from his or her control (Massaglia), and to account for foreign real property
assets lest it be charged (Ortiz), would suggest that a conservator has a
similar duty to account for out-of-state real property. Moreover, the
differences between a conservator and an executor, if anything, would suggest
that the conservator should have greater duties in terms of accounting for the
whole estate of the conservatee. A conservator is concerned with the well-being
of a living human being who would ordinarily have continuing control over all
his or her assets and would use them to maintain his or her standard of living,
regardless of where they were located. An executor is ultimately concerned with
liquidating or otherwise disposing of a body of property and liabilities
according to a certain set of prescribed rules.

C. Common Sense in Light of the Purposes of Conservatorship

   Indeed, picking up on theme of the reasons a conservatorship might be
established in the first place, it would appear that no good reason exists not
to account for all of a conservatee's property, including out-of-state real
property. The purpose of a conservatorship is to enable a competent person to
"assist the conservatee in the management of his property." (Board of Regents v.
Davis (1975) 14 Cal.3d 33, 43 [120 Cal. Rptr. 407, 533 P.2d 1047].) To do a
proper job of looking out for the conservatee's well-being, for example, it is
fundamental that a conservator would not want, as the Massaglia court put it,
"to let external assets knowingly escape his control" (Estate of Massaglia,
supra, 38 Cal.App.3d at p. 774)--again, that is more important for a live person
than a dead one. One can only assume that a conservator who had the best
interests of a conservatee at heart would want to know the maximum amount of
resources available for the benefit of the conservatee.

    Suppose, for example, that a conservatorship were established in California
for a California resident whose main asset was a potato farm in Idaho, and it
was this farm which provided the bulk of the conservatee's income at the time of
the conservatorship. No one would argue that the conservator would be justified
in taking no action to preserve the farm from foreclosure (let us assume, as in
Massaglia, that there was a California bank account from which Idaho lawyers
could be paid) and letting the farm and its income be lost. It is true of course
that, under certain circumstances (say, the income was insufficient to support
the conservatee in her normal lifestyle and prudence dictated that the asset be
liquidated), the conservator might have to initiate "ancillary" proceedings in
Idaho--in fact that might be required if (as in Massaglia) out-of-state
foreclosure proceedings had commenced. Even so, it would be unconscionable for
the conservator to allow the conservatee's standard of living to languish on the
theory that the out-of-state property was outside of the conservatee's estate
merely because it was out of state.

D. The Case Against Inclusion

   To recap: The plain language of the relevant conservatorship statutes,
analogous law in family law, bankruptcy and probate, and simple common sense in
light of the purpose of a conservatorship all point in the direction of
including foreign real property within the duties to account for "the estate" or
"for all of the estate" in sections 2610 and 2620. So why did this trial court
rule that the public guardian had no legal duty to include the conservatee's
Tennessee property in his final accounting?

   The public guardian relies on two pieces of authority: section 755 of the
Civil Code and a Continuing Education of the Bar (CEB) book, California
Conservatorship Practice (CEB 2005). Neither are persuasive of the public
guardian's position.

   Civil Code section 755 consists of one sentence:  "Real property within this
State is governed by the law of this State, except where the title is in the
United States." The statute thus simply establishes in rem ("against a thing")
jurisdiction over real property in California, except property owned by the
federal government. But it hardly follows from the idea that California courts
have jurisdiction to adjudicate matters concerning real property in California
that they don't have jurisdiction over in-state conservators (against the person
as distinct from against the thing) to order them to account for property within
the "estate" under their control, and in fact both the Ortiz and Massaglia cases
directly refute any such idea. There is a distinction between in rem
jurisdiction over property and in personam jurisdiction over in-state parties;
family law, for example, long ago solved the problem of foreign real property
within community estates by recognizing the jurisdiction of a court to order
parties to take action, as distinct from adjudicating rights directly. Thus
family courts regularly use their jurisdiction over in-state divorcing spouses
to order them to take whatever action is necessary to transfer interests in real
property located out of state, and there is no jurisdictional obstacle to having
divorcing spouses account for such property. (See Fam. Code, § 2660, subd. (b)
[if not possible to divide out-of-state community real property in such a way as
not to affect the "nature of the interests held" in such property, authorizing
court to require parties to "execute conveyances or take other actions with
respect to the real property situated in the other state as are necessary"];
e.g., In re Marriage of Economou (1990) 224 Cal. App. 3d 1466, 1479-1483 [274
Cal. Rptr. 473] [affirming amended judgment awarding wife half-interest in
Georgia property]; see also Muckle v. Superior Court (2002) 102 Cal.App.4th 218,
226 [125 Cal. Rptr. 2d 303] [" ' "a court having jurisdiction of the parties ...
may adjudicate their rights to land located in another state" ' "].)

   It would stand California community property on its head, for example, if the
mere act of taking title to land outside of California could insulate what would
otherwise be community property from California's equal division laws, or
obviate what would otherwise be one spouse's duties toward the other. (See Fam.
Code, §§ 1100-1103.) 9 To put it simply, you can't hide community earnings from
division by the family court by the expedient of investing them in Arizona real
estate.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -9    Family
Code section 1103 actually centers on permutations of cases where one or both
spouses has a conservator. The statute (all three subdivisions) refers the
reader to section 3000 et seq. of the Probate Code. Section 3000 begins the part
of the Probate Code involving management of community property where one of two
spouses lacks legal capacity. Generally, the spouse with legal capacity (as
distinct from the spouse who is a conservatee) will have exclusive management
and control of the community property, including its disposal (id., § 3051,
subd. (b)(1)), and thus section 3054 allows for exclusion of designated
community assets from the conservatorship estate. That makes perfect sense when
there is a capable spouse who can undertake control of the excluded assets.
Beyond that, we do not need to discuss this set of statutes. The public guardian
has made no argument based upon them.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The other authority on which the public guardian relies is the CEB
conservator ship book, and specifically section 10.71 (on p. 477). This is the
first paragraph in its entirely: "Real property outside the state is not subject
to the jurisdiction of California Courts (see CC § 755) and is therefore not
included in the inventory, although income received from, and expenses paid on,
the property are included in the conservator's accounts. The conservator may
wish to take some action outside the state to protect the conservatee's
interests, e.g., initiating a proceeding in that state." (1 Cal. Conservatorship
Practice, supra, § 10.71, p. 477.) (We need not quote the second one-paragraph
remainder of the section, which merely talks about a distinction between mineral
interests (real property) and royalties (personal property), without itself
referencing any source material or elaborating on the jurisdictional point.)

   Again, it does not follow that because a California court may not have in rem
jurisdiction over out-of-state real property that it has no jurisdiction over an
in-state conservator to impose on that conservator the duty of accounting for
out-of-state real property. As we have seen, a California family court faces no
jurisdictional obstacle preventing it from ordering parties over whom it
exercises in personam jurisdiction to execute conveyances or take all necessary
action to implement a California property division decree. (Fam. Code, § 2660,
subd. (b).) There is thus nothing inherent in Civil Code section 755, or, more
broadly, in the fact that California courts do not have in rem jurisdiction over
out-of-state property, that mandates the exclusion of such property from
conservatorship accountings.

   Finally, at oral argument, counsel for the erstwhile conservator was unable
to proffer a theory that made overall sense of the law. When asked about the
rents from the Tennessee property of which the public guardian did acknowledge
receipt, counsel could say no more than the public guardian was happy to take
money practically thrown at it, but did not otherwise have any duties toward the
property. That makes no sense--either the conservatee was entitled to receive
the money because it was part of his, er ... estate. Or he wasn't.

   Or what about if the conservatee had needed to have the Tennessee property
liquidated? Counsel suggested that Hume might have gone to Tennessee himself to
open an "ancilliary conservatorship." But that makes no sense either. Since
there already was a conservatorship in California, Hume would have no standing
to open up such an ancilliary conservatorship. We may take it as elementary due
process that a Tennessee judge isn't just going to let any relative of a person
for whom a California conservatorship has already been established to open up
proceedings to sell that conservatee's Tennessee real property. That judge is
going to require the already-appointed conservator to authorize any sale.

III. CONCLUSION

   In overruling Hume's objection focused on the absence of out-of-state
property in the conservator's accounting, the trial court was under the
misimpression that there was no legal requirement to include such property. The
order approving the accounting is therefore reversed, and the case remanded for
further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion. Appellant shall recover
his costs on appeal.

   Bedsworth, J., and Fybel, J., concurred.


                              62 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             ALL POINTS TRADERS, INC., Plaintiff and Appellant, v.
                BARRINGTON ASSOCIATES, Defendant and Respondent

                             Nos. B032751, B034590

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Three

            211 Cal. App. 3d 723; 259 Cal. Rptr. 780; 1989 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 632


                                 June 21, 1989

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Respondent's petition for review by the Supreme Court
was denied September 7, 1989.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Los Angeles County, No. C670784, Dzintra I.
Janavs, Judge.

COUNSEL: Nagler & Schneider and Marc E. Rohatiner for Plaintiff and Appellant.

McCambridge, Deixler & Marmaro, Bert H. Deixler and Shinaan S. Krakowsky for
Defendant and Respondent.

John K. Van de Kamp, Attorney General, Arthur C. de Goede, Assistant Attorney
General, William M. Pfeiffer and Steven A. Sokol as Amici Curiae, upon the
request of the Court of Appeal.

JUDGES: Opinion by Arabian, J., with Klein, P. J., and Danielson, J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: ARABIAN

OPINION

     Introduction

   This appeal raises the issue of whether an investment banking firm which
specializes in mergers and acquisitions must possess a real estate broker's
license when negotiating the sale of a business opportunity offered by a
corporation seeking to transfer all of its stock to a prospective buyer. We hold
that they must so possess.

    Factual and Procedural Background

   Petitioner and appellant All Points Traders, Inc., doing business as Sprink,
Inc. (All Points), is a California corporation whose sole shareholders prior to
the sale of its common stock were William F. Holbrook, Dollie R. Holbrook, James
W. Holbrook and Anne Holbrook.  The corporation supplies pipe fittings,
couplings and valves to the fire protection industry.  Respondent Barrington
Associates (Barrington), a California general partnership,  is an investment
banking firm which specializes in mergers and acquisitions. None of its partners
was a licensed real estate broker during the pertinent period.

   About May 1986, James Holbrook met with James Freedman, a principal of
Barrington.  Their discussions led to a contract between All Points and
Barrington which provided Barrington with the exclusive right to assist All
Points in the sale of its "assets and/or common stock." Pursuant to the
contract, Barrington agreed to "exercise [its] best efforts to sell the Company,
or find an investor, on terms and conditions satisfactory to [All Points]."
Barrington was to generate, screen and follow up on all leads, provide
information about All Points to qualified buyers, prepare a corporate profile of
All Points and assist in negotiations.

    Ultimately, All Points itself located the purchaser of the business,
although Barrington identified other prospective purchasers and handled initial
negotiations with some of them.  The sale included a transfer of All Points'
common stock, payment of various consulting fees to the principals of All
Points, and a lease with an option to purchase the land upon which the business
was located.

   On March 27, 1987, Barrington initiated binding arbitration before the
American Arbitration Association, claiming a commission pursuant to its written
agreement with All Points.  All Points resisted Barrington's claim on a number
of grounds, including Barrington's failure to possess a real estate broker's
license. On November 25, 1987, the arbitrator awarded Barrington its claimed
commission in the amount of $ 227,800, interest on a portion thereof and
reasonable attorneys' fees.

   All Points filed a petition and motion to vacate the arbitration award. The
trial court denied the petition and confirmed the arbitration award. All Points
appealed from the subsequent judgment.  Thereafter, All Points filed a motion
for a new trial, vacation of the judgment and reconsideration of the order
confirming the award.  The trial court denied All Points' motion and All Points
appealed from the order of denial.  The two appeals were consolidated.

   Contentions

   All Points contends that Barrington's failure to be licensed as a real estate
broker as required by Business and Professions Code section 10131 1 renders  the
brokerage agreement void and illegal, and therefore the arbitration award must
be vacated.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   All
statutory references are to the Business and Professions Code unless otherwise
indicated.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Barrington contends (1) it was not required to be licensed as a real estate
broker because the licensing requirement does not apply to the sale of corporate
stock, and (2) failure to confirm the arbitration award would result in All
Points being unjustly enriched.

   Discussion

   1. The Business Opportunity Licensing Requirement and Its History

   Originally, the licensing requirement for business opportunity transactions
was distinct from that for real estate transactions.  Some 52 years ago, the
California Legislature enacted legislation requiring any person acting as a
business opportunity broker or salesman to possess such a license. (Stats. 1937,
ch. 785, §§ 1, 14, pp. 2235, 2245.) This requirement was codified in the
Business and Professions Code in 1943 as a separate chapter of the Real Estate
Law (§ 10250 et seq.) entitled "Business Opportunity Regulations," under the
Department of Investment, Real Estate Division (former § 10000 et seq.).
(Stats. 1943, ch. 127, § 1, p. 844.) From its inception, the business
opportunity licensing requirement did not exempt incorporated businesses. 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Otherwise
there would have been no need to exempt corporations engaged in transactions
involving their own property, as provided in the original statute: "The
provisions of this act shall not apply to anyone who shall directly perform any
of the acts aforesaid with reference to his own property or, in the case of
corporations, through their regular officers receiving no special compensation
therefor perform any of the acts aforesaid with reference to their, to wit, said
corporations, own property . . . ." (Stats. 1937, ch. 785, § 2, p. 2236.) (
Tognazzini v. Jordan (1913) 165 Cal. 19, 23 [130 P. 879].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    In practice many business opportunity licensees also possessed a real estate
broker's license. Nevertheless, confusion arose as to whether a business
opportunity broker's license, a real estate broker's license or both were
required, when a business opportunity transaction involved real estate. (Review
of 1965 Code Legislature (Cont.Ed.Bar 1985) p. 14.) To simplify and clarify the
law, the Legislature in 1965 merged the real estate and business opportunity
licenses under the supervision of the Department of Real Estate. (Stats. 1965,
ch. 172, p. 1133; ibid.) Thereafter, one who negotiated the sale of a business
opportunity fell within the definition of a "real estate broker" (§ 10131), and
was required to have a real estate license (§ 10130). 3  This historical
background establishes that the definition of a "business  opportunity" does not
necessarily include real property, but that it may.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Section
10130 provides: "It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business, act in
the capacity of, advertise or assume to act as a real estate broker or a real
estate salesman within this state without first obtaining a real estate license
from the department."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Subdivision (a) of section 10131 currently provides: "A real estate broker
within the meaning of this part is a person who, for a compensation or in
expectation of a compensation, regardless of the form or time of payment, does
or negotiates to do one or more of the following acts for another or others:
[para.] (a) Sells or offers to sell, buys or offers to buy, solicits prospective
sellers or purchasers of, solicits or obtains listings of, or negotiates the
purchase, sale or exchange of real property or a business opportunity." (Italics
added.)

   Section 10030 defines a "business opportunity": "As used in this part, the
words 'business opportunity' shall include the sale or lease of the business and
goodwill of an existing business enterprise or opportunity."

   Real estate licensees must meet experience and training qualifications (§
10150.6) and may be required to provide proof of honesty and truthfulness (§
10153).  (See Buckley v. Savage (1960) 184 Cal.App.2d 18 [7 Cal.Rptr. 328],
cert. denied 366 U.S. 910 [6 L.Ed.2d 235, 81 S.Ct. 1086].) The applicant must
pass a written examination to demonstrate knowledge of English and arithmetical
computation common to real estate and business opportunity practices, and an
understanding of "the principles of real estate and business opportunity
conveyancing, . . . the principles of business and land economics and
appraisals, . . . the principles of real estate and business opportunity
practice and the canons of business ethics pertaining thereto," as well as the
regulations of the Real Estate Commissioner.  (§ 10153.)  The purpose of these
licensing requirements is to protect the public from incompetent or
untrustworthy practitioners.  (See Schantz v. Ellsworth (1971) 19 Cal.App.3d
289, 292-293 [96 Cal.Rptr. 783].)

   Without a required license, a person acting as a real estate broker as
defined is unable to enforce a contract to seek recovery of any earned
commission in a court of law.  (§§ 10130, 10136.) 4

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   In regard
to partnerships, such as Barrington, section 10137.1 provides: "Nothing
contained in this division shall preclude a partnership from performing acts for
which a real estate broker license is required, provided every partner through
whom the partnership so acts is a licensed real estate broker."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    2. The Definition of "Business Opportunity"

   Until the current controversy, there has been little discussion over the
meaning of "business opportunity" and the type of transaction requiring a
license. 5 The few reported California opinions which concern the licensing
requirements of the person who negotiates the sale of an incorporated business
do not address the issue of the business opportunity licensing requirement, but
rather the concomitant question of the need for a securities broker's license,
often in addition to the business opportunity or real estate broker's license.
In these cases, the acknowledged business opportunities or real estate
transactions, which resulted in the transfer of corporate stock, concerned a
building ( Owen v. Off (1951) 36 Cal.2d 751 [227 P.2d 457]), 6 a broadcasting
company and its radio station ( Stoll v. Mallory (1959) 173 Cal.App.2d 694 [343
P.2d 970]), 7 a resort and marina business ( Weber v. Jorgensen (1971) 16
Cal.App.3d 74 [93 Cal.Rptr. 668]), 8 a mortgage company ( Lyons v. Stevenson
(1977) 65 Cal.App.3d 595,  [135 Cal.Rptr.  457]) 9 and a mortuary ( Nationwide
Investment Corp. v. California Funeral Service, Inc. (1974) 40 Cal.App.3d 494,
[114 Cal.Rptr. 77]).

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   A number
of California cases have dealt with the issue of the "finder's exception" which
exempts a person who merely finds a buyer, but does not negotiate a transaction,
from the licensing requirements.  (See, e.g., Crofoot v. Spivak (1952) 113
Cal.App.2d 146 [248 P.2d 45].) The parties do not contend that the finder's
exception applies in this case.
6   In Owen v. Off, supra, 36 Cal.2d 751, the California Supreme Court held that
a licensed real estate broker could not enforce a contract for a commission for
his services in connection with the sale of corporate stock because he was not
licensed as required by the Corporate Securities Act.  The real estate broker
was employed to sell a building but before he could find a purchaser it was
decided for tax purposes to sell the stock in the corporation which owned the
building.  ( Id., at p. 753.)
7   In Stoll v. Mallory, supra, 173 Cal.App.2d 694, a licensed real estate and
business opportunity broker "was engaged to secure a purchaser for a radio
station business, not to find a buyer for Peabody's stock. [Peabody owned all
but about 150 shares of the 7,000 outstanding shares of the company.  ( Id., at
p. 696.)] Mallory's [the manager of the radio station] first letter to plaintiff
states: 'We would like to receive $ 150,000 for the station . . .' (Emphasis
added.) Plaintiff did not learn that Peabody wished to sell his stock until the
buyers and seller were brought together.  The memorandum of agreement signed by
them state[d] that Peabody [was] selling his interest in the 'Broadcasting
Company and its radio station K.S.J.O., together with all equipment, land,
buildings, supplies and other assets . . .' The memorandum further stated: '
Incident to this sale, seller guarantees to deliver 100% of the corporate stock
. . . delivery of the assets agreed to be sold will be made free and clear of
all encumbrances . . .' (Emphasis added.) Plaintiff did not participate in the
negotiations other than to bring the parties together and at no time did he
represent himself as dealing in stocks or offer for sale or negotiate the sale
of stock." ( Id., at p. 699.) The court held that plaintiff could recover his
commission because he was not required to be licensed under the Corporate
Securities Act.  It distinguished Owen v. Off, supra, as a case where the
plaintiff was employed by the defendants for compensation to sell their stock.
8   Weber v. Jorgensen, supra, 16 Cal.App.3d 74, held that a licensed real
estate broker was not required to have a securities broker's certificate to sue
for his commission.  At the time of the original listing agreement for the sale
of Echo Chalet resort and marina business, the sole shareholder and owner
instructed the broker plaintiff that he would transfer title to the property
(consisting of a lease, a special use permit, a license, improvements and
personal property thereon) ( id., at p. 77) by transferring all the stock in his
corporation, Echo Chalet, Inc., which held the lease, permits and licenses, to
the buyers, "'as an incident to the sale of the property, and that the stock
transfer agreement would be prepared and handled by an attorney and not by the
plaintiff.'" ( Id., at pp. 82-83, italics in original.)
9   Lyons v. Stevenson, supra, 65 Cal.App.3d 595, held that the real estate
broker was entitled to his commission even though he was not licensed as a
corporate securities broker. The court found no public policy objection to his
recovering a commission even though he knew that the mortgage company which was
sold was a corporation.  The court explained that the broker was not retained to
sell securities and neither the plaintiff nor defendant considered the method by
which the "business" would be transferred.  ( Id., at p. 603.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Only Nationwide Investment Corp. v. California Funeral Service, Inc., supra,
40 Cal.App.3d 494, presented a situation similar to the one here.  The
Nationwide court described the case as "atypical" in that plaintiff "Nationwide
[sought] a commission for successfully negotiating the sale of a business to
defendant although not licensed as a real estate broker or as a securities
broker." ( Id., at p. 499.) However, the Nationwide court did not address the
real estate licensing issue but held that Nationwide, an investment company
which negotiated the purchase of all the shares of a mortuary on behalf of a
client, was required to have a securities broker's license as it was engaged in
the business of effecting transactions in securities and therefore could not
maintain an action to collect its commission. 10

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -10   The
court limited its holding to the securities broker's license issue: "We agree
with the parties that this was a securities transaction, and we determine only
whether Nationwide was a broker-dealer and required to have a securities
broker's license." ( National Investment Corp. v. California Funeral Service,
Inc., supra, 40 Cal.App.3d 494, 499.) However, in dicta the court noted: "[H]ad
Humphrey Chula Vista Mortuary not been a corporation but had sold all of its
assets instead of stock to CFS, with Nationwide being the intermediary and
negotiating the deal, Nationwide would have been required to have a real estate
broker's license." ( Id., at p. 502, fn. 8.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The Ninth Circuit Court has interpreted the California business opportunity
licensing requirements in Meisner v. Reliance Steel & Aluminum Co. (9th Cir.
1959) 273 F.2d 49, holding that an out-of-state resident who assisted in finding
a buyer for the "assets or capital stock" of Reliance Steel, a California
corporation, and then actively participated in the negotiations resulting in the
sale of the assets was required to have a business opportunity broker's license
to maintain an action for his commission.  ( Id., at pp. 50, 53.)

      In accordance with the principle of statutory interpretation that
"[c]ourts must give effect to the words of a statute according to their usual
and ordinary meaning [Citations.]" ( Gonzales & Co. v. Department of Alcoholic
Bev. Control (1984) 151 Cal.App.3d 172, 175 [198 Cal.Rptr. 479]), we find that
the sale or purchase of a "business opportunity" encompasses any transfer of the
ownership of an entire ongoing business in corporate form whether by transfer of
all the stock or all the assets.  Other courts interpreting  similar state
licensing provisions have reached the same conclusion.  (See, e.g., Shochet
Securities, Inc. v. First Union Corp. (S.D.Fla. 1987) 663 F.Supp. 1035, 1037;
Springer v. Rosauer (1982) 31 Wn.App. 418 [641 P.2d 1216, 1218]; Schmitt v. Coad
(1979) 24 Wn.App. 661 [604 P.2d 507, 508-509]; Lakeshore Financial Corp. v.
Comstock (W.D.Mich. 1984) 587 F.Supp. 426, 428-429, affd. (6th Cir. 1985) 779
F.2d 51; Cardillo v. Canusa Extrusion Engineering (1985) 145 Mich.App. 361 [377
N.W.2d 412, 414-416].)

   Barrington contends that as a seller of stock has no vendible interest in the
goodwill of the business carried on by the corporation and cannot transfer any
part of it, a corporate stock sale does not constitute a "business opportunity."
11 This contention  is meritless.  There is no question that the sale in this
case included a transfer of the goodwill of the business, affecting the purchase
price.  Furthermore, the goodwill of a business conducted by a corporation is
the property of the corporation ( Brown v. Allied Corrugated Box Co. (1979) 91
Cal.App.3d 477, 488 [154 Cal.Rptr. 170]); therefore, the purchaser of the
corporation not only acquired the "business" but the "goodwill" as well.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -11   The
original 1937 statute provided that "the words 'business opportunity' shall mean
and include business, business opportunity and/or good will of an existing
business." (Stats. 1937, ch. 785, § 2, p. 2236.) When the business opportunity
licensing requirements were combined with the real estate licensing requirements
in 1965, the definition was changed to its current language: "As used in this
part, the words business opportunity shall include the sale or lease of the
business and goodwill of an existing business enterprise or opportunity."
(Stats. 1965, ch. 172, § 3, p. 1134.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Barrington also contends that the Legislature has specifically declared that
one who assists in the sale of corporate stock is not a real estate broker,
citing section 10131.3.  This contention is meritless as well.

   Section 10131.3 provides: "A real estate broker within the meaning of this
part is also a person who, for another or others, for compensation or in
expectation of compensation, issues or sells, solicits prospective sellers or
purchasers of, solicits or obtains listings of, or negotiates the purchase, sale
or exchange of securities as specified in Section 25206 of the Corporations Code
.

   "The provisions of this section do not apply to a broker-dealer . . .
licensed by the Commissioner of Corporations . . . ." 12

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -12   A
securities broker-dealer is required to be licensed by the Commissioner of
Corporations.

    Corporations Code section 25210 provides: "(a) Unless exempted under the
provisions of Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 25200) of this part, no
broker-dealer shall effect any transaction in, or induce or attempt to induce
the purchase or sale of, any security in this state unless such broker-dealer
has first applied for and secured from the commissioner a certificate, then in
effect, authorizing such person to act in that capacity.

   "(b) No person shall, on behalf of a broker-dealer licensed pursuant to
Section 25211, or on behalf of an issuer, effect any transaction in, or induce
or attempt to induce the purchase or sale of, any security in this state unless
such broker-dealer and agent have complied with such rules as the commissioner
may adopt for the qualification and employment of such agents."

    Section 25206 of the Corporations Code referred to in the real estate
licensing provision of section 10131, provides: "A broker licensed by the Real
Estate Commissioner is exempt from the provisions of Section 25210 [requiring
broker/dealer licensing] when engaged in transactions in any interest in any
general or limited partnership, joint venture, unincorporated association, or
similar organization (but not a corporation) owned beneficially by no more than
100 persons and formed for the sole purpose of, and engaged solely in,
investment in or gain from an interest in real property, including, but not
limited to, a sale, exchange, trade or development.  . . ."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -



    Section 10131.3 does not delete business opportunities transactions which
are effected by means of a stock transfer, but adds to the definition of real
estate broker those persons who assist in certain noncorporate securities
transactions in small real estate investment entities.  Section 10131.3 refers
to those securities "as specified in Section 25206 of the Corporations Code,"
i.e., "any interest in any general or limited partnership, joint venture,
unincorporated association, or similar organization, (but not a corporation)
owned beneficially by no more than 100 persons and formed for the sole purpose
of, and engaged solely in, investment in or gain from an interest in real
property, including, but not limited to, a sale, exchange, trade or
development." ( Corp. Code, § 25206.) Adding these securities transactions,
which are neither real estate nor business opportunity transactions, in no
respect limits the definition of real estate broker in section 10131,
subdivision (a).

   3. The Sale of All Points

     The main thrust of Barrington's argument is that the sale of All Points was
more in the nature of a securities transaction than the transfer of a business
opportunity. Barrington suggests that when a business is transferred through the
purchase and sale of stock, rather than a purchase of assets and goodwill, the
business opportunity licensing requirements do not apply.

   This view exalts form over substance of the regulated transactions and
ignores the purposes of the regulation. The legal significance of such
exaltation has been acknowledged by courts in various contexts.  In Weber v.
Jorgensen, supra, 16 Cal.  App.3d 74, the court held that a real estate broker
was not required to have a securities broker's certificate to sue for his
commission, even though the sale of the resort and marina business took the
form of a stock transfer.  In so holding the court remarked: "From the
complaint, we may infer that the shares of the corporation had been duly issued
and were outstanding.  Under these circumstances, it would normally be a matter
of complete indifference to the buyers allegedly produced by plaintiff whether
the resort and marina were being operated by defendant or by the corporation.
The buyers, of course, would be at complete liberty to utilize the already
existing corporate structure, or dissolve the corporation and operate the resort
in their own proprietary capacity." ( Id., at p. 85.) The court observed that
many owners of investment property "often adopt the corporate form of ownership
and organization for tax and other purposes" and that "the services of real
estate brokers as well as many other specialists are so often essential to the
guidance of property owners in the handling and disposition of their property."
( Id., at pp. 85-86.)

   Similarly, in holding that the sale of an executive placement firm was not a
sale of securities for purposes of the Corporate Securities Act qualification
requirement, the California Supreme Court stated in Fox v. Ehrmantraut (1980) 28
Cal.3d 127, 138-140 [167 Cal.Rptr. 595, 615 P.2d 1383], that California courts
look through form to substance to further the purposes of the act.  The Court
contrasted securities transactions with the sale of a business:

   "'It is settled that the Corporate Securities Law was not intended to afford
supervision and regulation of instruments which constitute agreements with
persons who expect to reap a profit from their own services or other active
participation in a business venture.  Such contracts are clearly distinguished
from instruments issued to persons who, for a consideration paid, stipulate for
a right to share in the profits or proceeds of a business enterprise to be
conducted by others; and the court will look through form to substance to
discover whether in fact the transaction contemplates the conduct of a business
enterprise by others than the purchasers, in the profits or proceeds of which
the purchasers are to share.  [Citations.]'" (28 Cal.3d at p. 139.)

   We find that the sale of All Points was in substance the sale of a "business
opportunity," even though it was accomplished through a transfer of corporate
shares, and therefore the person negotiating the transaction was required to
have a real estate broker's license. Whether such transaction also  fell within
the scope of securities regulations is irrelevant. 13 Regulation under one
statute or regulatory scheme does not preclude regulation pursuant to other
statutory provisions. 14 Although  the Legislature has provided for coordination
of regulation between the Commissioner of Corporations and the Real Estate
Commissioner in certain limited areas of real estate-related securities, the
statutory scheme provides no indication that business opportunity regulation and
securities regulation in general are mutually exclusive or dismembered from one
another.  In fact, our review discloses a legislative intention to provide a
synthesis of harmony.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -13   This
issue is not before us.  Barrington contends that, as a merger and acquisition
firm, it is exempt from the securities broker licensing requirement of
Corporations Code section 25210 pursuant to a rule promulgated by the
Commissioner of Corporations.  All Points does not dispute this contention.

   The exemption for merger and acquisition firms is set forth in title 10 of
the California Code of Regulations, section 260.204.5, which provides: "An
exemption from the provisions of Section 25210 of the Code is hereby granted, as
being necessary and appropriate in the public interest and for protection of the
investors, to any person who effects transactions in securities in this state
only in connection with mergers, consolidations or purchases of corporate
assets, and who does not receive, transmit or hold for customers any funds or
securities in connection with such transactions."
14   The securities-broker exemption recognizes that merger and acquisition
firms effect transactions which are unlike the usual securities transaction.  In
Commissioner's Opinion No. 76/15C, the Commissioner of Corporations addressed
the applicability of the exemption to transactions which do not appear to fall
within the "language" of the rule.  "For example, two companies may commence
discussions of a possible combination of their enterprises.  The exact type of
transaction by which the combination will be effected will be a product of
accounting, tax and legal advice.  The transaction may be a merger,
consolidation or purchase of corporate assets or an exchange of shares or
purchases of one company's shares by another." The Commissioner explained that
"the exemption from the certification requirement of Section 25210 of the law
provided by Rule 204.5 is intended to apply to those broker-dealers whose
activities are limited to bringing together companies for the purpose of forming
a single enterprise.  While the Rule uses the terms 'mergers, consolidations, or
purchases of corporate assets,' these terms, especially consolidation, must be
interpreted more broadly than as used in other Sections of the Law . . . .
Accordingly, a broker-dealer whose intent is to effect transactions only in
connection with mergers, consolidations or purchases of corporate assets and who
meets the other requirements of Rule 204.5, may avail himself of the exemption
provided by that Rule if the transactions in which it participates take forms
which do not fall within the literal terms of the exemption because of advice
other than the advice of the broker-dealer."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    4. The Inability to Enforce the Arbitration Award

   "[A]rbitration has become an accepted and favored method of resolving
disputes, praised by the courts as an expeditious and economical method of
relieving over-burdened civil calendars." ( Madden v. Kaiser Foundation
Hospitals (1976) 17 Cal.3d 699, 706-707 [131 Cal.Rptr. 882, 552 P.2d 1178];
citations omitted.)

     Accordingly, every reasonable intendment is indulged to give effect to
arbitration proceedings.  "Courts may not examine the merits of the controversy,
the sufficiency of the evidence supporting the award, or the reasoning
supporting the decision.  [Citation.] A court may not set aside an arbitration
award even if the arbitrator made an error in law or fact.  [Citations.]" (
Lindholm v. Galvin (1979) 95 Cal.App.3d 443, 450-451 [157 Cal.Rptr. 167],
italics in original.)

   "Under certain circumstances an award based on an error in law may be set
aside on the ground that it was in excess of the arbitrator's powers.  ( Code
Civ. Proc., § 1286.2, subd. (d); Abbott v. California State Auto. Assn. (1977)
68 Cal.App.3d 763, 770 [].)  A trial court, however, is limited in its authority
to vacate the award of an arbitrator, even in the event of an error of fact or
law.  The mere fact that an arbitrator reached an erroneous conclusion based on
an error of law which does not appear on the face of the record will not
invalidate the award; on the other hand, where the error appears on the face of
the award and causes substantial injustice the award may be vacated.  ( Hirsch
v. Ensign (1981) 122 Cal.App.3d 521, 529 []; Abbott v. California State Auto.
Assn., supra, 68 Cal.App.3d at p. 771.)" ( Ray Wilson Co. v. Anaheim Memorial
Hospital Assn. (1985) 166 Cal.App.3d 1081, 1090-1091 [213 Cal.Rptr. 62].) 15

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -15    Code of
Civil Procedure section 1286.2, subdivision (d) provides as follows: "Subject to
Section 1286.4, the court shall vacate the award if the court determines that:
[para.] (d) The arbitrators exceeded their powers and the award cannot be
corrected without affecting the merits of the decision upon the controversy
submitted . . . ."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    In Loving & Evans v. Blick (1949) 33 Cal.2d 603 [204 P.2d 23], the parties
to a building contract submitted to arbitration a dispute over the amount of
payment due.  The property owner asserted that the contractors were not properly
licensed. The parties stipulated that one of the partners and the partnership
itself did not have contractor's licenses during performance of the work.  The
arbitrator found in favor of the contractors and the trial court affirmed the
arbitration award.

   In reversing the confirmation, the Supreme Court explained: "[I]t has been
repeatedly declared in this state that 'a contract made contrary to the terms of
a law designed for the protection of the public and prescribing a penalty for
violation thereof is illegal and void, and no action may be brought to enforce
such contract.' [Citations.] . . .

   ". . . [T]he rules which give finality to the arbitrator's determination of
ordinary  questions of fact or of law are inapplicable where the issue of
illegality of the entire transaction is raised in a proceeding for the
enforcement of the arbitrator's award.  When so raised, the issue is one for
judicial determination upon the evidence presented to the trial court, and any
preliminary determination of legality by the arbitrator, whether in the nature
of a determination of a pure question of law or a mixed question of fact and
law, should not be held to be binding upon the trial court." ( Id., at pp. 607,
609; Webb v. West Side District Hospital (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 946, 949 [193
Cal.Rptr. 80].)

   ". . . [I]t is generally held that 'a claim arising out of an illegal
transaction is not a proper subject matter for submission to arbitration, and
that an award springing out of an illegal contract, which no court can enforce,
cannot stand on any higher ground than the contract itself.'" ( Loving & Evans
v. Blick, supra, 33 Cal.2d at p. 610, citation omitted.)

   Inherent in the arbitration award granting Barrington a commission for its
involvement in the sale of All Points is the finding that the underlying
contract was legal and enforceable.   However, the issue of illegality is one
for judicial determination upon the evidence presented to the trial court, and
the arbitrator's finding, whether in the nature of a determination of a pure
question of law or a mixed question of fact and law, is not binding on the trial
court.  ( Loving & Evans v. Blick, supra, 33 Cal.2d 603, 609.)

     Barrington contends that it is entitled to recover its fee from All Points
because at the time of execution of the contract it was not "a clear violation"
of law or public policy to assist in the sale of a client's corporate stock
without possessing a real estate broker's license, in contrast to the situation
in Loving & Evans v. Blick, supra, 33 Cal.2d at page 607. They suggest that the
statutory language is unclear in its command that a merger and acquisition
specialist must possess a real estate broker's license, pointing to the
declarations of various individuals in the industry that it was the "custom and
practice" of members of the investment banking community not to be so licensed.
They also argue that no evidence was produced that the Department of Real Estate
has "any consistent enforcement policy regarding the sale of corporate stock by
an investment banker and/or merger and acquisition specialist which does not
possess a real estate broker's license," and claim that its principals were
"extremely qualified by way of background and experience" to perform the
contract.

   We recognize and acknowledge that there may be special circumstances where
the purpose of the legal requirement would not be advanced by  denying relief.
"[R]ules denying relief to parties to illegal contracts are subject to a wide
range of exceptions.  In each case, the grant or refusal of relief depends upon
the public interest involved in the particular kind of illegality, including the
policy of the transgressed law.  (See, 6A Corbin, Contracts (1962), § 1534, pp.
818-819.) 'In each such case, how the aims of policy can best be achieved
depends on the kind of illegality and the particular facts involved.' ( Lewis &
Queen v. N. M. Ball Sons (1957) 48 Cal.2d 141, 151 [].)" ( Weber v. Jorgensen,
supra, 16 Cal.App.3d at pp. 84-85.) In Weber, discussed above, the court found
the lack of a securities broker's certificate raised "no public policy objection
in the nature of the services alleged by plaintiff . . . ." (Ibid.) The
requirement for a certificate was unimportant under the facts of the case.  The
seller had instructed the plaintiff that the transfer of the corporate stock was
incidental to the sale of the real property, and that the stock transfer
agreement would be prepared and handled by an attorney, not by the real estate
broker plaintiff.

   This is not such a case.  Enforcement of the contract for a commission would
be in direct contravention of the statute and against public policy. That
conclusion is not altered by the fact that there may be persons engaging in
similar activities who have unintentionally misconstrued the law and may face
harsh consequences.  However, "[c]onsequences cannot  alter statutes, but may
help to fix their meaning" 16 The Department of Real Estate, as amicus, has
expressed its opinion that section 10131 applies in the case of a sale of a
corporate business opportunity.  Certainly the sale of All Points, as an ongoing
enterprise, was not "incidental" to the sale of its stock. Indeed, the only
purpose of the stock transfer was to effect the sale of the business itself.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -16   Matter
of Rouss (1917) 221 N.Y. 81 [116 N.E. 782, 785] (Cardozo, J.).
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The Legislature selected the specific means to protect the public and has
expressed its intention in section 10136 which states, "No person engaged in the
business or acting in the capacity of a real estate broker or a real estate
salesman within this State shall bring or maintain any action in the courts of
this State for the collection of compensation for the performance of any of the
acts mentioned in this article without alleging and proving that he was a duly
licensed real estate broker or real estate salesman at the time the alleged
cause of action arose." In light of the statute's mandatory dictation, we must
conclude that Barrington cannot pursue its action for a commission.

    Barrington lastly contends that All Points will be unjustly enriched if the
contract is not enforced.  However, this court cannot "resort to equitable
considerations in defiance" of the mandate of the Legislature.  (See Lewis &
Queen v. N. M. Ball Sons (1957) 48 Cal.2d 141, 152 [308 P.2d 713].)

5. Attorney's Fees

   Having ultimately prevailed, All Points is entitled to attorney's fees as
provided in the parties' agreement.  ( Code Civ. Proc., § 1717; M. C. & D.
Capital Corporation v. Gilmaker (1988) 204 Cal.App.3d 671 [251 Cal.Rptr. 178].)

   Judgment reversed and the case remanded to the trial court for further
proceedings consistent with this opinion.  All Points is awarded costs on
appeal.


                              63 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           RALPH O. WILLIAMS, Respondent, v. G. E. KINSEY, Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 14986

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division One

          74 Cal. App. 2d 583; 169 P.2d 487; 1946 Cal. App. LEXIS 1008


                                  May 24, 1946

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court
was Denied July 18, 1946.  Edmonds, J., Voted for a Hearing.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  Thurmond Clarke, Judge.

   Action to recover money due on an express contract, and for money had and
received.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Brokers--Compensation--Divided Commissions.  --A broker who, for a
consideration, agrees with a principal to an exchange of real estate, who is not
a licensed broker, to pay him half of the commission received from the other
principal, where he has previously put the principals in contact with each
other, but does not participate in the transaction, does not violate the Real
Estate Act (Bus. & Prof. Code, §§ 10130-10221), which prohibits certain
agreements of brokers with unlicensed persons acting as brokers, because in said
transaction the principal first mentioned, in trading his own property, is not
acting as a broker within the meaning of the act.

(2) Id.--Compensation--Procuring Cause.  --Upon an exchange of a principal's
property the broker who establishes the contact between said principal and the
other party to the exchange is entitled to a commission if this "bringing
together" was the effective cause of the deal, although the broker was retained
by said principal only in connection with property different from that concerned
in the transaction.

(3) Id.--Compensation--Producing Purchaser--Estoppel.  --Where, after a broker
initiated negotiations for an exchange of properties between the owners thereof,
one owner took the matter into his own hands and completed an exchange himself,
the broker was so completely discharged from responsibility that the owner
completing the transaction was estopped to contend, as against the broker's
claim for compensation, that the broker did not actually participate in the
negotiations which resulted in the consummation of a deal.

(4) Id.--Compensation--Evidence--Sufficiency.  --In an action by a broker to
recover compensation pursuant to a contract, the evidence supported findings
that the broker did not act as an agent for either owner in effecting an
exchange of properties, but acted as a mere middleman in bringing the parties
together; that the owners themselves negotiated the terms of the exchange; that
the broker thereby became entitled to two commissions, one from each owner; and
that one owner paid the commission he owed, while the other owner gave the
broker the contract sued on instead of paying the commission he owed.

(5a) (5b) Id.--Compensation--Evidence--Sufficiency.  --In an action by a broker
to recover compensation pursuant to a contract whereby one of the owners
involved in an exchange of properties agreed to measure his broker's commission
by the "net proceeds of the sale" of a house above a set figure, the evidence
supported findings that there was no agreement that interest was to be charged
as a disbursement against the gross proceeds of the sale, and that certain
furniture was temporarily placed in the property and was not sold therewith.

(6) Appeal--Record--Opinions of Trial Judge.  --The written or oral opinion of
the trial court is no part of the record on appeal and will not be considered by
the appellate court for the purpose of predicating error on the rulings of the
trial court or in determining whether the findings of fact are supported by the
evidence.

(7) Trial--Findings--Expression or Opinion of Judge as Impeaching Findings.
--Inconsistencies between the written or oral opinion of a trial judge or his
antecedent expressions and the findings of fact cannot be considered by an
appellate court.

(8) Id.--By Court--Decision.  --Rule 5, subd. a, of Rules on Appeal, authorizing
the inclusion of "any written opinion of the superior court" in the record on
appeal, does not restrict by antecedent expressions of the trial court the
absolute power of the trial judge to declare his final conclusions in the only
manner authorized by law, namely, by filing his "decision" as provided in Code
Civ. Proc., § 632.

(9) Interest--When Recoverable.  --Except in the case of a loan of money, the
matter of payment of interest on the "net proceeds of the sale" must be made the
subject of an express agreement; otherwise it cannot be charged.

(10) Contracts--Consideration--Sufficiency.  --The moral obligation which arises
from an oral agreement with a real estate broker is sufficient legal
consideration to support a later written agreement.

(11) Id.--Consideration--Pleading.  --Lack of consideration of a written
instrument is an affirmative defense and must be pleaded.

(12) Actions--Joinder.  --A cause of action for money had and received may
properly be joined in the same complaint with other common counts or with a
cause of action on an express contract.

COUNSEL: W. T. Stockman, Henry G. Bodkin and Bodkin, Breslin & Luddy for
Appellant.

Clifford E. Hughes and Meserve, Mumper & Hughes for Respondent.

JUDGES: White, J.  York, P. J., and Doran, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: WHITE

OPINION

     Defendant appeals from an adverse judgment.

   It appears from the record that during the year 1941 plaintiff was a licensed
real estate broker actively engaged in such business in the city of Los Angeles.
Defendant, though not a licensed real estate broker, was an operator in real
estate on a more or less large scale.  He published and circulated among some
800 real estate brokers, including plaintiff, brochures in which he set forth
his holdings on which he was open to proposals.  Through these brochures
defendant advertised that he dealt through brokers only and would pay a real
estate commission to any one effecting a transaction involving one of his
properties.  Plaintiff was aware of such advertisements, and was also aware of
the fact that Asa V. Call was the owner of a large estate property improved with
a residence, in the city of Beverly Hills, which Mr. Call was interested in
disposing of, and plaintiff felt he could be instrumental in bringing about a
transaction whereby the defendant might exchange one of his properties for the
above mentioned property of Mr. Call.  In the fall of 1941 plaintiff took
defendant to see the Call property and interested him in acquiring  it.  At
defendant's suggestion, plaintiff submitted to Mr. Call three of the former's
properties, but no deal was consummated.  There is in the record substantial
evidence that plaintiff first brought defendant and Asa V. Call together in an
effort to effectuate a transaction under the terms of which Mr. Call would
exchange his residence for one of defendant's properties and that defendant was
to pay plaintiff a commission in the event such a transaction eventuated between
defendant and Mr. Call.  The record further reflects the fact that there was no
agreement in writing calling for the payment of a commission, because, as
testified by plaintiff, "it was useless to have a contract signed in advance for
a commission where the deal was an exchange, because it was impossible to
describe the transaction before a deal was actually worked out."

   It further appears that on or about December 1, 1941, plaintiff learned that
defendant was acquiring certain property known as Beaconsfield Manor, and he
thereupon went to the defendant, inquiring of him if he was interested in
exchanging Beaconsfield Manor for Mr. Call's property.  Defendant informed
plaintiff at that time that he had already opened negotiations with Mr. Call to
effect an exchange thereof for Mr. Call's property through defendant's salaried
employee, Mr. Grunwald.  Defendant also told plaintiff that the latter was not
to talk to Mr. Call, but was to "keep your hands off, I will pay your commission
of $ 5,000." According to plaintiff's testimony, defendant advised him that he
had earned his commission by bringing Mr. Call and the defendant together and
that if defendant was successful in effecting a trade of any of his properties
involving the Call residence he would see that respondent "was protected on any
commission that he had coming from Mr. Call." There is also testimony that
defendant further stated that when the negotiations got to the point where
escrow instructions were to be signed, plaintiff would be notified and could go
to the bank with the other parties where the escrow was to held, at which time
proper escrow instructions would be worked out providing for the payment of the
commission to which plaintiff was entitled from Mr. Call and from the defendant,
to which plaintiff agreed.

   There is also contained in the record evidence that on December 8, 1941, Mr.
Call and defendant opened an escrow providing for the exchange of Beaconsfield
Manor for the  Call residence; that plaintiff was not notified thereof and no
provision was made for the payment of any commission to him by either party.
Upon discovering that Mr. Call and defendant had signed escrow instructions
without his knowledge, thereby leaving him with no written agreement  regarding
his compensation, plaintiff contacted defendant.  Upon the defendant's
suggestion, plaintiff attempted to get in touch with Mr. Call, but was
unsuccessful, and after several days advised the defendant that he knew of no
way to protect himself under the circumstances other than to file a lien for his
commissions against the escrow. In this regard plaintiff testified that
defendant said "he would give me an agreement that would protect me all the way
around.  He stated Mr. Call had beaten him down on his margin in the deal and
that he could not pay me any cash commission; that he figured that he was
entitled to a minimum of 15% profit on the exchange of Beaconsfield for the Call
residence, and that therefore he was going to put the Call house into my deal
with him on my commission at $ 30,000; that when he sold the Call house he would
give me one-half of the net proceeds of the sale above $ 30,000; that since we
did not know how much commission Mr. Call was going to pay, we would throw all
of the commissions into one pot and divide them equally.  He said that in this
way he thought that I would make an amount that would total more than a 5%
commission on both sides of the deal." Thereupon defendant wrote out and handed
to plaintiff an agreement, dated December 23, 1941, reading as follows:

   "It is understood that in lieu of my paying you a commission on the Call,
Beaconsfield trade, I will pay you one-half of the net proceeds of the sale of
the Call house above $ 30,000.  You are to pay me one-half of commission you
collect from Call."

   Subsequently the escrow was closed, on December 31, 1941, and Mr. Call got
the Beaconsfield Manor while appellant got Mr. Call's residence.  Thereafter Mr.
Call paid plaintiff a commission of $ 850, and defendant paid plaintiff $ 500,
which sum, according to the latter's testimony, was on account of commissions.
Thereafter defendant sold the house he had acquired from Mr. Call for $ 55,000
and received the money therefor.  Upon discovering the sale, plaintiff demanded
his compensation pursuant to the aforesaid contract of December 23, 1941, and
defendant declined to pay plaintiff any further  compensation in addition to
what he had already paid.  At that time defendant rendered plaintiff a statement
setting forth the disposition of the funds received from the sale of the Call
property, taking credit for $ 425, being one-half the commission Mr. Call paid
plaintiff, and the $ 500 which defendant had paid to plaintiff.  Thereupon this
action ensued.

   Plaintiff's complaint pleads the foregoing facts in the first cause of action
thereof and in the second cause of action sets up a common count for money had
and received.  Plaintiff's prayer was for judgment against the defendant for the
sum of $ 10,521.75, with interest thereon at the rate of 7 per cent per annum
from September 25, 1943.  By his answer defendant denied he advanced $ 500 or
any other sum to plaintiff as a commission, but on the contrary alleged that the
$ 500 was paid in full settlement of the claim under the aforesaid written
contract; denied that he had rendered a statement showing the net profit to be $
1,389.69 or any other sum, but alleged that the aforesaid statement was
defendant's ledger sheet showing net profits, furnished to plaintiff's attorney
at his request.  The answer further denied any sum was due for money had and
received.

   By his answer defendant also set up various defenses, the first of which
alleged that concurrently with defendant's agreement to pay plaintiff one-half
of the net proceeds on the sale of the Call residence over $ 30,000, plaintiff
agreed that he would use his best efforts in selling the Call residence and
would accomplish it in a few weeks, for a substantial profit; alleged that
defendant relied upon the representation and believed plaintiff, which plaintiff
knew; that plaintiff intended that defendant should rely upon the statement,
knew it was false, and did not intend to use his best efforts to sell the Call
residence, nor did he believe he could sell it, but intended to deceive
defendant.  As a second affirmative defense, defendant alleged that the claim of
plaintiff was compromised and settled March 5, 1942, upon the payment of the
aforesaid $ 500.  For a third separate defense, it was alleged that if any sum
were due plaintiff it was not in excess of one-half of $ 1,318.69, as itemized
in the above mentioned statement, which, in itemized form, was attached  to
defendant's answer, less closing costs of the deal, at that time undetermined.

   Following trial before the court, sitting without a jury, judgment was
rendered in favor of plaintiff and against the  defendant for the sum of $
3,582.05, from which judgment defendant prosecutes this appeal.

   Appellant concedes, with reference to his second affirmative defense, that
the court found upon conflicting evidence that the $ 500 paid in March, 1942,
was merely a payment on account and not in full settlement of the contract,  as
claimed by defendant.  Appellant also concedes, with reference to his first
affirmative defense, that there was a substantial conflict in the evidence with
reference thereto and that the court found against defendant's contention in
regard to his claim that after payment of the aforesaid $ 500 no effort was made
by plaintiff to sell the Call property.  Because these findings are based upon
conflicting evidence of a substantial nature, defendant has abandoned these
defenses on appeal.

   The main ground urged by appellant for a reversal is that the judgment is
contrary to law, in that the indisputable evidence shows that while plaintiff
was a licensed real estate broker under the laws of the State of California
(California Real Estate Act, Stats. 1919, p. 1252, as amended; now Bus. & Prof.
Code, ch. 3, §§ 10130 to 10221), that neither defendant nor his salaried
employee, Mr. Grunwald, who proposed to Mr. Call that the latter trade his
residence for the defendant's Beaconsfield property, was a licensed real estate
broker or salesman; that the aforesaid contract of December 23, 1941, upon which
recovery was sought herein provided that plaintiff's compensation for services
rendered in consummating an exchange of properties contemplated that plaintiff
should pay to defendant one-half the real estate commission he received from Asa
V. Call for services defendant and his employee rendered in consummating the
exchange; that the agreement being indivisible, plaintiff's compensation cannot
be arrived at without taking into consideration such compensation received from
Asa Call; and that said contract therefore contravenes the express provisions of
the laws of this state (§ 2, Cal. Real Estate Act, now Bus. & Prof. Code, §
10134).

   Section 2 of the California Real Estate Act, in effect at the time herein
pertinent, provided (in part):

   "One act, for a compensation of buying or selling real estate of or for
another, or offering for another to buy or sell or exchange real estate, or
negotiating the purchase or sale or exchange of, or listing or soliciting
prospective purchasers of real estate, or negotiating a loan on or leasing or
renting or  placing for rent real estate, or collecting rent therefrom shall
constitute the person, copartnership or corporation making such offer, sale or
purchase, exchange or lease, or negotiating said loan, or so renting or placing
for rent or collecting said rent or listing or soliciting, a real estate broker
or salesman within the meaning of this act."

   Section 18 of the same act provided:

   "It shall be unlawful for any licensed broker to pay any compensation for
performing any of the acts herein specified to any person who is not a licensed
broker, or a salesman licensed under the broker paying the compensation, and no
real estate salesman shall be employed by or accept compensation from any person
other than the broker under whom he is at the time licensed. It shall be
unlawful for any licensed real estate salesman to pay any compensation for
performing any of the acts specified in section 2 hereof to any licensee except
through the broker under whom he is at the time licensed. It shall be a
misdemeanor for any person, firm or corporation, whether obligor, escrow holder
or otherwise, to pay or deliver to anyone a compensation for performing any of
the acts specified in section 2 hereof, who shall not be known to be, or present
evidence to such payor that he is a regularly licensed real estate broker at the
time such compensation is earned.  Punishment for said misdemeanor shall be a
fine not exceeding fifty dollars for any one offense.

   "Employment or compensation of unlicensed person.  No licensed broker shall
employ or compensate directly or indirectly any person for performing any of the
acts specified in section 2 of this act who is not a licensed broker or who is
not a salesman licensed under the broker employing, or paying the compensation
to, such person."

   The court found that plaintiff was a licensed real estate broker at the time
of the transaction here in question and that at such time the defendant was not
so licensed. The court further found "that thereafter and on or about the 1st
day of December, 1941, defendant acquired Beaconsfield Manor, and through his
agents and representatives and without the knowledge of plaintiff, interested
Mr. Call in exchanging the Call property for Beaconsfield Manor; that the escrow
instructions wherein and whereby it was arranged that the Beaconsfield Manor was
to be exchanged for the Call property, were signed by the defendant and by Mr.
Call without the participation of plaintiff, and without the plaintiff having
talked to Mr. Call concerning the same; that plaintiff did not act as the agent
for Asa V. Call or defendant, or arrange any of the terms of the exchange of the
Beaconsfield Manor for the Call property, but acted as a mere middleman who
brought said parties together in an attempt to effect an exchange of the Call
property for property, other than Beaconsfield Manor, belonging to the
defendant, and that defendant and Mr. Call arranged the terms of the exchange of
Beaconsfield Manor for the Call residence between themselves, without the
assistance of plaintiff."

   It was further found by the court "that plaintiff had collected a commission
of $ 850 from Mr. Call some time in the month of February, 1942, and that
plaintiff and defendant agreed that the said commission and the net proceeds of
the sale of the Call house above $ 30,000 was (sic) to be put in one pot and
divided equally between plaintiff and defendant as the means of determining and
paying the amount due plaintiff in lieu of a commission on the Beaconsfield-Call
exchange; that it is true that the $ 500 paid by defendant to Plaintiff on the
5th day of March, 1942, was paid by defendant to plaintiff on account of the
commission to which he would ultimately be entitled when the Call property was
sold; . . ."

   The first question presented is whether, under the facts herein, it was the
agreement between the parties that plaintiff, a licensed broker, should split
his compensation as such real estate broker with defendant, an unlicensed
person, a portion of the services for which compensation was to be received
having been performed by defendant, an unlicensed person, through his salaried
employee, also an unlicensed person.

     At the time here pertinent section 18 of the Real Estate Act made it
unlawful for "any licensed broker to pay any compensation for performing any of
the acts herein specified to any person who is not a licensed broker, or a
salesman licensed under the broker paying the compensation.  . . ." (Emphasis
added.) The query therefore arises, what are "any of the acts herein specified"?
Manifestly, the Real Estate Act intended to make it unlawful for a licensed
broker to divide his compensation with any unlicensed person who performed any
of the services of a broker in the consummation of a deal.  The question then
arises, did the defendant act as a broker in the transaction with which we are
here concerned?  Section 2 of the Real Estate Act declares the following  acts
to constitute one a broker or salesman: "One act, for a compensation, of buying
or selling real estate of or for another, or offering for another to buy or sell
or exchange real estate, or negotiating the purchase or sale or exchange of . .
. real estate. . . ." (Italics added.) In the exchange of the Call residence for
the Beaconsfield Manor apartments there were only two parties.  Mr. Call was one
and the defendant, as owner of the Beaconsfield Manor apartments, was the other.
From the record it is obvious that defendant was not Mr. Call's broker, and
certainly defendant could not employ himself as his own broker, nor did
plaintiff employ defendant as his broker. The court found that plaintiff brought
the principals together and that they arranged among themselves, as owners  of
the respective properties involved, to negotiate the terms of the deal.  That
when one deals with his own property his negotiations with reference to the sale
or exchange thereof do not constitute him a broker within the meaning of the
act, under the facts here presented, is evidenced by section 2 thereof, which
provides that "the provisions of this act, except as to sections 19a and 20a to
20 1 inclusive"  (not here involved) "shall not apply to anyone who shall
directly perform any of the acts aforesaid with reference to his own property. .
. ."

   The purpose of the Real Estate Act is not to raise revenue, but to protect
the public ( Firpo v. Murphy, 72 Cal.App. 249, 253 [236 P. 968]), and therefore
it does not by its specific terms require a person to be licensed in order to
act with regard to his own property or affairs.  As to what was the agreement
between the parties, the court, upon conflicting but substantial evidence, found
"that it is true that plaintiff had collected a commission of $ 850 from Mr.
Call some time in the month of February, 1942, and that plaintiff and defendant
agreed that the said commission and the net proceeds of the sale of the Call
house above $ 30,000 was to be put in one pot and divided equally between
plaintiff and defendant as the means of determining and paying the amount due
plaintiff in lieu of a commission on the Beaconsfield-Call exchange; . . ." The
court's finding in this regard removes the agreement in question from the
category of agreements inhibited by the Real Estate Act. Furthermore, we are
convinced that the defendant, acting as a principal and not as a broker in
connection with his own property, was not performing "any of the acts" specified
in the Real Estate Act, was  not a broker, and does not therefore come within
either the letter, spirit or meaning of the provisions of the act which make
certain agreements between brokers and unlicensed persons unlawful.

     Appellant next contends that the court erred in its finding numbered III,
reading in part, "that plaintiff did not arrange for the exchange of the 'Call
house' for 'Beaconsfield', but merely brought the owners of said properties
together prior to the first day of December, 1941, as hereinafter found."
Appellant argues that the undisputed evidence shows that the parties were
brought together as to other property only; that respondent's contract with
appellant was special and not general; that the former performed no services in
connection with the trade of properties that was consummated and is therefore
not entitled to recover.  That respondent originally brought appellant and Mr.
Call together cannot be disputed.  The evidence in that regard is without
contradiction.  If this "bringing together" of Mr. Call and appellant was the
effective cause of the particular deal that was finally made, then respondent is
entitled to recover.  ( Neiswender v. Campbell, 119 Cal.App. 504, 507 [6 P.2d
584].)   Furthermore, after respondent had initiated the negotiations for an
exchange of properties between appellant and Mr. Call, the former took the
matter into his own hands and completed an exchange by himself with the aid of
his salaried employee.  Respondent was thereby so completely discharged from
responsibility that appellant is estopped to contend against respondent broker's
claim for a commission on the ground that the latter did not actually
participate in the negotiations which resulted in appellant and the party to
whom respondent introduced appellant consummating a deal.  ( Larrabee v.
Republic Bond etc. Co., 100 Cal.App. 447, 451 [280 P. 149]; Leckey v. Holst, 97
Cal.App. 698, 701 [275 P. 1015]; 4 Cal.Jur. § 21, p. 577; 2 Am.Jur., "Agency,"
§§ 304 to 306; 45 L.R.A. 51; 14 A.L.R. 472; Green v. Robertson, 64 Cal. 75, 76
[28 P. 446]; Clark v. Allen, 125 Cal. 276, 279 [57 P. 985]; King v. Reed, 24
Cal.App. 229, 236 [141 P. 41].) The cases cited and relied upon by appellant are
easily distinguishable from the case at bar in their respective factual
backgrounds.

     Although in conflict, there is nevertheless substantial evidence in the
record to show that respondent acted in the  capacity of a middleman -- in other
words, a broker who brings seller and buyer, or the parties to an exchange of
properties, together.  In his capacity as such middleman  the broker need have
nothing to do with actually negotiating the bargain.  ( Ryan v. Walker, 35
Cal.App. 116, 119 [169 P. 417].) Contrary to appellant's contention, finding III
does find the ultimate facts alleged in paragraph III of the complaint as it
stood following amendment and at the time the finding was made, namely, that
respondent as a middleman brought appellant and Mr. Call together; that
appellant and Mr. Call themselves negotiated the terms of the exchange of the
Call residence for appellant's Beaconsfield Manor apartments, and that
respondent thereby became entitled to two commissions -- one from Mr. Call and
another from appellant --; that Mr. Call paid the commission he owed and
appellant gave respondent the aforesaid contract of December 23, 1941, instead
of paying the commission he owed to respondent.  The phrase "as hereinafter
found" refers to finding VII, where it was comprehensively set forth that while
respondent did not arrange the terms of the exchange agreed upon, he acted as a
middleman and that the parties themselves arranged the terms of the transaction.
The challenged finding III finds support in the testimony given by respondent
that after bringing Mr. Call and appellant together he learned that appellant
was acquiring Beaconsfield Manor in the latter part of November, 1941, and told
appellant that he thought it would be a good deal for Mr. Call; that he had been
theretofore and was at that time attempting to arrange an exchange of the Call
property for one of appellant's properties, and that several deals had been
considered.  Appellant told respondent that his employee, Mr. Grunwald, had
already proposed through Mr. Rolapp, an employee of the Pacific Mutual Life
Insurance Company, that Mr. Call consider trading his residence for
Beaconsfield.  Respondent at that time told appellant that it was odd that
appellant's employee should "go behind respondent's back" and try to make a deal
directly.  Appellant then explained that Mr.  Grunwald and Mr. Rolapp were very
good friends; that the deal was progressing nicely, and that he, appellant,
considered that the deal had better chances of eventuating if respondent kept
his hands off of it.  At that time appellant told respondent that he, appellant,
would pay respondent a commission of $ 5,000; "that if he" (appellant)  "was
successful in effecting a trade of any of his property involving the taking of
the Call residence, Mr. Grunwald would see that I" (respondent) "was protected
on any commission that I had coming from Mr. Call"; that respondent had put Mr.
Call in touch with appellant; that Mr. Call was respondent's prospect and that
respondent had earned his commission in bringing Mr. Call and appellant
together, and that respondent might spoil the deal, which was apparently
progressing very nicely, "if he were to get in there and start talking to Mr.
Call and his people." Appellant told respondent that when the negotiations got
to the point where escrow instructions were to be signed, respondent would be
notified; that respondent would go to the bank where the escrow was to be held
with the other parties and that proper instructions would be worked out for the
payment of a commission to which respondent was entitled from Mr. Call and from
appellant.  Respondent agreed not to talk to Mr. Call regarding the deal on
Beaconsfield and it is undisputed that he did not talk to Mr. Call.

   In other words, appellant's agreement was that he would pay a commission in
the event of an exchange with Mr. Call of "any" of appellant's properties.
Obviously, this would include the Beaconsfield Manor apartments.

   It is further contended by appellant that the portion of finding VII reading,
"that plaintiff did not act as the agent for Asa V. Call or defendant or arrange
any of the terms of the exchange of Beaconsfield Manor for the Call property,
but acted as a mere middleman who brought said parties together in an attempt to
effectuate an exchange of the Call property for property, other than
Beaconsfield Manor, belonging to the defendant," is contrary to the undisputed
evidence.  We deem it unnecessary to here set forth the evidence which has been
hereinbefore narrated in detail.  Suffice it to say that even though it be
conceded that respondent was a broker for Mr. Call and for appellant in trying
to negotiate numerous exchanges which were not consummated, nevertheless such
evidence does not invalidate a finding that respondent was not the agent for
either party in the strict legal sense of that term, because there was no
evidence to the effect that respondent was invested with any power to bind or
commit either party or that he was to do anything with regard to negotiating the
terms of the exchange other than to bring the parties together.   Appellant
fails to recognize the distinction between a broker acting as an agent and a
broker acting as a middleman. This distinction is set forth with clarity in
Clark v. Allen, supra, at page 278, where the court declares that a broker acts
as an agent when there is confided to him the power to act on behalf of the
parties and to exercise discretion, skill and judgment; whereas a middleman
possesses none of these prerogatives, and earns his commission simply by
bringing the parties together.  In the case just cited the court said:

   "For a defense to the action it is claimed that plaintiff's assignors, the
brokers, received compensation for their services from the other party to the
trade without his (defendant's) knowledge, and for the reason he now insists
that the brokers are barred from recovering any compensation from him.  In other
words, it is claimed that the law will not allow the brokers to act as the agent
of both parties, and a contract of that kind for compensation will not be
recognized by the courts.  As a general principle, this contention is sound, but
there are circumstances where a party may act for two persons and charge
compensation from both for his services.  If the duty of the broker is simply to
bring together two men who desire to exchange their lands, and the broker's
entire duty is performed when he has brought the two men together, then we see
nothing against good morals and a sound public policy in allowing compensation
to the broker from each of the parties.  In such a case, the broker is in no
sense representing conflicting interests.  He has nothing whatever to do with
the trade.  Under the contract his advice and assistance to either party is not
called for.  Upon the state of facts here assumed, the broker may be termed a
middleman and not an agent in the strict sense of the term." (Italics added.)

   The next point urged by appellant is that the court erred in finding that
defendant was indebted to plaintiff in the sum of $ 3,582.05 and interest,
because in arriving at said sum the court failed to allow defendant interest on
the $ 30,000 value of the Call residence, or interest on money advanced by
defendant in maintaining and operating said Call residence until it was sold, or
compensation for the use of furniture in the Call residence, including
reimbursement for expenses incurred in transportation of such furniture from
Oregon to the Call residence.  For an intelligent consideration of this point,
it is necessary to remember that appellant's agreement with  respondent was that
he would pay the latter "one-half of the net proceeds of the sale of the Call
house above $ 30,000." The court found that the gross sales price of the Call
property was $ 55,000.  It was also found that certain items listed in Exhibit
"A" attached to defendant's answer "were incurred and paid by defendant as
reasonable expenses of maintaining and selling the Call property," totalling the
sum of $ 15,985.90; that the net proceeds over $ 30,000 from the sale of the
Call property, before commissions, was $ 55,000 less $ 30,000, less $ 15,985.90,
to wit, the sum of $ 9,014.10; that one-half of said amount is $ 4,507.05; "that
defendant is entitled to credit for $ 500 heretofore paid by him to plaintiff on
account of commissions and the sum of $ 425, as and being one-half of the
commission paid plaintiff by Mr. Call; that one-half of the net proceeds of the
sale of the Call property over $ 30,000, . . ." less the above mentioned
expenses and credits amounted to $ 3,582.05, for which plaintiff was given
judgment.

   By its findings the court determined that defendant was not entitled to
interest upon his investment of $ 30,000 in the Call property or interest upon
the disbursements made by him as reasonable expenses of maintaining and selling
the Call property.  With reference to the agreement between the parties
defendant testified that "in arriving at such net proceeds, I was to receive $
30,000 plus the cost of maintenance  and upkeep, including caretaker, gardener,
taxes, reasonable interest to me on the $ 30,000, and any other expenses
incurred, including any commission paid on the sale, and after such deduction
the net proceeds should be divided equally between us"; while plaintiff
testified as follows: "All of this conversation was in connection with the
proposed trade of Mr. Call's house for the Cunningham apartments. This was the
only time that Mr. Kinsey and I ever discussed the carrying charges that would
be involved on Mr. Call's residence.  There was no agreement or discussion at
any time with respect to his being allowed to deduct any carrying charges over
and above $ 30,000, or any other amount in connection with the exchange of Mr.
Call's residence for the Beaconsfield apartments. . . ."

   On rebuttal plaintiff testified: "There never was at any time any discussion
between Mr. Kinsey and myself that he was to have any interest or any carrying
charges in connection with any proposed exchange of any of his properties for
the Call residence.  There never was any discussion of Mr. Kinsey  being
entitled to the cost of maintenance and upkeep, including caretaker, gardener,
taxes or any other item on the Call property.  The only discussion that was had
concerning these items was at the time that I first showed the Call property to
Mr. Kinsey.  We sat in my automobile in the front of his house after I had taken
him to see the Call property the first time in the fall of 1941.  At the time I
told him what the taxes were and we discussed what it would cost to maintain the
house and grounds.  That was several months before Mr. Kinsey acquired the
Beaconsfield.  It was understood that in the event that he made a deal on the
Call house he would naturally have to take care of those expenses.  . . .  "It
was only after the escrow was signed up between Mr. Kinsey and Mr. Call behind
my back, that any arrangement other than a 5% commission to me on both sides of
the deal, was discussed.  The terms of that deal were arranged orally within two
or three days after the deal went into escrow in December, 1941.  There was no
discussion between Mr. Kinsey and myself prior to or at the time of giving the
memo of December 23, 1941, except the discussion which I have heretofore related
on the stand."

     The court found "that there was no agreement or discussion between the
plaintiff and defendant to the effect that interest was to be charged as a
disbursement against the gross proceeds of the sale of the property on the sum
of $ 30,000 set forth in the agreement of December 23, 1941, or on any of the
disbursements shown in Exhibit A to defendant's answer, . . .  That in the fall
of 1941 and in connection with the proposed exchange of the Call property for
property, other than Beaconsfield Manor, belonging to the defendant, plaintiff
and defendant discussed the amount of taxes on the Call property, the expense of
paying a gardener, and the amount of insurance, but that there was no discussion
between plaintiff and defendant at any time concerning interest on $ 30,000 or
interest on any moneys that might be disbursed by defendant as carrying charges
on, or expenses in effecting the sale of, the Call property; . . ."

   In view of the foregoing testimony given by plaintiff, it cannot be said that
the findings just quoted are without evidentiary support.  True, there was a
conflict, but when a finding or judgment is attacked upon the ground of
insufficiency of the evidence, the province of an appellate tribunal begins and
ends with a determination as to whether there is any substantial evidence,
contradicted or uncontradicted,  which will support the questioned finding of
fact or judgment.  ( Eggert v. Pacific States S. & L. Assn., 57 Cal.App.2d 239,
243 [135 P.2d 412, 136 P.2d 822]; Viner v. Untrecht, 26 Cal.2d 261, 267 [158
P.2d 3]; Cordell v. City of Los Angeles, 67 Cal.App.2d 257, 265 [154 P.2d 31].)

   Appellant insists, however, that the record shows that the court believed the
defendant rather than the plaintiff, because by its finding numbered VII it
determined that defendant was entitled to add the  sum of $ 15,985.10 expended
for the upkeep and maintenance of the Call property to the sum of $ 30,000 in
computing the net proceeds, and because, as revealed by the statement on appeal,
the court in giving "its decision from the bench" stated, "I find for the
plaintiff upon the contract." That after disallowing certain items of deductions
claimed by defendant, the court said: "However, I disagree with Mr. Hughes (one
of plaintiff's counsel) and feel that Mr. Kinsey (the defendant) is entitled to
reasonable interest, and I feel he is entitled to credit at the rate of 3% per
annum, and the credit for interest, per schedule attached to the answer as
Exhibit "A," to wit, $ 4319.25, is reduced to 3% per annum.

   "Question by Mr. Hughes: You mean interest on $ 30,000 and the carrying
charges?

   "The Court: No, interest on $ 30,000, the value of the Call residence, from
the time it was acquired until it was sold.  No interest will be allowed on the
carrying charges or other expenses paid by Mr. Kinsey.

   "Mr. Hughes will prepare the findings and serve them."

   It appears that thereafter counsel for plaintiff communicated with the trial
judge, and on July 28, 1944, wrote a letter to defendant's counsel, a copy of
which was transmitted to the trial judge.  The letter follows:

   "Re: Williams v. Kinsey

   "Gentlemen:

   "At the close of the trial of the above entitled action it was not clear to
me from the remarks made by the court whether or not there was to be a finding
that the contract had been modified by an oral agreement.  I asked Judge Clarke
about it, and upon being advised that there was to be no such finding, I asked,
and received permission from the court, that I be allowed to prepare findings
making no provision for the payment of interest. The court granted this request,
stating  that I should write you a letter setting forth the facts and advising
you that if you desired to raise any issue on that point, the same could be done
by proposing counter findings and setting the same down for settlement.

   "Accordingly, I have prepared and hand you herewith a copy of the findings
prepared as per my suggestion above set forth.

    "I have not cited to the court, but cite to you now the case of Young v.
Canfield, 33 Cal.App. 343 [164 P. 1134], which is practically on all fours with
the case at bar, which, in my judgment, makes it rather futile to spend any more
time on the interest question."

   The statement on appeal then continues:

   "Thereafter plaintiff prepared and served proposed findings of fact and
conclusions of law and judgment, in which findings and judgment interest was
disallowed entirely.  Objections to the failure of the court to make an
allowance of interest in the findings were filed by defendant and settlement of
the findings was set down for hearing."

   At such hearing defendant's counsel called the attention of the court to the
foregoing letter, and the trial judge stated that a copy thereof had been
received by him through the mail.  Following such hearing the court adopted the
findings prepared by plaintiff and disallowed the aforementioned interest items.
Thereafter defendant moved for a new trial, and during the hearing of such
motion the statement on appeal reveals that the following occurred: ". . . The
court stated during the course of the hearing thereof that at the close of the
trial he had felt that as a matter of equity Mr. Kinsey was entitled to
reasonable interest on $ 30,000, but that after hearing argument he felt that he
was wrong and that Mr. Kinsey was not entitled to any interest, and thereupon
denied the motion for a new trial."

   What transpired in the instant case demonstrates the wisdom of the rule that
the deliberations of courts are conclusively merged in their orders or
judgments, and the oral or written opinions of trial judges may not be
considered for the purpose of reversing such orders or judgments.  ( De Cou v.
Howell, 190 Cal. 741, 751 [214 P. 444]; Southern Cal. etc.  Lines v. San Diego
etc. Ry. Co., 66 Cal.App.2d 672, 676 [152 P.2d 470].)   That the written or oral
opinion of the trial court is no part of the record on appeal and will not be
considered by the appellate court for the purpose of predicating error upon the
rulings of the trial court or in determining whether the findings of fact are
supported by the evidence, is the general rule.  ( Rickards v. Noonan, 40
Cal.App.2d 266, 271 [104 P.2d 839].)   It is settled that inconsistencies
between the written or oral opinion of a trial judge or his antecedent
expressions and the findings of fact cannot be considered by an appellate court.
( Lord v. Katz, 54 Cal.App.2d 363, 366 [128 P.2d 907]; 20 Cal.Jur. § 80, p. 129;
Lynch v. International B. Corp., 68 Cal.App. 432 [229 P. 968]; Gates v. Green,
151 Cal. 65, 69 [90 P. 189].)   We do not regard subdivision a of rule 5 of
Rules on Appeal for the Supreme Court and District Courts of Appeal of this
state, adopted by the Judicial Council and effective July 1, 1943, authorizing
the inclusion of "any written opinion of the superior court" in the record on
appeal, as in any way restricting by antecedent expressions of the trial court
the absolute power of the trial judge to declare his final conclusions in the
only manner authorized by law, to wit, by filing his "decision" (findings of
fact and conclusions of law) as provided in section 632 of the Code of Civil
Procedure. In the instant case the trial judge frankly stated that while at the
conclusion of the trial he was of the opinion, as orally expressed, that "as a
matter of equity Mr. Kinsey was entitled to reasonable interest on $ 30,000, but
after hearing argument he felt that he was wrong and that Mr. Kinsey was not
entitled to any interest."

   The court having found, and their being substantial evidence to support the
finding, that there was no conversation or agreement between appellant and
respondent to the effect that appellant was to have reasonable interest, it now
devolves upon us to determine whether, in the absence of any agreement between
the parties for the payment of interest on the $ 30,000 and the carrying
charges, the determination of the court not to award such interest is supported
by law.   The rule seems well established that except in the case of a loan of
money, which by our code is made subject to the payment of interest by
presumption ( Civ. Code, § 1914), the matter of payment of interest on the "net
proceeds of the sale," as used in the agreement before us, must be made the
subject of an express agreement; otherwise it cannot be charged.  ( Young v.
Canfield, 33 Cal.App. 343, 344 [164 P.  1134]; Howard v. D. W. Hobson Co., 38
Cal.App 445 [176 P. 715].) Where, as here, appellant advanced his capital and
respondent his skill, the former was not entitled to interest on his
contribution of capital to the venture in the absence of an agreement entitling
him to make such charge.  ( Clement v. Duncan, 191 Cal. 209, 221 [215 P. 1025].)
In the state of the record here presented, the finding of the court disallowing
interest on the $ 30,000 and carrying charges was supported both by the evidence
and the law.

     With reference to the refusal of the court to allow credit to the defendant
for use of the furniture moved into the Call house, reimbursement for the
expense of its transportation from Oregon in the sum of $ 874.93, and allowance
of interest thereon, the court found that appellant moved said furniture from a
house he had purchased in the State of Oregon and that such furniture was
"temporarily placed in the Call property and was not sold with said property;
that said expenses were not reasonably incurred in maintaining, or effecting the
sale of, the Call property, but were made for defendant's benefit." There was
substantial evidence in the record justifying this finding and it cannot
therefore be disturbed.  The very fact that the furniture was not sold with the
Call residence lends strength to the court's conclusion that its presence in the
house was not for the purpose of inducing a sale of the premises, but as the
court found, was for defendant's convenience and benefit.

     As a further ground of appeal, it is contended by appellant that the
agreement of December 23, 1941, raised only a rebuttable presumption of
consideration and that such presumption was overcome by the evidence and the
finding that the exchange of the Call residence for the Beaconsfield  apartments
was effected without any assistance or participation on the part of plaintiff.
This claim is unavailing, because the agreement of December 23, 1941, was a
different agreement from the one originally made.  This is shown by the very
language of the written document, which recites: "It is understood that in lieu
of paying you a commission on the Call, Beaconsfield trade, I will pay you.  . .
." Appellant was under a moral obligation to pay respondent a commission for
bringing appellant and Mr. Call together.  This in itself was sufficient legal
consideration for the subsequent written agreement of December 23, 1941.  ( Civ.
Code, §§ 1605, 1606; opinion by Supreme Court denying a hearing in Medberry  v.
Olcovich, 15 Cal.App.2d 263, 271 [59 P.2d 551, 60 P.2d 281].) Furthermore, the
issue of lack of consideration was raised for the first time on appeal.  The
answer does not plead lack of consideration.  It was not urged in support of the
motion for nonsuit or on motion for a new trial.   Lack of consideration of a
written instrument is an affirmative defense and must be pleaded.  ( Bryan v.
Banks, 98 Cal.App. 748, 755 [277 P. 1075]; Rivera v. Cappa, 29 Cal.App. 496 [156
P. 1016, 1017]; California S. F. Corp. v. J. D. Millar R. Co., 118 Cal.App. 185,
189, 190, 191 [5 P.2d 41]; Fierce v. Reed, 106 Cal.App. 673, 677 [289 P. 855]; 6
Cal.Jur. § 138, p. 209.)

     Appellant next asserts that respondent cannot recover on the second count
of his complaint on the theory of quantum meruit.  However, plaintiff has not
attempted to state a cause of action on the theory of quantum meruit.  The
second cause of action is a common count for money had and received.  It alleges
that there came into the possession of defendant certain money for and on
account of plaintiff for the latter's use and benefit and which belonged to him.
This common count may properly be joined in the same complaint with other common
counts or with a cause of action on an express contract.  (17 Cal.Jur. § 27, p.
633.)

   Finally, appellant contends that the court erred in computing the amount
found due as set forth in finding V, but in his reply brief concedes that "while
the court's Finding V is somewhat confusing, the computation upon the theory
adopted in respect to respondent's right to recover is apparently correct."

   For the foregoing reasons, the judgment is affirmed.


                              64 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           CHARLES G. McGAUGHEY, Plaintiff and Appellant, v. DAVID H.
             FOX, as Real Estate Commissioner, etc., Defendant and
                                   Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 55070

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division One

            94 Cal. App. 3d 645; 156 Cal. Rptr. 593; 1979 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1893


                                 June 29, 1979

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied July 24, 1979.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Los Angeles County, No. SO C37863, Charles
Downing, Temporary Judge. *

*   Pursuant to Constitution, article VI, section 21.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1a) (1b) (1c) Brokers § 25--Duties and Liabilities--Reimbursement From Real
Estate Education, Research and Recovery Fund--Requirement That Judgment Debtor
Have Performed Acts for Which License Required.  --The holder of an unsatisfied
judgment against a licensed real estate broker cannot recover from the Real
Estate Fund unless the judgment debtor, in the transaction upon which the
judgment is based, performed acts for which a license is required ( Bus. & Prof.
Code, § 10471). Thus, the trial court properly denied an application for a court
order directing the Real Estate Commissioner to pay plaintiff $ 10,000 from the
Real Estate Fund in partial satisfaction of a default judgment that had been
entered in his favor in an earlier action based on the fraudulent sale of a
limited partnership interest in an apartment complex, where the evidence
supported the trial court's implied finding that in selling its investment units
to plaintiff, the defaulting broker had acted for itself in its capacity as a
limited partner and not for the partnership, so as to render the investment
transaction one in which the seller was not required to have a real estate
broker's license.

(2) Brokers § 25--Duties and Liabilities--Reimbursement From Real Estate
Education, Research and Recovery Fund--Implied Finding That Defaulting Broker
Acted for Itself.  --In an action to recover $ 10,000 from the Real Estate Fund
in partial satisfaction of a default judgment that had been entered in plaintiff
buyer's favor in an earlier action based on a broker's fraudulent sale of its
own limited partnership interest in an apartment complex, the trial court's
statement, as a conclusion of law, that the investment transaction at issue did
not require a real estate license was equivalent to a finding of ultimate fact.
As such, it encompassed findings on all intermediate evidentiary facts necessary
to sustain it, including a finding that the broker acted for itself, and not for
the partnership, in selling its investment units to plaintiff.

(3) Brokers § 25--Duties and Liabilities of Brokers--Reimbursement From Real
Estate Education, Research and Recovery Fund--Statutory Construction.
--Although the statute creating the Real Estate Fund ( Bus. & Prof. Code, §
10471), is remedial in nature and must be liberally construed, the express
statutory requirement that the broker must have performed acts for which a real
estate license is required must still be satisfied.

COUNSEL: Golden, Neal, Shuffler & Johnson and Daniel K. Kean for Plaintiff and
Appellant.

George Deukmejian, Attorney General, and Arthur C. de Goede, Assistant Attorney
General, for Defendant and Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Lillie, Acting P. J., with Thompson and Hanson, JJ.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: LILLIE

OPINION

     A default judgment in the principal sum of $ 29,100 was entered in favor of
plaintiff Charles McGaughey and against Oren Enterprises, Inc. (Oren), a
licensed real estate broker, in an action based on fraudulent sale of a limited
partnership interest in an apartment complex. Upon failure to discover any
assets of the judgment debtor, plaintiff applied for an order of the court
directing that the Real Estate Commissioner pay him from the Real Estate Fund
the sum of $ 10,000 in partial satisfaction of the judgment.  ( Bus. & Prof.
Code, § 10471.) 1 The  Real Estate Commissioner filed an answer to the
application and after a hearing, judgment was entered denying the application on
the ground that the investment transaction between plaintiff and Oren was not
such that a real estate broker's license was required by Oren, thus one of the
requisites for recovery from the Real Estate Fund was lacking.  Plaintiff
appeals from the judgment.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Business
and Professions Code section 10471 provides in part: "When any aggrieved person
obtains a final judgment in any court of competent jurisdiction against any
person or persons licensed under this part, under grounds of fraud,
misrepresentation, deceit, or conversion of trust funds arising directly out of
any transaction when the judgment debtor was licensed and performed acts for
which a license is required under this part, . . . the aggrieved person may,
upon the judgment becoming final, file a verified application in the court in
which the judgment was entered for an order directing payment out of the
separate account in the Real Estate Fund for education, research, and recovery
purposes of the amount of actual and direct loss in such transaction up to the
sum of ten thousand dollars ($ 10,000) of the amount unpaid upon the judgment,
provided that nothing shall be construed to obligate such separate account for
more than ten thousand dollars ($ 10,000) per transaction regardless of the
number of persons aggrieved or parcels of real estate involved in such
transaction." (Italics added.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      On June 8, 1970, a limited partnership agreement was entered into by Oren,
as the  general partner, and Wilton Associates, Inc., as a limited partner. The
name of the partnership was Pierce Oak Park Apartments, and its purpose was to
"hold, improve, maintain, operate and lease" an 11-acre apartment complex known
as Pierce Park Apartments, then owned by Pierce Park Apartments, Inc.  The
partnership capital was to be derived from the sale of 300 investment units, for
$ 1,000 each, to limited partners; the $ 1,000 for each unit was to be paid to
Oren for the partnership. The agreement further provided that available cash
(cash income in excess of cash disbursements) was to be distributed quarterly to
the limited partners in accordance with the number of investment units held by
each.  The general partner would be considered a limited partner, as well, to
the extent that it contributed to capital by acquiring investment unit holdings.
The agreement granted to the general partner "exclusive license to act as agent
for the sale of the partnership property," for which services it was entitled to
compensation in the form of a brokerage commission of 6 percent of the gross
selling price of the property.

   Oren was able to raise only 60 percent of the purchase price of Pierce Park
Apartments through limited partnership investments.  The seller agreed to accept
a 40 percent interest in the partnership as both a limited and a general
partner, and to give Oren until December 31, 1970, to raise the money necessary
to buy out the seller's interest.  On these terms, the escrow for the
partnership's purchase of Pierce Park Apartments closed September 15, 1970.
Oren took a commission of $ 60,000 "as an expense in the sale" of the apartments
to the partnership. Oren was unable to raise the money necessary to buy out the
seller's 40 percent interest in the partnership. On March 16, 1971, Oren
resigned as a general partner, leaving the seller as the remaining general
partner. In that capacity, the seller assumed management of the apartments on
behalf of the partnership.

    In October 1970, through a solicitor of investments at his place of
employment, plaintiff learned of the opportunity to invest in the partnership.
The solicitor introduced plaintiff to representatives of Oren who gave him a
brochure outlining the advantages of investment in the partnership.  The
brochure included a copy of the limited partnership agreement and contained a
statement that Oren would receive a $ 45,000 "syndication fee from the
partnership in Escrow" and would be allowed to participate in any real estate
commission "from the purchase or sale of the property by the partnership."
Oren's representatives told plaintiff that he could purchase 29.1 investment
units for $ 29,100.  By "exchange and purchase agreement" between plaintiff and
Oren executed October 31, 1970, plaintiff purchased a 9.7 percent limited
partnership interest (consisting of 29.1 investment units) held by Oren.  The
consideration of $ 29,100 was paid in the form of a trust deed note for $ 23,500
(discounted to $ 15,000) plus $ 14,100 cash.  Apparently, no part of the
consideration was transferred by Oren to the partnership.

   Under Business and Professions Code section 10471, the holder of an
unsatisfied judgment against a licensed real estate broker cannot recover from
the Real Estate Fund unless the judgment debtor, in the transaction upon which
the judgment is based, performed acts for which a license is required.  (See fn.
1.) At the time of Oren's sale of investment units to plaintiff,  a real estate
broker was defined as one who sells a real estate syndicate security "for
another or others, for compensation or in expectation of compensation." ( Bus. &
Prof. Code, § 10131.3.) 2  The trial court made no express finding on the
question whether Oren acted for itself or for the partnership in selling the
investment units to plaintiff.   However, the court stated as a conclusion of
law that the investment transaction between plaintiff and Oren did not require a
real estate license. This statement may be treated as a finding of ultimate
fact.  (See Estate of D'India (1976) 63 Cal.App.3d 942, 951 [134 Cal.Rptr.  165]
.) As such, it encompasses findings on all intermediate evidentiary facts
necessary to sustain it ( Division of Labor Law Enforcement v. Transpacific
Transportation Co. (1977) 69 Cal.App.3d 268, 274 [137 Cal.Rptr. 855]; Fries v.
Anderson, Clayton & Co. (1961) 190 Cal.App.2d 667, 681  [12 Cal.Rptr. 336]),
including a finding that Oren acted for itself, not for the partnership, in
selling the investment units to plaintiff.  The evidence supports such finding.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Prior to
its amendment in 1977, Business and Professions Code section 10131.3, by
reference to section 10251, defined "real estate syndicate security" as an
interest in a real estate syndicate, which is an organization (such as a limited
partnership) owned beneficially by no more than 100 persons and formed for the
sole purpose of investment in or gain from an interest in real property.  In
1977 section 10251 was repealed and section 10131.3 was amended by substitution
of a reference to Corporations Code section 25206, which defines a real estate
syndicate security substantially as that term was defined in former Business and
Professions Code section 10251.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      The investment units were created to raise capital for the partnership by
their sale to limited partners. Thus, they initially were the property of the
partnership (see Civ. Code, § 684) and Oren, in effecting an original sale of
investment units by the partnership to a limited partner, undoubtedly would have
been acting for the partnership. However, upon a sale of investment units by the
partnership to a limited partner, the units ceased to be the property of the
partnership and became the property of the limited partner purchasing them; they
were his individual interest in the partnership, representing his share of
partnership profits and surplus. (See Corp. Code, §§ 15026, 15518; Security
First Nat. Bk. v. Whittaker (1966) 241 Cal.App.2d 554, 557 [50 Cal.Rptr. 652].)
The limited partnership agreement provided that Oren would be considered a
limited partner to the extent it acquired investment unit holdings in return for
its contribution to capital.  The agreement also gave each limited partner the
right to sell his interest.  Oren acquired 29.1 investment units, which were its
interest in the partnership as a limited partner and entitled it to receive a
share of the profits and surplus of the partnership. These were the units which
Oren sold to plaintiff, 3 and it did so on its own behalf as a limited partner.
In short, Oren sold its own property to plaintiff; it did not sell partnership
property to him, and did not act for the partnership in making the sale.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   The
purchase and exchange agreement between plaintiff and Oren (executed October 31,
1970) states that Oren "holds a 9.7% limited partnership interest in Pierce Oak
Park Apartments, a limited partnership, by agreement dated November 25, 1970 [
sic], consisting of 29.1 units therein, hereinafter called 'limited interest.'"
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The trial court received in evidence the declaration of the seller of Pierce
Park Apartments wherein the declarant stated: "To the best of my knowledge,
which was obtained directly from reviewing the income and disbursement journals
and the escrow documents for the purchase of Pierce Park Apartments, neither
Oren Enterprises nor Wilton Associates, Inc. ever made any capital investments
whatsoever to the project.  . . .  It is further my understanding throughout the
transaction . . . that Oren Enterprises, Inc., never intended to use any of its
own funds to finance the project and that at all times was relying upon the
money that could be raised by the sale of limited partnerships to their investor
group." Such evidence merely created a conflict with other evidence (the limited
partnership agreement and the purchase and exchange agreement) which  showed
that Oren, by contributing to the capital of the partnership, acquired in its
own right, as a limited partner, the investment units which it sold to
plaintiff. 4 It must be assumed that the trial court resolved the conflict in
favor of the prevailing party ( Evans v. Thomason (1977) 72 Cal.App.3d 978,
982-983 [140 Cal.Rptr. 525]), and its implied finding to that effect may not be
disturbed on appeal.  (See Northwestern  Mut.  Ins. Co. v. Farmers' Ins. Group
(1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 1031, 1053 [143 Cal.Rptr. 415]; Varela v. Wells Fargo Bank
(1971) 15 Cal.App.3d 741, 749 [93 Cal.Rptr. 428].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   The court
expressly found as a fact that plaintiff's investment was made for the purpose
of securing a limited partnership interest in a partnership in which Oren was a
coparticipant as a general partner. Contrary to plaintiff's contention, such
finding does not establish that Oren acted in its capacity of general partner,
on behalf of the partnership, in selling the limited partnership interest to
plaintiff.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      Plaintiff correctly argues that because Business and Professions Code
section 10471 is intended to protect the public against loss resulting from
fraud of real estate brokers, the statute is remedial and therefore must be
liberally construed. ( Nordahl v. Department of Real Estate (1975) 48 Cal.App.3d
657, 663 [121 Cal.Rptr. 794].) However we cannot, under the guise of liberal
construction, disregard the express provisions of section 10471 which authorize
recovery from the Real Estate Fund only if a broker performed acts for which a
real estate license is required, i.e., if he acted for another in the fraudulent
transaction.   The trial court impliedly found that Oren acted for itself, not
for the partnership, in selling investment units to plaintiff.  The evidence
supports that finding which, in turn, supports the judgment denying recovery
from the Real Estate Fund.

   The judgment is affirmed.


                              65 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            JAMES MONROE DARR, Plaintiff and Appellant, v. LONE STAR
                   INDUSTRIES, INC., Defendant and Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 17415

            Court of Appeal of California, Third Appellate District

          94 Cal. App. 3d 895; 157 Cal. Rptr. 90; 1979 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      1948


                                 July 11, 1979

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied August 8, 1979.
Evans, Acting P. J., was of the Opinion that the Petition should be granted.
Respondent's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court was Denied September 6,
1979.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Sacramento County, No. 253697, Joseph A.
DeCristoforo, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1a) (1b) Easements and Licenses in Real Property § 2--Easements--Definitions
and Distinctions.  --In an action for injuries sustained when plaintiff dove
into a river from a low level bridge, the trial court improperly granted
defendant's motion for nonsuit based on Civ. Code, § 846, which effectively
relieves an "owner of any estate in real property" of liability for injuries
resulting from certain recreational activities, including water sports.
Defendant's interest in the bridge from which plaintiff dove and was injured did
not amount to an "ownership of any estate in real property" within the meaning
of § 846. It derived from a right of entry or easement granted by the State of
California over the riverbed upon which the bridge was constructed. An easement
is a nonpossessory interest in real property and as such does not constitute an
estate in real property.

(2) Dismissal and Nonsuit § 45--Nonsuit ( Code Civ. Proc., § 581c)--Hearing and
Determination.  --A motion for nonsuit is the equivalent of a demurrer to
evidence or motion for a directed verdict. The trial court indulges in every
legitimate evidentiary inference in favor of the party against whom the motion
is directed and may grant the order only if, as a matter of law, such a reading
of the facts do not sustain that party's case.

(3) Easements and Licenses in Real Property § 3--Easements--Creation.  --The
State Lands Commission granted in a "right of entry permit" an easement in a
riverbed, where the document expressly permitted a right of entry upon a strip
of sovereign land in the bed of a river and further described the interest
granted as "a right-of-way easement with standard terms and conditions."

(4) Landlord and Tenant § 9--Leases--What Passes by Lease.  --A leasehold vests
exclusive possession of the property to the lessee, even against the owner of
the fee and is based on a privity of estate between lessor and lessee. Hence, an
interest granted by the State Lands Commission in a "right of entry permit,"
permitting a right of entry upon a strip of sovereign land in a bed of a river,
did not divest the state of its possession in the riverbed and thus did not
transfer a leasehold. Nor did the use of the words "leased for two years" in the
state document transform the interest conveyed into a leasehold. The term
"lease" in this context merely described the length in duration of the interest
conveyed. It did not describe the nature or quality of the interest conveyed.

(5) Easements and Licenses in Real Property § 2--Easements--Definitions and
Distinctions.  --Although an easement is an interest in real property, it is a
nonpossessory interest and, as such, cannot be an estate in real property.

COUNSEL: Jones, Lamb, Jarboe & Boli, Michael S. Jarboe, Marvin C. Marx and
Lawrence J. Hannan, Jr., for Plaintiff and Appellant.

Hardy, Erich & Brown, Van Longyear and John Quincy Brown, Jr., for Defendant and
Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Reynoso, J., with Puglia, P. J., concurring.  Separate
dissenting opinion by Evans, J.

OPINION BY: REYNOSO

OPINION

     This appeal follows a judgment dismissing plaintiff's personal injury
action entered upon an order granting defendant's motion for nonsuit.

   Plaintiff sustained injury when he dove into the American River from a low
level bridge located a short distance downstream from the public bridge crossing
at Sunrise Boulevard in Sacramento County.  As a result of the dive, plaintiff
suffers partial permanent paralysis.  Following the accident, plaintiff filed a
complaint for damages. 1 At the close of plaintiff's case, defendant filed a
motion for nonsuit based on Civil Code section 846, which effectively relieves
an "owner of any estate in real  property" of liability for injuries resulting
from certain recreational activities, including water sports. 2 The trial court
granted the motion.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1
Plaintiff's original complaint named Lone Star Industries, Inc., Pacific Cement
Aggregate, Inc., and Sacramento County as defendants.  By stipulation, the
parties agreed that Lone Star Industries, Inc., was the successor in interest to
Pacific Cement Aggregate, Inc.  Subsequently, plaintiff dismissed his action
against the county and went to trial against Lone Star Industries, Inc., alone.
2   At the time of the accident, Civil Code section 846 provided in its
entirety: "An owner of any estate in real property owes no duty of care to keep
the premises safe for entry or use by others for fishing hunting, camping, water
sports, hiking, riding, including animal and all types of vehicular riding, rock
collecting, or sightseeing or to give any warning of hazardous conditions, uses
of, structures, or activities on such premises to persons entering for such
purposes, except as provided in this section.

   "An owner of any estate in real property who gives permission to another for
entry or use for the above purposes upon the premises does not thereby (a)
extend any assurance that the premises are safe for such purposes, or (b)
constitute the person to whom permission has been granted the legal status of an
invitee or licensee to whom a duty of care is owed, or (c) assume responsibility
for or incur liability for any injury to person or property caused by any act of
such person to whom permission has been granted except as provided in this
section.

   "This section does not limit the liability which otherwise exists (a) for
willful or malicious failure to guard or warn against a dangerous condition,
use, structure or activity; or (b) for injury suffered in any case where
permission to enter for the above purposes was granted for a consideration other
than the consideration, if any, paid to said landowner by the state; or (c) to
any persons who are expressly invited rather than merely permitted to come upon
the premises by the landowner.

   "Nothing in this section creates a duty of care or ground of liability for
injury to person or property." Subsequent to the time of the accident that
section has twice been amended, first in 1976 and later in 1978.  The amendments
are not relevant herein.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      We have determined that, as a matter of law, defendant's interest in the
bridge from which plaintiff dove and was injured did not amount to an "ownership
of any estate in real property" within the meaning of Civil Code section 846.
Consequently, defendant cannot invoke the protection of the statute.  We reverse
the order granting a nonsuit and remand the matter for further proceedings.

   I

   The following recitation of facts serves as useful background.  At the time
of the accident, defendant was aware that steel culverts and pilings, placed in
the river by its predecessor in interest, Pacific Cement Aggregate, Inc.
(hereinafter PCA), resided beneath the surface of water below the bridge.
Defendant was also aware that people commonly dove from the bridge. Indeed, from
1965 until the time of the accident, PCA, and later defendant, employed various
precautionary measures to prevent the public's vehicular and pedestrian use of
the bridge. Defendant and its predecessor posted "No Trespassing" signs, erected
cable barriers at the end of the bridge, and employed guards during hauling
periods.  However, defendant made no attempt to warn the public of the specific
danger posed by the submerged culverts and pilings.

    Relevant to the issue which we find dispositive are these additional facts.
The bridge in question was used by defendant to haul gravel from one side of the
river to the other.  The property upon which the bridge was built, the bed of
the American River, is owned by the State of California.  In 1965, Natomas
Company (hereinafter Natomas), owner of the property from which the gravel was
hauled, obtained a "Right of Entry Permit" from the State Lands Commission.
This document conveyed a right-of-way to Natomas to permit its access over the
river at the place of the future bridge site.  Subsequently, defendant asserts,
Natomas granted PCA the right to enter its property to remove gravel. 3 PCA then
constructed the bridge, apparently pursuant to its agreement with Natomas, in an
effort to facilitate its gravel operation.  Prior to the accident, defendant
succeeded to PCA's interests, including whatever right of entry PCA had acquired
from Natomas.  Defendant remained in control of the bridge until September 10,
1974, when it quitclaimed its rights and interests in the bridge to the County
of Sacramento.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Plaintiff
contends that Natomas' right-of-way could not be transferred absent the approval
of the state.  Plaintiff urged strenuously at oral argument that PCA acquired no
interest from Natomas.  We need not decide that issue; however, our resolution
assumes such transferability for purposes of this opinion.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    II

     A motion for nonsuit is the equivalent of a demurrer to evidence or motion
for a directed verdict.  ( Code Civ. Proc., § 581c; e.g., Estate of Easton
(1931) 118 Cal.App. 659, 662 [5 P.2d 635]; Bush v. Wood (1908) 8 Cal.App. 647
[97 P. 709].) The trial court indulges in every legitimate evidentiary inference
in favor of the party against whom the motion is directed and may grant the
order only if, as a matter of law, such a reading of the facts do not sustain
that party's case.  (E.g., Estate of Lances (1932) 216 Cal. 397, 400 [14 P.2d
768].) Thus, we shall examine the viability of plaintiff's claim that
defendant's interest in the real property at issue did not constitute ownership
of any estate in real property.

     The type of property interest granted Natomas from the State Lands
Commission is of primary importance in this case: Defendant could not have
succeeded to a property interest more expansive than what PCA had acquired from
Natomas.  Therefore, we scrutinize the state document granting the right of
entry permit to Natomas to ascertain the nature of the interest conveyed: The
document expressly permits a right of entry upon a strip of sovereign land in
the bed of the American River. It further describes Natomas' interest in the
riverbed as "a right of way  easement with standard terms and conditions."
(Emphasis supplied.) Natomas has an easement in the riverbed. The bridge was
constructed to perfect that interest.  In accordance with the accepted
definition of an easement, Natomas' interest is in the land of another (the
state), and defendant as owner of the interest is entitled to a limited use
(bridge crossing) of the other's land.  ( Goble v. Dotson (1962) 203 Cal.App.2d
272, 277 [21 Cal.Rptr. 769]; Zlozower v. Lindenbaum (1929) 100 Cal.App. 766, 770
[281 P. 102]; Rest., Property (1944) § 450, com. (a).) Put simply, because the
state granted a right of way over its property in the riverbed, it transferred
an easement. ( Marin County Hospital Dist. v. Cicurel (1957) 154 Cal.App.2d 294
[316 P.2d 32]; Moakley v. Los Angeles Pacific Ry. Co. (1934) 139 Cal.App.2d 421
[34 P.2d 218].) In circumstances such as these, in which an entity obtains a
right of way over state waterbeds, our Supreme Court defines the nature of the
property interest acquired as follows: "[Before]  a bridge can be constructed
over [state lands underlying navigable waters] an easement must be secured from
the state." (Italics added.) ( Southlands Co. v. City of San Diego (1931) 211
Cal. 646, 664 [297 P. 521].)

     The document did not transfer a leasehold to Natomas.  A leasehold vests
exclusive possession of the property to the lessee, even against the owner of
the fee ( Von Goerlitz v. Turner (1944) 65 Cal.App.2d 425, 429 [150 P.2d 278])
and is based on a privity of estate between lessor and lessee. (See Ellingson v.
Walsh, O'Connor & Barneson (1940) 15 Cal.2d 673 [104 P.2d 507]; Samuels v.
Ottinger (1915) 169 Cal. 209 [146 P. 683]; 1 Bowman, Ogden's Revised Cal. Real
Property Law (Cont.Ed.Bar 1974) p. 491.) By contrast, the interest acquired by
Natomas did not divest the state of its possession in the riverbed. Nor does the
use of the words "leased for two years" in the state document transform Natomas'
interest into a leasehold. An easement may be conveyed for any length of
duration. The term "lease" in this context, like the terms "fee simple absolute"
or "fee simple defeasible" merely describes the length in duration of the
interest conveyed. It does not describe the nature or quality of the interest
conveyed. (See Callahan v. Martin (1935) 3 Cal.2d 110 [43 P.2d 788, 101 A.L.R.
871]; Renden v. Geneva Development Corp. (1967) 253 Cal.App.2d 578 [61 Cal.Rptr.
463]; Irvin v. Petitfils (1941) 44 Cal.App.2d 496 [112 P.2d 688].)

     Defendant agrees that Natomas was granted an easement. But it misconstrues
the law when it maintains that because an easement is an interest in real
property, it necessarily constitutes an estate in real  property. 4 An interest
in land is not presumptively an estate in land: the term estate is confined to
those interests in land which are or may become possessory.  (E.g., Rest.,
Property (1936) § 9; Bowman, supra, at pp. 25-26; 2 Powell on Real Property
(1977) Estates, ch. 12, § 172.) The California Civil Code, for example, lists
four types of estates in real property, all of them possessory interests. 5
Defendant correctly notes that an easement is an interest in real property. (See
3 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (8th ed. 1973) Real Property, § 341, pp.
2041-2042.) However, they fail to note that an easement is a nonpossessory
interest in real property. ( Elliott v. McCombs (1941) 17 Cal.2d 23 [109 P.2d
329].) Indeed, that an easement involves use of another's land evidences its
nonpossessory character.  As such, it cannot be an estate in real property. (See
3 Witkin, supra, Real Property, § 340; Rest. of Property, supra, § 450, com. (a)
.) Powell states the rule succinctly: "While an easement is clearly an 'interest
in land' . . . it is equally clearly never an 'estate in land.'" (3 Powell,
supra, Easements and Licenses, ch. 34, § 405.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   Plaintiff
maintains that defendant had a profit a prendre, and cites authority that such
an interest constitutes an estate in real property. Assuming what plaintiff
asserts to be true, defendant would have an estate only in the gravel that the
profit entitled him to extract, not an estate in the riverbed itself.  The focus
of our concern vis-a-vis section 846 -- the bridge of access to defendant's
supposed estate -- would remain an easement. (See 3 Powell, supra, Easements and
Licenses, ch.  34, § 405.)
5   Civil Code section 761 reads as follows:

   "Estates in real property, in respect to the duration of their enjoyment, are
either:

   "1. Estates of inheritance or perpetual estates;

   "2. Estates for life;

   "3. Estates for years; or,

   "4. Estates at will."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      We conclude that, as a matter of law, any interest that defendant could
have had in the right-of-way over the riverbed was nonpossessory, hence, could
not have constituted an estate in real property. Thus, the motion for nonsuit
based on section 846 was improperly granted.

   We reverse the order granting the nonsuit and remand for further proceedings
consistent with this opinion.

DISSENT BY: EVANS

DISSENT

   Evans, J. I dissent.

   The majority conclude that a "right of entry" or easement granted by the
State of California upon which a bridge over the American River was  constructed
by the permittee or holder of the easement is not an "estate in real property"
as envisioned by Civil Code section 846.  It is my conviction that under the law
of this state, they are wrong.  They narrowly interpret the phrase "owner of any
estate in real property" in the manner suggested by the injured plaintiff.
Plaintiff and the majority seem to suggest that the phrase is defined by Civil
Code section 761. 1 Again, I conclude to the contrary.  The section is not
definitive of the word "estate." It is merely the description of four general
types of estates in the context of duration. 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Civil
Code section 761 reads as follows: "Estates in real property, in respect to the
duration of their enjoyment, are either:

   "1. Estates of inheritance or perpetual estates;

   "2. Estates for life;

   "3. Estates for years; or,

   "4. Estates at will."
2   It is elementary lexicography that one does not define a word by use of the
word itself.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   For example, it has been held that under section 761, a lease of tidelands
from the state is an interest in real property and an "estate for years" just as
an ordinary leasehold is an "estate in land." ( San Pedro etc. R. R. Co. v. Los
Angeles (1919) 180 Cal. 18, 20-21 [179 P. 393]; Parker v. Superior Court (1970)
9 Cal.App.3d 397, 400 [88 Cal.Rptr.  352].) In this connection, I note that the
document by which the state granted Natomas Company (defendant's predecessor)
the right to cross the American River refers to Natomas as a "Lessee or
Permittee." Moreover, inasmuch as a right of entry given under contract to enter
upon land to cut and remove timber is an "estate or interest" in land ( Kirsch
v. Barnes (N.D.Cal. 1957) 157 F. Supp. 671, 673), so must a right of entry or
easement to permit construction and use of a bridge.

   The Legislature is presumed, when it enacts a statute, to be aware of the
case law of the estate.  (See 45 Cal.Jur.2d, Statutes, § 101, pp.  615-616.)
Accordingly,  when section 846 was adopted and subsequently amended, had the
Legislature desired to limit or change the accepted meaning of "estate" in real
property, it could have expressly done so.

   To restrict the application of section 846 in this instance will result in
inequitable treatment of owners of private bridges over waterways which are
accessible to trespassers. The majority would eliminate from the purview of
section 846, the owner of a bridge accessible for water sports by trespassers
simply because that owner does not  own the fee of the underlying waterway. The
anomalous situation thus arises that the owner who grants the easement is
protected by section 846 while the owner of  the structure over the waterway
within the easement which is used for recreational purposes is not.  Elimination
from the protection of the section is accomplished by an assumption that an
easement over the river upon which a bridge is built is not an "estate in real
property."

   An examination of the express language of the section in the context of Civil
Code, title 3, chapter 2, section 840 et seq., is helpful in pointing out the
error in the majority conclusion.  Section 846 commences "An owner of any estate
in real property. . . ." (Italics added.) I emphasize the legislative use of the
term "any estate." Had the Legislature intended a restricted definition of "
estate," it could have simply done so.  It did not.  Section 845 deals with
owners of easements, and indicates the Legislature's use of the word "estate" to
be an all encompassing word of art, including an "owner of any easement."

   The Legislature adopted section 846 in 1963, and amended it in 1970, 1971,
1972, 1976, and 1978, for clarification and to include protection against damage
resulting from recreational use of the property by trespassers as well as
invitees.  The amendments to section 846 are indicative of the legislative
policy to reduce the tendency by landowners to remove their real property from
potential recreational access by eliminating the risk of gratuitous tort
liability that the owner might experience unless he successfully bars entry to
his property for the enumerated recreational uses.  Since adoption of the
section, the Legislature had broadened the scope of the immunities created by
the section and is a beacon light indicative of its intention to create an
exception in favor of the owner of any estate, be it fee or a right of passage
over the land or waterway by way of easement against liability imposed by Civil
Code section 1714. 3 (See English v. Marin Mun. Water Dist. (1977) 66 Cal.App.3d
725, 731 [136 Cal.Rptr. 224].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Civil
Code section 1714 provides in part: "(a) Everyone is responsible, not only for
the result of his willful acts, but also for an injury occasioned to another by
his want of ordinary care or skill in the management of his property or person,
. . ."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The inequity resulting from the majority result is vividly presented by the
decision in Lostritto v. Southern Pac. Transportation Co. (1977) 73 Cal.App.3d
737 [140 Cal.Rptr. 905]. In that case, not unlike this, a 16-year-old trespasser
dove from the defendant railroad trestle bridge into the streambed of the San
Lorenzo River. His neck was broken rendering him quadriplegic.  The court held
that section 846 precluded a damage award against the railroad pursuant to Civil
Code section 1714.  I find it inconsequential that the railroad owned the
underlying streambed  as well as the bridge in order to entitle the owner to the
protection of section 846.  I do not believe the Legislature intended an
exclusion from the protection of the section for failure to "own the riverbed"
in a situation resulting in injury to one using a private bridge over the
American River for recreational purposes.  The right of entry granted by the
state in the first instance which permits construction of a bridge over the
underlying fee has equal dignity with a document utilizing the language
easement. In each instance an "estate in real property" is granted.  ( Parker v.
Superior Court, supra, 9 Cal.App.3d at p. 400.)

   As I construe section 846, the defendant was the owner "of an estate in real
property" and was entitled to the immunity afforded by that section.  (Cf.
Lostritto v. Southern Pac. Transportation Co., supra, 73 Cal.App.3d at p. 746.)

   I would affirm the judgment.


                              66 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          RAY L. RILEY, as Real Estate Commissioner etc., Petitioner,
              v. JOHN S. CHAMBERS, as Controller, etc., Respondent

                                 Sac. No. 2985

                          Supreme Court of California

          181 Cal. 589; 185 P. 855; 1919 Cal. LEXIS 399; 8 A.L.R. 418


                               November 29, 1919

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Rehearing Denied.  All the Justices Concurred.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPLICATION for Writ of Mandamus to require the state
controller to audit warrant for expenses of real estate commissioner.

COUNSEL: Max J. Kuhl, for Petitioner.

James L. Atteridge and Wesley E. Marten, for Respondent.

Fry & Wood, Amici Curiae.

JUDGES: In Bank.  Olney, J.  Shaw, J., Wilbur, J., Lennon, J., Angellotti, C.
J., and Lawlor, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: OLNEY

OPINION

     The legislature of 1919 passed an act (Stats. 1919, p. 1252), purporting to
regulate the business of acting as a real estate broker or salesman in
California, creating a state real estate department with an official having the
title of real estate commissioner at its head, and providing  for the payment of
the expenses of the department out of a certain fund in the state treasury. The
petitioner, Ray L. Riley, was appointed real estate commissioner, incurred
certain expenses on account of his department, and sought their payment out of
the state treasury in the manner provided by the act.  The respondent, the state
controller, refused to authorize   such payment, having apparently some doubt as
to the constitutional validity of the act.  Thereupon the commissioner sought to
obtain a writ of mandate from this court to compel the controller to authorize
the payment of the expenses in question.  A demurrer was interposed to the
petition for a writ, and the matter has been submitted to us upon this demurrer.
The only points raised are as to the constitutionality of the act.

   The act makes it unlawful for any person or corporation to act as a real
estate broker or real estate salesman without first obtaining a license. A real
estate broker is defined as any "person, copartnership, or corporation who, for
a compensation, sells, or offers for sale, buys, or offers to buy, or negotiates
the purchase or sale or exchange of real estate, or who, for compensation,
negotiates loans on real estate, leases, or offers to lease, rents, or places
for rent, or collects rent from real estate, or improvements thereon, for others
as a whole or partial vocation." A real estate salesman is defined as one who
for compensation and as a whole or partial vocation is employed by a real estate
broker to do any of the things specified in the definition of a broker.

   The act provides that it shall not apply to anyone acting in regard to his
own property, to anyone "holding a duly executed power of attorney from the
owner," to any attorney at law acting in his professional capacity, or to any
receiver, trustee in bankruptcy, or trustee selling under a deed of trust. It
also provides that a single act of selling, etc., shall make the person a real
estate broker.

   The required license is to be issued by the real estate commissioner upon
written application, accompanied, in the case of a broker, by the recommendation
of two real estate owners certifying that the applicant is "honest, truthful and
of good reputation," and in the case of a salesman by a similar recommendation
and certification by his employer.  The act does not in so many words authorize
the commissioner to refuse a license if he is not satisfied as to the  honesty,
truthfulness, and good reputation of the applicant, but such authority is
necessarily implied.  For the license a broker is required to pay an annual fee
of ten dollars and a salesman one of two dollars.

   The commissioner is given power to suspend or revoke any license for
dishonest dealing by the licensee after the presentation of written charges
against him and an opportunity afforded him to be heard.  The decision of the
commissioner suspending or revoking any license is made subject to review by the
courts in accordance with the provisions of the code for the issuance of writs
of review, the action of the courts, however, being limited by the act to
determining whether there has been "an abuse of discretion" on the part of the
commissioner.

   Anyone acting as real estate broker or salesman in violation of the act is
made liable to punishment, if an individual, by a fine not exceeding two
thousand dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding two years, or by both fine and
imprisonment, and if a corporation, by a fine not exceeding five thousand
dollars.

   A real estate department is, as we have said, created with the real estate
commissioner as its head.  The latter is authorized to employ such deputies and
assistants as he may need and fix their compensation.  No limit is placed on his
discretion in this respect, other than the practical limit incident to the fact
that all the expenses of the department, including the five thousand dollar
salary of the commissioner himself, are payable only out of a certain fund in
the state treasury, which, in turn, is made up solely of fees collected by the
department.

   Such being the general scope and outline of the act, a number of objections
are made to it.  The most important of these is that the act is an unreasonable
interference with the right of every citizen to engage in a legitimate and
useful occupation. This objection is fundamental, and if sound, the whole act
falls, since its sole primary purpose is to hedge about the pursuit of the
vocation of a real estate broker or salesman with certain restrictions.  That
such vocation is a legitimate and useful one cannot be controverted.   Nor can
it be controverted that the right to engage in a lawful and useful occupation
cannot, in effect, be taken away under the guise of regulation. On  the other
hand, it is equally true that a lawful and useful occupation may be subjected to
regulation in the public interest, and that all regulation involves in some
degree a limitation upon the exercise of the right regulated.  The test is
whether or not the limitation imposed is really by way of regulation only, is
one whose purpose and effect go no further than throwing reasonable safeguards
in the public interest around the exercise of the right.  If the limitation is
of this character, its imposition is a proper exercise of the police power
resident in the legislature, and whose exercise is one of the latter's most
important functions.

   Now the single primary purpose of the act is to require of real estate
brokers and salesmen that they be "honest, truthful and of good reputation." All
of its provisions, including the requirement of a license, are but incidental to
this single purpose and designed to accomplish it.  In the nature of things no
amount of regulation can insure the possession of those qualities by everyone
engaged in the business, and it is easy to conceive of regulations which would
have this as their sole object and yet be so extreme as practically  to take
away the general right of engaging in the business.  Two questions, therefore,
arise regarding such regulations as those here imposed; First, is the general
limitation that only persons of good character may engage in the particular
business a safeguard which may reasonably be required as to that business?  And,
second, are the specific limitations prescribed to accomplish the general
purpose no more than reasonable therefor?

   As to the second question, there is no controversy in the present case, and
in fact there could not well by any.  It is clear that if it is permissible to
require some assurance of good character, the specific limitation imposed for
that purpose by this act that everyone seeking to engage in the business shall
file a written application accompanied by a certificate of good character, is no
more than reasonable.  The controversy is over the first question, whether or
not the general limitation that only persons of good character should engage in
the business is a permissible one.  The position of counsel opposing the
validity of the act is that "To prevent a person engaging in a lawful and
innocuous business or occupation because of his moral character or  reputation
is in our opinion an arbitrary invasion of private rights and liberties." This
may be true of some businesses and vocations. It is certainly not true of all.
Where the occupation is one of which it can be fairly said that those pursuing
it should have certain particular qualifications, it is within the power of the
legislature to exact reasonable assurances of those pursuing the occupation that
they do possess these qualifications. The most familiar illustrations of this
are the qualifications of preliminary training and learning required of
professional men such as lawyers, physicians, dentists, pharmacists and
architects.  Where the occupation is one wherein those following it act as the
agents and representatives of others and in a more or less confidential and
fiduciary capacity, it certainly can be fairly said that those pursuing it
should have in a particular degree the qualifications of "honesty, truthfulness
and good reputation." The occupation of a real estate agent is of just this
sort.  He acts for others and in a more or less confidential and fiduciary
capacity.  As a result there is particularly required of him for the proper
discharge of his duties honesty and truthfulness, and the legislature has the
right to require some assurance of their possession by everyone following the
occupation. One strong assurance of their possession is a good reputation.

     No extended discussion of this point is necessary.  It is definitely
settled by the supreme court of the United States in Hall v. Geiger-Jones Co.,
242 U.S. 539,  [Ann. Cas. 1917C, 643, 61 L. Ed. 480, 37 Sup. Ct. Rep. 217]. The
state of Ohio had passed a law requiring every dealer in securities, such as a
bondhouse, to obtain a license from the state superintendent of banks.  As a
condition of obtaining such a license the dealer was required to establish his
good repute to the satisfaction of the state official.  The same attack was made
upon the law by reason of this provision as is now made upon the California law,
but its validity was upheld.  So far as this point is concerned, there is
certainly no difference between the occupation of a dealer in securities and
that of a real estate agent.  In fact, the relation of the latter to his client
is of a more fiduciary character than that of the security dealer to his
customer.

     Another and cognate objection is that the act is invalid because it gives
the commissioner arbitrary power to determine who may have a license and,
therefore, who may lawfully engage in the real estate business. If such
arbitrary power were in fact conferred by the act, it may well be that the
objection would be good.  But such power is not conferred either in the granting
of licenses or in their revocation.  An applicant for a license is entitled to
it if he presents the required recommendation and certificate, unless the
commissioner is not satisfied that he has, in fact, the qualifications of
honesty, truthfulness, and a good reputation. In other words, the commissioner
has no discretion unless he doubts the possession by the applicant of those
qualifications which it was the purpose of the act to assure.

   But it may be said that the power of the commissioner to refuse a license if
he is not satisfied as to the character of the applicant practically gives him
arbitrary power as he alone can determine whether he is satisfied or not.  This,
however, is not true.  While the commissioner has the power to refuse a license
if he is not satisfied as to the character of the applicant, his discretion is
not arbitrary.  There must exist facts which reasonably justify his conclusion
that the applicant is not of good character and reputation.  If such facts do
not exist, it is his duty to issue the license and this duty can be enforced by
the courts.

   No extended discussion of this objection is necessary, since here, also, the
matter is definitely settled by Hall v. Geiger-Jones Co., supra . With this such
decisions as Los Angeles v. Hollywood Cemetery Assn., 124 Cal. 344, [71 Am. St.
Rep. 75, 57 Pac. 153], Schaezlein v. Cabaniss, 135 Cal. 466, [87 Am. St. Rep.
122, 56 L. R. A. 733, 67 Pac. 755], and La Junta v. Heath, 38 Colo. 372, [88
Pac. 459], are not in conflict, since the acts or ordinances involved in those
cases conferred the power of granting or refusing the right requested without
any specification of the conditions upon which it should be granted or refused.
The power conferred was both uncontrolled and unguided.

   A third objection is that the act confers judicial powers upon the
commissioner, a nonjudicial official.  This objection is founded upon the fact
that he is given the power  after a hearing or opportunity for a hearing to
suspend or revoke any license in case the licensee is guilty of any one of a
number of acts, all of which come within the general designation of dishonest
dealing.  But whether the conferring of this power upon the commissioner is
constitutionally valid or not, we need not determine at this time and we express
no opinion.   It is a sufficient answer to the objection, so far as this
proceeding goes, that this portion of the act is not directly involved, and that
it plainly is but a detail and not an essential part of the act and is separable
from the balance without affecting the substantial accomplishment of the purpose
for which the act was passed, so that even if invalid, its invalidity would not
render the whole invalid and in particular would not affect the question
involved here, the right of the commissioner to have the expenses of his office
paid in the manner provided.

   The remaining objections to the act are that in a number of different
respects it makes unreasonable discriminations and is, therefore, special
legislation.  Two such alleged discriminations are pointed out by counsel for
the respondent.  The first is the provision that on a review by the courts of
the commissioner's action in suspending or revoking any license, the burden of
proof is upon the licensee to show an "abuse of discretion" on the part of the
commissioner.   This provision is but a part of the general provision giving the
commissioner power to suspend or revoke licenses, and what we have just said in
regard to the objection to this general provision applies with double force to
this part of it.  Even if invalid, as to which we express no opinion, the
provision is plainly separable from the balance of the act, and does not affect
its validity.

     The second alleged discrimination is that the salaries of the deputies and
employees of the commissioner are not fixed, but their amount is left to the
discretion of the commissioner.  In many cases it is advisable, if not
necessary, that the compensation of employees, even of public employees, be left
to the discretion of the official in charge of the department where they are
employed and who is responsible for the efficiency of that department.  It
cannot be said that conferring this power in one case  and not in others is the
making of an unreasonable distinction.

   The remaining objections -- all because of alleged unreasonable
discriminations -- are made by counsel appearing as amici curiae: The first of
these is that the act makes a difference between collectors of rents and
collectors of other obligations.  Those engaged in collecting rents and not
otherwise engaging in the real estate business might well have been omitted from
the operation of the act.   But the business of collecting rents is so closely
connected with the real estate business generally, and it is so usual for the
first to be carried on as a part of a general real estate business, that we
cannot say the legislature was not justified in classifying them together and
thereby making a distinction between collectors of rent and other collectors.

   The second objection of amici curiae along this line is that an unreasonable
distinction is made when the act excepts "persons holding a duly executed power
of attorney from the owner." The soundness of this objection depends upon what
is meant by a "power of attorney:" Power of attorney to do what?  The act does
not say.  Any written authority by one man to act for another may be said to be
a power of attorney and the argument of amici curiae is that as used in the act
in question it must include authority to act as broker merely, to negotiate
sales, leases or other transactions in real property, as distinguished from
authority to consummate the transaction.  If this be so they argue, in effect,
and argue truly, any broker, while continuing to act solely as a broker, may yet
escape from the restrictions of the act by always securing written authority,
and there is no reason why any distinction should be made between brokers who
always act under written authority and those who do not, so far as subjecting
them to regulation is concerned.

   Such a construction of the act, however, is not a reasonable one.  It would
not only render the act invalid, but even if it did not do this, it would
practically render it ineffective, since, as has been said, any broker could
secure escape from its provisions merely by being careful to secure written
authority in every case.   A much more natural construction is that by power of
attorney is meant written authority to act for and in place of the principal  in
consummating the transaction as distinguished from merely negotiating it.  This
construction removes the objection of unreasonable discrimination, for such an
agent is much more than a broker and there is nothing unreasonable in not
applying to him the regulations applicable to brokers.

     A third distinction urged by amici curiae as unreasonable is that between
brokers and salesmen. The discriminations between the two made by the act are
that brokers pay an annual license fee of ten dollars and salesmen of two
dollars, and the former is required to furnish certificates of character by two
land owners, while the latter furnish certificates by their employers.  But
certainly a larger fee and a different certificate may reasonably  be exacted
from a broker engaged in business for himself than are exacted from a salesman
working for another.

     The fourth point of amici curiae is that trustees selling under a deed of
trust are excepted, and no exception is made of trustees doing anything else
than selling, such as leasing or renting, or collecting rents. The reply is that
trustees, whether selling or doing something else, do not come within the
purview of the act.  The express exception of trustees selling under a deed of
trust adds nothing and the act would be the same if it made no mention of
trustees.

     The fifth point made by amici curiae is that officers of a corporation
licensed to do business as a real estate broker may act as brokers or salesmen
without being subject to the requirements of the act.  Suffice it to say that we
do not so read the act.

   There are a number of other objections made, but inasmuch as counsel
themselves say that they are made not so much to impeach the validity of the act
as to show its injustice, a consideration addressable to the legislature but not
to us, no discussion of them is required.

   It is ordered that the writ issue as prayed.


                              67 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          O. J. GALBAVY, Respondent, v. CLEVELIN REALTY CORPORATION (a
                            Corporation), Appellant

                                Civ. No. A. 5436

            APPELLATE DEPARTMENT, SUPERIOR COURT OF CALIFORNIA, LOS
                                    ANGELES

            58 Cal. App. 2d Supp. 903; 136 P.2d 134; 1943 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 134


                            April 13, 1943, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:      APPEAL from a judgment of the Municipal Court of the City of
Los Angeles. Edwin L. Jefferson, Judge. Action to recover compensation earned by
real estate salesman.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Corporations--Records--Parol Evidence--Best Evidence of Contents.  --A
corporation minute book is not the only competent evidence to prove the passage
of resolutions by its board of directors, as oral evidence is permissible for
that purpose. Oral evidence of the contents of a resolution, however, may be
subject to the best evidence rule if an objection to the evidence on that ground
is interposed.

(2) Brokers--Definitions--Real Estate Salesmen.  --Real Estate Act, § 2
(Deering's Gen. Laws, 1937, Act 112; Stats. 1919, p. 1252, as amended), defining
"real estate salesmen" so as to include "one who for a compensation is employed
by a licensed broker" to do any of the acts which are included in the definition
of a broker, but not including the words "for another or others," appearing in
the definition of a broker, or any other words which expressly limit the acts of
a salesman to those done for principals other than the broker by whom he is
employed, may not be so construed as to read such limitation into the definition
by implication.

(3) Id.--Compensation--As Dependent Upon License.  --Under Real Estate Act, § 2,
declaring that in case of corporate owners the statute shall not apply to their
regular officers performing acts without special compensation, the regular
officers of a corporation which is licensed as a real estate broker may act
without licenses in selling its property.

(4) Id.--Definitions--Salesmen.  --Under the Real Estate Act, § 2, declaring
that "one act, for a compensation of buying or selling real estate for another"
shall constitute the person doing so "a real estate broker or salesman under
this act," a salesman selling his employer's land acts "for another," but it is
consistent with the provision last quoted that he remain merely a salesman when
doing so.

(5a) (5b) Id.--Compensation--As Dependent Upon License--License of Salesman.
--The provisions of Real Estate Act, § 18, making it unlawful to pay
compensation "to any person who is not a licensed broker, or a salesman licensed
under the broker paying the compensation," and forbidding a real estate salesman
to "accept compensation from any person other than the broker under whom he is
at the time licensed," are consistent with a salesman's right to recover
compensation for selling his employer's own property, as these provisions do not
limit the compensation which may be paid by a broker to his salesman to
transactions in which the broker is acting as such. A contrary construction
would result in great inconvenience, as brokers could not then use salesmen
employed by them to sell their own land, but would have to employ other brokers
for that purpose.

(6) Statutes--Construction--Consequences of Particular Construction--
Inconvenience.  --In construing a doubtful statute, the court may take into
consideration any great inconvenience which may result from a given construction
and, if the language used permits, give to the statute a construction which is
in harmony with sound sense and wise policy.

COUNSEL: David B. Larimer for Appellant.

A. S. Goldman for Respondent.

JUDGES: SHAW, P. J. Fox, J., and Kincaid, J. pro tem, concurred.

OPINION BY: SHAW

OPINION

     SHAW, P. J. -- Plaintiff's assignor, Landfield, was a real estate salesman,
licensed to act as such under the defendant, Clevelin Realty Corporation, which
was a licensed real estate  broker, and this action is brought to recover
compensation claimed to have been earned by Landfield while acting as such
salesman. The defendant filed a cross-complaint against Landfield, alleging that
he had been guilty of fraud in making some of the sales for which plaintiff
claims compensation, and that defendant had been compelled by reason of such
fraud to make settlements and adjustments with the purchasers, and had been
damaged thereby. The same matter was pleaded in the answer as an offset to
plaintiff's claim. The defendant appeals from a judgment against it on both
complaint and cross-complaint.

   The testimony given by defendant's treasurer, Schultz, is sufficient to
support the implied finding that the sum of $ 561.17, awarded plaintiff by the
judgment, was due to Landfield from defendant for commissions. But the evidence
also shows without dispute that defendant is entitled to have $ 300 deducted
from that amount for the price of land conveyed to Landfield by defendant. The
agreement for the purchase of this land by Landfield from defendant is admitted
by plaintiff, as is the receipt of the deed. The agreement provides that the
price, $ 300, is to be a charge against Landfield's contingent commission
account and to be retained by defendant from moneys received by it against that
account.

     Plaintiff now objects to that deed on the ground that the authority of
those who executed it for defendant is not shown. Schultz testified that a
resolution conferring such authority had been passed by the board of directors.
It is true the minute book and the original resolution were not produced, but a
corporation minute book is not the only competent evidence to prove the passage
of resolutions by its board of directors. Oral evidence is permissible for that
purpose. ( Boggs v. Lakeport etc.   Assn., (1896) 111 Cal. 354, 357 [43 P. 1106]
; Michaels v. Pacific S. W. Laundry, (1930) 104 Cal. App. 349, 362 [286 P. 165,
286 P. 1071].) Oral proof of the contents of the resolution might have been
subject to the best evidence rule, but no objection to the evidence on that
ground appears. No evidence in disproof of the authority to execute the deed was
given. Nothing appeared, therefore, to authorize the belated attempt to rescind
this transaction because of non-performance by defendant, made by plaintiff
rather than Landfield, at the hearing of the motion for a new trial, even if
rescission could properly be had at that stage of the proceedings.

     It appears without dispute that the land which plaintiff's assignor,
Landfield, sold for defendant and for sale of which compensation is claimed, was
owned by defendant. On this fact a doubt arose whether plaintiff's claim was not
barred by the provisions of the California Real Estate Act (Deering's General
Laws 1937, Act 112, Stats. 1919, p. 1252 as amended), and re-argument was
allowed on this question. We have concluded that the action is not so barred.
The statute above mentioned provides for licensing real estate brokers and real
estate salesmen, a salesman's license authorizing him to act only under the
particular broker by whom he is employed when it is issued. Section 2 defines
the term "real estate broker" so as to include "a person, copartnership or
corporation who, for a compensation" does any of a series of acts which may be
characterized generally as negotiating real estate transactions, "for another or
others." It defines "real estate salesman" so as to include "one who for a
compensation is employed by a licensed broker" to do any of the acts which are
included in the definition of a broker. The definition of a salesman does not
include the words "for another or others," appearing in the definition of a
broker, or any other words which expressly limit the acts of a salesman to those
done for principals other than the broker by whom he is employed. We see no
reason to read such limitation into the definition of a salesman, by
implication.

     Section 2 does, it is true, further provide that the statute, -- except
sections 19a and 20a to 20 1, which relate to approval of subdivisions of land
by the Real Estate Commissioner and are of no consequence here -- "shall not
apply to anyone who shall directly perform any of the acts aforesaid with
reference to his own property," or in case of corporate owners to their regular
officers performing such acts without special compensation. Defendant being a
corporation, its regular officers could act under this provision without
licenses, but the provision does not purport to provide what sort of license its
other employees must hold in order to act for it.   Section 2 further provides
that "one act, for a compensation  of buying or selling real estate for another"
etc. shall constitute the person doing so "a real estate broker  or salesman
under this act." The salesman selling his employer's land acts "for another,"
but it is consistent with the provision last quoted that he remain merely a
salesman when doing so.

     Section 18 makes it unlawful for a licensed broker to pay "compensation for
performing any of the acts herein specified" -- the reference by "herein"
apparently being to the act as a whole -- "to any person who is not a licensed
broker, or a salesman licensed under the broker paying the compensation," and
forbids a real estate salesman to "accept compensation from any person other
than the broker under whom he is at the time licensed." These provisions are
also consistent with plaintiff's right to recover for the acts done by Landfield
here. The first of them is broad enough to include acts which would, except for
plaintiff's position as salesman, be those of a broker; and neither contains any
words which limit the compensation which may be paid by a broker to his salesman
to transactions in which the broker is acting as such. Section 18 further
provides that it is a misdemeanor "for any person, firm or corporation, whether
obligor, escrow holder or otherwise, to pay or deliver to anyone a compensation
for performing any of the acts specified in section 2 hereof, who shall not be
known to be, or present evidence to such payor that he is a regularly licensed
real estate broker at the time such compensation is earned." This reference to
section 2 is broad enough, if it stood alone, to include acts as a salesman, but
its context, both in this sentence and in the provisions of section 18
previously referred to, show that it does not intend to deal with payments made
by a licensed broker to a salesman licensed under him.

   A possible objection to the conclusion we have stated is that it renders the
words "licensed broker," in the definition of a salesman, to a considerable
extent a mere description of the person who employs the salesman, rather than a
designation of the field in which the salesman acts for him. However, this is a
reasonably possible interpretation of the words used, which are ambiguous in
this respect, and it is to be preferred because of the very inconvenient results
of a contrary interpretation.   "In construing a doubtful statute, no doubt the
court may take into consideration any great inconvenience which may result from
a given construction."  (23 Cal.Jur. 768; Reithardt v. Board of Education,
(1941) 43 Cal. App. 2d 629, 633 [111 P.2d 440].) Where a statute is ambiguous,
the court "may look beyond the law itself and take into consideration the
consequences of a particular construction or interpretation, and if the language
used permits, give to the statute a construction which is in harmony with sound
sense and wise policy -- one which will make the statute practically operative
with the least injury to those upon whom it spends its force so that a statute
designed to regulate will not be so construed as to destroy."  ( In re La Belle
(1940) 37 Cal. App. 2d 32, 38-9 [98 P.2d 778].)

     It is a matter of common knowledge, and no doubt the Legislature when it
enacted this statute was aware, that subdivisions of land for the purpose of
sale are often promoted and placed on the market, at least in part, by real
estate brokers who own them or have some interest in them beyond the mere
expectation of earning broker's commissions by their sale, and that in many
other cases brokers own or have such an interest in the land which they sell. It
would be a matter of great inconvenience if in such cases the brokers could not
set the salesman employed by them at the work of selling such land, but must
employ other brokers for that purpose. Upon the salesman would be placed the
burden of ascertaining before entering into a transaction whether his employer
had any interest in the land involved, or taking the chance of working for
nothing if such interest existed. These results would necessarily follow from
the provisions of section 18, unless a salesman may be regarded as acting in
that capacity when he sells his employing broker's own land. Construing the
statute according to the rule of convenience above stated,  we think he may be
so regarded. The act itself suggests no reason for not so construing it. Its
purpose is to require honesty and fair dealing on the part of those engaged in
the real estate business, and this purpose is to be carried out by requiring
proof of honesty and good reputation before a license to engage in that
business, either as broker or salesman, can be issued (secs. 9a, 9b), and
providing for revocation of a license to act in either capacity for dishonesty
or fraud (sec. 12). A salesman selling his employer's own property stands in no
relation to the public with whom he deals substantially different from that of a
salesman selling, in behalf of his employer, the property of others. Under our
construction of the statute the sanctions of the statute, intended  to ensure
his honesty, will apply to a salesman equally in either case, and thus its
purpose will be as fully carried out as if the owning and selling broker were to
employ another broker, instead of his own salesman, to sell for him.

   We do not find it proper to modify the judgment by deducting from it the sum
of $ 300 herein discussed, and thereupon to affirm it, because of defendant's
cross-complaint and the offset pleaded in the answer. Defendant offered
substantial evidence in support of its allegations, and we would not be
warranted in passing upon the weight of this evidence, as we must do in order to
make a finding here on the amount, if any, to be awarded plaintiff. The
questions arising on this cross-complaint and offset have not been discussed, so
we express no opinion upon them, but suggest that if this matter is urged on a
new trial more attention be given to the question of measure of damages than it
appears to have received heretofore.

   The judgment is reversed, and the cause is remanded to the municipal court
for a new trial, appellant to recover its costs of appeal.

   Fox, J., and Kincaid, J. pro tem, concurred.


                              68 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          SETH BLACKBURN et al., Plaintiffs and Respondents, v. ANDREW
                  CHARNLEY et al., Defendants and Appellants.

                                    B166080

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SECOND APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION SIX

          117 Cal. App. 4th 758; 11 Cal. Rptr. 3d 885; 2004 Cal. App.
            LEXIS 473; 2004 Cal. Daily Op. Service 3067; 2004 Daily
                                Journal DAR 4410


                              April 8, 2004, Filed

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY: Time for Granting or Denying Review Extended Blackburn v.
Charnley, 2004 Cal. LEXIS 5927 (Cal., June 24, 2004)
Review denied by Blackburn v. Charnley, 2004 Cal. LEXIS 6665 (Cal., July 21,
2004)

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of San Luis Obispo County, Nos. CV 010854 and
CV 020254, Kenneth Andreen, Judge. ( Retired Associate Justice of the Court of
Appeal, Fifth Appellate District, assigned by the Chief Justice pursuant to
article VI, section 6 of the California Constitution.)

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports

(4) Specific Performance § 36--Actions--Evidence and Proof--Description of Lots
Conveyed.--A judgment of specific performance of real estate purchase agreements
entered into between a developer and buyers of lots was proper, where properly
admitted extrinsic evidence rendered the description of the lots conveyed by the
purchase agreements sufficiently definite for enforcement.

   [11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (9th ed. 1990) Equity, § 25; 7 Witkin, Cal.
Procedure (4th ed. 1997) Judgment, § 169.]

(7) Negligence § 10--Elements of Actionable Negligence--Duty of Care--Standard
of Care--Final Statement of Decision.--A developer who was ordered to
specifically perform real estate purchase agreements was not prejudiced by
language in the trial court's final statement of decision that the developer
failed to establish at trial that his real estate broker or real estate agent
failed to meet the applicable standard of care, where the language in the final
statement of decision was not a finding that the real estate broker or agent met
the standard of care.

COUNSEL: Paul J. Weinberg for Defendants and Appellants.

Ogden & Fricks, Roy E. Ogden and Sue N. Carrasco for Plaintiffs and Respondents.

JUDGES: Coffee, J., with Perren, J., and Gilbert, P. J., concurring.

OPINION BY: COFFEE

OPINION

    COFFEE, J.--Andrew Charnley and Charnley Gustason Development Company, Inc.
(collectively Charnley) appeal from a judgment awarding respondents, Seth
Blackburn and Chris Goetsch Blackburn and Jeffery and Laurie Thomas, specific
performance of real estate purchase agreements and attorney's fees. Charnley
contends the trial court erred in (1) entering a judgment for specific
performance because the purchase agreements were not sufficiently certain and
definite to be enforceable; (2) awarding contractual attorney's fees to the
Blackburns and Thomases; and (3) including language in the statement of decision
indicating that the real estate brokers involved in the transaction did not
breach their standard of care. We affirm.

Factual and Procedural Background

   Charnley purchased tracts 1785 and 1926, both in Templeton, for the purpose
of subdividing them. Michelle Smith, a licensed real estate agent  with Country
Real Estate, was Charney's exclusive real estate agent. She assisted Charnley in
purchasing tract 1785 and buying or selling approximately 100 other properties.
A standard California Association of Realtors (CAR) purchase agreement was used
for his purchase of tract 1785.

   In December of 1999, Smith entered into two exclusive authorization and right
to sell agreements with Charnley to sell lots 1, 2, and 3 in tract 1785 and 18
townhome units to be constructed on tract 1926. Charnley instructed her to list
the three lots and the homes to be constructed on tract 1785 for a sales price
of $ 184,900 each, and the townhome units in tract 1926 for a sales price of $
164,900. When Smith signed the exclusive listings for these properties, Charnley
did not tell her that he did not have the Department of Real Estate's approval
for these subdivisions, as evidenced by a final public report. Charnley did not
receive the final public report until December 2001.

   In February of 2000, the Blackburns contacted Smith and discussed the three
lots available in tract 1785. Smith provided them with a sheet describing the
standard features of the homes to be constructed on the three lots, the site
plans, the floor plan callouts, and elevation plans. The Blackburns decided to
make an offer on lot 2 at the purchase price of $ 184,900. The home was to
consist of 1448 square feet, with three bedrooms and two bathrooms. The
Blackburns' offer asked that the seller pay closing costs and include rain
gutters. With Smith's assistance, the Blackburns made their offer on a standard
preprinted purchase and sale agreement used by CAR. Smith then communicated the
offer to Charnley, who countered with an increased purchase price of $ 188,000.
Chris Blackburn testified that she and her husband agreed to that price,
inserted it into the preprinted purchase and sale agreement, and the couple and
Charnley signed the agreement. The purchase agreement provided that the couple
would deposit $ 1,000 into escrow "once construction begins," seller would pay $
5,000 of the buyers' closing costs, and escrow would close "upon completion" of
construction.

   A few days later, the parties executed a document entitled "Amendment to Real
Estate Deposit Receipt," which refers to the "Contract dated 2/22/00? between
Charnley as seller and the Blackburns as buyers. This amendment provided in part
that the buyers were aware that: (1) they were purchasing a "to be completed"
"spec" home and not a custom home; and (2) plans were provided to the buyers for
information purposes only and changes in detail and/or specific layouts and
dimensions of the residence may be necessitated during construction.

   In March of 2000, William and Patti Van Orden (not parties to this action)
submitted an offer to purchase lot 3 for $ 184,900, the price advertised in the
standard features sheet. They were assisted by Sheryle Machado, a licensed  real
estate associate of Country Real Estate, and received a site plan for lot 3,
floor plan callouts, elevation callouts, and a map of the lots. The Van Ordens'
purchase agreement was identical to the Blackburns' and was written on the same
five-page standardized form used by CAR. Machado inserted as a contingency of
the sale that, upon receipt of the public report, a deposit of $ 1,000 would be
paid by the buyer, contingent upon the buyer's approval of the public report.
She received a copy of the offer back from Michelle Smith signed by Andrew
Charnley. Ultimately, the Van Ordens paid $ 205,730 for their house, due to
nearly $ 20,829 in upgrades and extra landscaping. These adjustments appear on
change orders, dated January 21, 2002, which reference the March 2000 CAR form
purchase contract.

   In March of 2000, respondents Jeffery and Laurie Thomas submitted an offer
for lot 1 on tract 1785 with the assistance of Sheryle Machado. The Thomases
were also given Charnley's standard features sheet, site and elevation plans,
and floor plans for the house to be built on lot 1. Their purchase agreement
consisted of the same five-page standardized CAR form used by the Blackburns and
the Van Ordens. In April of 2000, the Thomases received a counteroffer from
Charnley, increasing the purchase price to $ 196,000. They executed the
agreement at the increased price. Their purchase agreement states that Charnley
agreed to sell them real property in Templeton described as lot 1, Old Country
Road, that the Thomases would deposit $ 1,000 into escrow "upon receipt and
approval of the Public Report" and the closing date would be determined once
construction began. The agreement incorporated by reference the standard
features sheet provided to the Thomases.

   Michelle Smith testified that she ultimately sold all but one of the
townhomes on tract 1926.  Pursuant to Charnley's request, she delivered the CAR
purchase agreements to the bank for his use in obtaining a construction loan.
She testified that Charnley never discussed taking reservations on tracts 1785
or 1926 and she has never taken a reservation in her career. She sold other
developments for Charnley prior to selling the instant lots. One such
development was on Delores Lane in Templeton. She used the same documents for
that development as in the instant case, i.e., a standard features sheet, site
and floor plans, and elevation plans.

   Over the next year, construction did not start on any house in tract 1785.
The Blackburns contacted Smith frequently for the status of the start date for
construction and the reason for the delays. Smith testified that, in June of
2001, Charnley gave her a letter indicating that he could not perform the
contracts on lots 1, 2 and 3. He stated that due to construction costs and
delays, he could not build the homes at the prices for which he sold them.

    At the end of June 2001, Charnley called a meeting with the Blackburns and
Smith.  At that meeting, Charnley told the Blackburns that he had failed to
obtain a public report for tract 1785 from the Department of Real Estate before
entering into the purchase agreement and, therefore, the agreement was neither
valid nor binding. He asked the Blackburns to renegotiate the purchase price to
$ 199,000 or, alternatively, offered to buy them out of the transaction. The
Blackburns refused to renegotiate the purchase price and the meeting ended. At
that time, Charnley did not mention that he believed the purchase contracts were
in reality nonbinding "reservations."

   Charnley then asked Smith to contact the Thomases to buy them out of their
contract. A settlement was attempted with the Thomases but failed after Charnley
refused to complete a provision concerning confidentiality of the transaction.

   Construction finally began on the homes in approximately September of 2001.
Evidence presented at trial demonstrated that, during the construction delay,
the real estate market appreciated significantly. The homes were completed in
approximately February of 2002. Renters were ultimately placed in the homes on
lots 1 and 2 in July of 2002.

   In October of 2001, the Blackburns initiated this action, and the Thomases
filed suit in March of 2002. The couples concomitantly recorded notices of a
pending action (lis pendens) on the properties. Charnley answered and filed a
cross-complaint against Country Real Estate and Michelle Smith. The trial court
consolidated the actions, severed Charnley's cross-complaint against the real
estate broker and agent, and conducted a trial on the complaints.

   Jeffery Thomas testified that when construction did not begin as expected on
their home, he and his wife purchased a smaller, older home for a higher price.
He did so for the tax advantage of owning a home. He stated that he and his wife
always intended to move into their new home on lot 1 and to sell the older one.

   H. Stanton McDonald, a real estate appraiser, conducted an appraisal of the
Thomases' home on lot 1. As of March of 2000 (the time of purchase), he
appraised the 1484 square foot home at $ 185,000. In December of 2000, he
appraised it at $ 230,000. Lisa Marrs, a licensed real estate associate employed
by Bjerre and Garcia Realty, testified that she conducted a rental analysis for
the homes on lots 1 and 2. She opined the fair rental value of each home was
between $ 1,350 and $ 1,400 per month for the entire year of 2002.

   James Donegan, Sr., testified that his law firm obtained the final public
report for tract 1785 in December of 2001. He testified that a reservation
instrument is routinely used to reserve a lot for future purchase until the
final tract map is approved. Unlike the CAR purchase agreement executed by the
parties, the reservation instrument clearly states, "This is not an offer or
contract to purchase or sell."

   At trial, Charnley maintained that he had simply entered into reservations
for the homes on lots 1 and 2, and there was, consequently, no mutual assent or
"meeting of the minds" between the parties. He also maintained the agreements
could not be specifically enforced because the terms were not sufficiently
certain. He testified that Michele Smith proposed taking nonbinding reservations
for the lots on tract 1785. He acknowledged giving her an exclusive listing to
sell the lots and that she brought him offers. He testified that she told him
"it was a nonbinding agreement, as long as we didn't take any money and we
didn't open up an escrow." He testified that construction delays led to
increased construction costs and he could  not go through with the agreements
for either tract 1926 or 1785 without losing too much money.

   Charnley testified that in June of 2001, he felt the lots on tract 1785 were
valued at $ 230,000 to $ 240,000. He believed the house on lot 1 at the time of
its completion was worth $ 290,000, and the square footage had increased from
1450 to 1650. He believed the house on lot 2 was worth $ 275,000.

   After taking the case under submission, the trial court ordered specific
performance of the agreements with the Blackburns and Thomases. The court found
that Charnley entered into purchase contracts with these couples without first
obtaining approval from the Department of Real Estate, the contracts were
voidable only by the aggrieved purchasers pursuant to Government Code section
66499.32, and the buyers elected not to rescind them. The court found that the
motivating factor for Charnley listing the property and obtaining residential
purchase agreements was to obtain construction financing. The court disbelieved
Charnley's claim of mistake concerning the effectiveness of the purchase
agreements, reasoning that Charnley knew what he was doing and he did not
believe the CAR purchase agreements were reservations or nonbinding agreements.
The court found that he knew it was illegal to sell subdivided lands without
first obtaining a final public report from the Department of Real Estate
Commissioner, and he "believed he could take unfair advantage of his own failure
to comply with Business and Professions Code Section 11018.2 if he subsequently
elected at his whim to avoid the agreements in order to make a larger profit.
[He] was wrong."

   The court further found that Charnley had not relied on any representation of
Michelle Smith or her supervisor, Thomas Erskine, that the purchase agreements
were not binding. The court reasoned that Charnley signed exclusive listing
agreements with Smith to sell the property months before he  applied for
approval from the Department of Real Estate, he had the ability to seek legal
advice, he chose not to do so, and allegedly relied upon a salesperson (a
layperson), which was not reasonable. The court reasoned that under the
objective test for contracts, Charnley's undisclosed intention of avoiding the
contracts, if he chose to do so, did not prevent the formation of enforceable
contracts.

   The court rejected all of Charnley's defenses to the request for specific
performance. The court found the contracts were sufficiently certain to support
a decree of specific performance in that they were for a specified lot in a
specified tract. "Although the lots were not specifically delineated by metes
and bounds, they were sufficiently identified. This was open ground; the fact
that a lot boundary might be a few feet one way or another was irrelevant. [¶]
Smith obtained floor plans and elevations. These, along with the 'Standard
Features' Sheet, which was given to both sets of Plaintiffs when they executed
the agreements, gave enough detail. These were not custom homes. Plaintiffs were
satisfied to accept the general specifications given them." Moreover, the court
reasoned, the homes were fully constructed at the time of trial and the couples
were willing to accept them "as is."

   The court found the consideration for the purchases adequate at the time of
contracting as demonstrated by the testimony of the appraiser. The court found
that a balance of the hardships caused by granting specific performance favored
the buyers, that Charnley should bear any loss caused by the delay in
construction, and that the buyers were not unjustly enriched  by the increased
value of the real estate, because, had the sale been completed on time, they
would have received the same benefit.

   The court further found that the Blackburns and Thomases had tendered
performance of their obligations under the purchase agreements, but Charnley had
refused it. The court noted that Charnley had never notified the Blackburns or
the Thomases that construction had commenced, he never asked for the deposits,
he never provided the Thomases with the public report, and when the Blackburns
and Thomases offered their deposits, Charnley refused to accept them.

   Finally, the court determined that the Blackburns and Thomases were entitled
to the lost rental value of the homes ($ 1,300 per month per home) from the date
they were rented out (July of 2002) through the date of trial, i.e., a total of
$ 6,500 to each couple.

   The Blackburns and Thomases subsequently moved for an award of attorney's
fees under the terms of their agreements. The court granted the motion, awarding
the Blackburns $ 36,000 and the Thomases $ 24,000 as attorney's fees.

Discussion

I. Availability of a Decree of Specific Performance

   Charnley contends the trial court erred in entering a decree of specific
performance because the legal descriptions in the purchase agreements were not
sufficiently certain and definite to be enforceable. Charnley argues that no
legal description for the properties existed at the time the agreements were
executed, there was no "metes and bounds" description, and the square footage
and precise location of the lot lines could not be determined.

   Specific performance of a contract may be decreed whenever: (1) its terms are
sufficiently definite; (2) consideration is adequate; (3) there is substantial
similarity of the requested performance to the contractual terms; (4) there is
mutuality of remedies; and (5) plaintiff's legal remedy is inadequate. (Civ.
Code, § 3390, subd. 5 [court may not specifically enforce "[a]n agreement, the
terms of which are not sufficiently certain to make the precise act which is to
be done clearly ascertainable"];  Tamarind Lithography Workshop, Inc. v. Sanders
(1983) 143 Cal. App. 3d 571, 575 [193 Cal. Rptr. 409].)

   The material factors to be ascertained to support a contract for the sale of
real property are: (1) the seller; (2) the buyer; (3) the price; (4) time and
manner of payment; and (5) description of the property sufficient to identify
it. ( King v. Stanley (1948) 32 Cal.2d 584, 589 [197 P.2d 321].) In determining
whether the material factors in a contract are sufficiently certain for specific
performance, "the modern trend of the law favors carrying out the parties'
intention through the enforcement of contracts and disfavors holding them
unenforceable because of uncertainty. ... The defense of uncertainty has
validity only when the uncertainty or incompleteness of the contract prevents
the court from knowing what to enforce." ( Hennefer v. Butcher (1986) 182 Cal.
App. 3d 492, 500 [227 Cal. Rptr. 318], citations & fn. omitted.) Parol evidence
that does not vary or contradict the written terms of the contract is admissible
to explain the ambiguities or give meaning and content to words used, provided
it does not vary or contradict the terms of the contract. ( Id. at p. 501.)

   Here, the purchase agreements expressly provided that Charnley agreed to sell
lots 1 and 2 on Old Country Road. The trial court admitted into evidence the
standard  features sheets, site plans, floor plans, elevation plans, and tract
map furnished to the couples at the time of contracting to further explain the
meaning of the terms. The court had no difficulty determining what was conveyed
by the purchase agreements. These were "spec" homes that were completely
constructed by the time of trial. As constructed, the homes were consistent with
the standard features sheet, the site and elevation plans, floor plans, and
tract map. Charnley presented no evidence showing that the lots or houses were
not what was essentially described in those documents. Significantly, the Van
Ordens completed the purchase of lot 3 based on identically executed purchase
agreements. We conclude the properly admitted extrinsic evidence rendered the
description of the lots conveyed by the purchase agreements sufficiently
definite for enforcement. The court did not err in ordering specific
performance.

II. The Award of Attorney's Fees

   Charnley contends the trial court erred in awarding attorney's fees to the
Blackburns and Thomases because they failed to satisfy a contractual condition
precedent for the recovery of fees. He argues that the couples were required to
mediate their claims prior to filing suit in order to preserve their right to
seek attorney's fees. On appeal,  we review the determination of the legal basis
for an award of attorney fees de novo as a question of law. ( Leamon v.
Krajkiewcz (2003) 107 Cal.App.4th 424, 431 [132 Cal. Rptr. 2d 362].)

   The parties' purchase agreement provides that in any action arising out of
the agreement, "the prevailing Buyer or Seller shall be entitled to reasonable
attorney's fees and costs from the non-prevailing Buyer or Seller, except as
provided in paragraph 21A."

   Paragraph 21A requires the parties to mediate their disputes prior to
initiating an action to preserve the entitlement to attorney's fees. Paragraph
21A provides in pertinent part: "21. DISPUTE RESOLUTION: [¶] A. MEDIATION: Buyer
and Seller agree to mediate any dispute or claim arising between them out of
this Agreement, or any resulting transaction, before resorting to ... court
action, subject to paragraphs 21C and D below. ... If any party commences an
action based on a dispute or claim to which this paragraph applies, without
first attempting to resolve the matter through mediation, then that party shall
not be entitled to recover attorney's fees, even if they would otherwise be
available to that party in any such action. ..."

   Paragraph 21C sets forth exemptions to the requirement of mediation.
Paragraph 21C provides in pertinent part: "The following matters are excluded
from Mediation and Arbitration hereunder ... . The filing of a court action to
enable the recording of a notice of pending action ... or other provisional
remedies, shall not constitute a violation of the mediation and arbitration
provisions." (Italics added.)

   In granting the motion for attorney's fees, the trial court ruled that the
purchase agreements expressly exempted the couples from the mediation
requirement because they filed an action to enable the recording of a notice of
lis pendens. Alternatively, the court ruled that any attempt to mediate the
dispute would have been futile. The court reasoned: "[T]he filing of an action
to enable the recording of a notice of pending action is not a violation of the
mediation provision. The Blackburns filed a Notice of Lis Pendens on October 12,
2001; the Thomases filed theirs on March 27, 2002. Prudent practice dictated
this result. They wanted specific performance of agreements for the  purchase of
real property. Had they not filed them, defendant would have been free to sell
to third parties and specific performance might not have been available. [¶]
Moreover, mediation was conducted pursuant to this court's practices. Although
an extremely effective mediator--Judge Burke--mediated the cases after filing
and before trial, he was unable to reach agreement. This is strong evidence that
any attempt at mediation prior to filing would have been futile."

   Here, the parties filed a lawsuit and recorded a lis pendens on their lots in
order to protect their homes from resale to a bona fide purchaser in a booming
real estate market and to preserve their right to seek specific performance.
Under the plain and unambiguous provisions of the purchase agreements, they were
exempt from the mediation requirement. We agree with the trial court that the
couples were entitled to attorney's fees as the prevailing parties.

   We reject Charnley's contention that the trial court should have made a
finding, either at trial or at the attorney's fee hearing, that prior to
recording their lis pendens the plaintiffs had a good faith reason to believe
that Charnley was going to sell the parcels out from under them imminently. The
language of paragraph 21C sets forth no such restriction in order preserve the
entitlement to attorney's fees. The language expressly states that the filing of
an action to enable the recording of a lis pendens is not a violation of the
mediation requirement. As the Blackburns and Thomases observe, if the drafters
of the standard CAR purchase agreement intended the "lis pendens" exception to
apply only when an anticipatory breach is documented, the drafters could have
easily said so in the agreement. (See, e.g.,  In re Marriage of Iberti (1997) 55
Cal.App.4th 1434, 1440-1441 [64 Cal. Rptr. 2d 766] [rejecting interpretation of
a marital settlement agreement that would have added qualifying language to an
unambiguous provision].)

    Leamon v. Krajkiewcz, supra, 107 Cal.App.4th 424, cited by Charnley, is
inapposite. There, the Court of Appeal interpreted a similar real estate
purchase agreement and affirmed the trial court's order denying a seller's
request for attorney's fees on the ground that the seller had failed to seek
mediation prior to filing suit. Leamon did not address the particular clause of
the purchase agreement at issue here which allows the buyers to file suit
without first seeking mediation to enable the recording of a lis pendens.

    Charnley also contends that the couples' right to obtain attorney's fees is
negated by technical defects in their service and filing (not recording) of the
lis pendens placed on each of their lots. Charnley failed to raise this argument
in the court below in opposition to the motion for attorney's fees.
Additionally, he failed to move to expunge the lis pendens recorded by the
Blackburns and Thomases. We conclude, therefore, that Charnley has waived this
issue on appeal. ( Chamberlain v. Ventura County Civil Service Com. (1977) 69
Cal. App. 3d 362, 372 [138 Cal. Rptr. 155].)

III. The Statement of Decision

   At the conclusion of trial, the court took the case under submission and
issued a tentative decision. In the tentative decision, the court rejected
Charnley's defenses and stated in part: "Alleged negligence of broker/agents.
[¶] If defendant has been damaged by failure of Country Real Estate to live up
to the standard of care of the industry, he can pursue it in his
cross-complaints." Charnley then requested a statement of decision answering the
question whether the negligence of the parties'  dual real estate agent could be
imputed to the buyers to defeat specific performance.

   In response, the trial court issued a final statement of decision, including
the following language on page 7 at lines 14 through 19: "The Defendant failed
to establish at trial that his broker or agent failed to meet the applicable
standard of care in the industry. If defendant feels he has been damaged by the
alleged failure of Country Real Estate to live up to the standard of care of the
industry, he can pursue it in his cross-complaints." Charnley subsequently
objected to this language, but the court did not rule on the objection.

   Charnley contends the trial court erred by inserting the above language into
the final statement of decision because no evidence was presented at trial as to
the standard of care owed by a real estate agent. Charnley argues that the
language was inserted by opposing counsel and the court never actually made such
a finding. Charnley contends that he is prejudiced by the inclusion of this
language in the statement of decision because it will have collateral estoppel
effect on the negligence claim raised in Charnley's cross-complaint pending
below against the real estate broker and agent. Charnley asks that we modify the
trial court's statement of decision and judgment to remove this unintended
language.

   We conclude that Charnley is not prejudiced by the language on page 7, lines
14 though 19. The language states only that Charnley "failed to establish at
trial that his broker or agent failed to meet the applicable standard of care."
This is not a finding that the real estate broker or agent met their standard of
care. Because the standard of care of a real estate broker or agent  was not at
issue in the trial, the trial judge simply advised Charnley that if he feels he
"has been damaged by the alleged failure of Country Real Estate to live up to
the standard of care of the industry, he can pursue it in his cross-complaints."
We conclude that the above language will not have any collateral estoppel effect
on the negligence claim asserted by Charnley in its cross-complaint against
Country Real Estate and/or the real estate broker and agent.

   Accordingly, the judgment and postjudgment order awarding attorney's fees are
affirmed. Costs on appeal are awarded to the Blackburns and Thomases.

   Gilbert, P. J., and Perren, J., concurred.

   Appellants' petition for review by the Supreme Court was denied July 21,
2004.


                              69 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             In the Matter of the Estate of ELLA McCRAY, Deceased.
            HAROLD A. McCRAY et al., Appellants, v. CITIZENS TRUST &
                    SAVINGS BANK (a Corporation), Respondent

                                 L. A. No. 9570

                          Supreme Court of California

                 204 Cal. 399; 268 P. 647; 1928 Cal. LEXIS 693


                                 June 25, 1928

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  Sidney N. Reeve, Judge.

COUNSEL: T. Frank Courtney and D. Webster Egan for Appellants.

Henry Merton, O'Melveny, Tuller & Myers, and Walter K. Tuller for Respondent.

Pillsbury, Madison & Sutro, Brobeck, Phleger & Harrison and O'Melveny, Millikin
& Tuller, Amici Curiae, for Respondent.

JUDGES: In Bank. Waste, C. J.  Richards, J., Shenk, J., Curtis, J., Preston, J.,
Seawell, J., and Tyler, J., pro tem., concurred.

OPINION BY: WASTE

OPINION

     Ella McCray died on February 19, 1925, leaving an estate consisting of both
real and personal property.  A holographic will, executed by her and bearing
date August 20, 1924, was admitted to probate upon the petition of the
respondent Citizens Trust & Savings Bank, named therein as executor. By her will
she bequeathed to her three sons and only heirs certain personal property, but
did not devise to them, or otherwise attempt to dispose of the fee in her real
estate, except that in the body of her will there appears the following
provision: "The Real estate held in trust for 10 years at least and income
equally divided among the sons." On the reverse side of the paper upon which the
will is penned this language is used: "I want this real estate fixed so that the
McCray Estate will be held in Trust for a time so that it cannot be squandered
and wasted." The will contained no express appointment of a trustee.  The "sons"
referred to in the provision first above quoted were the then three living adult
sons of the testatrix. One of them having passed away, his interest is
represented in this proceeding by the administratrix of his estate.  In due
course, the probate court entered its decree of partial distribution, wherein
appeared the following provision: "5. To Citizens Trust & Savings Bank, a
Corporation, of Los Angeles, California, as Trustee, all the real property
belonging to said estate, herein described, to be held in Trust for 10 years
from August 20, 1924, and the income therefrom  to be equally divided annually
hereafter share and share alike, 1/3 to Harold A. McCray, his heirs and assigns,
1/3 to Wilbur D. McCray, his heirs and assigns, and 1/3 between the heirs of
Richard H. McCray, now deceased, their heirs and assigns until August 19, 1934,
on which last date this Trust shall terminate, and the title in fee of all said
real property shall thereupon vest: an undivided 1/3 in Harold A. McCray, his
heirs and assigns forever, an undivided 1/3 in Wilbur D. McCray, his heirs and
assigns forever, and an undivided 1/3 in the heirs of Richard H. McCray, now
deceased, their heirs and assigns forever, free from the control of said
trustee, or its successors." The surviving sons and the personal representative
of the deceased son prosecute this appeal from the foregoing provision in the
decree of distribution.

   The decedent's attempted creation of a trust in her real property is first
assailed by the appellants upon the ground that the will should have expressly
provided for the appointment of a trustee, the vesting of an estate in such
trustee, and the designation of a purpose for which a trust may legally be
created.  Failing to do so, the effect, they contend, is to render abortive the
decedent's effort, resulting in the devolution of such property as in the case
of intestacy.  We are unable to agree with this contention.   It is the duty of
the court to interpret the provisions of a will and to carry out the intention
of the testatrix, if that intention can be ascertained, provided no law is
violated in so doing.  ( Estate of Reith, 144 Cal. 314, 316 [77 Pac. 942];
Estate of Marti, 132 Cal. 666, 668 [61 Pac. 964, 64 Pac. 1071].)   No technical
language or set form of words is necessary to the creation of a trust, either by
deed or will.  The words "upon trust" or "trustee" are not indispensable if the
intent to create a trust is otherwise sufficiently evident.  ( Estate of Tessier
, 2 Cof. Prob. Dec. 362, 367; Taber v. Bailey, 22 Cal. App. 617, 620 [135 Pac.
975]; Estate of Doane, 190 Cal. 412, 415 [213 Pac. 53].) It is sufficient if the
subject matter of the trust, the purpose thereof, and the persons beneficially
interested are indicated with reasonable certainty.  ( Sec. 2221, Civ. Code.)
In the instant case, the testatrix, by the employment of explicit language,
clearly evidenced an intention to impose a  trust for a designated period upon
her real property, during which period any income therefrom was to be paid over
to her sons.  That a trust may validly and legally be created for the purpose
designated by her is recognized in subdivision 3 of section 857 of the Civil
Code, and the will being in writing complies with the provisions of section 852
of the same code in that respect.

     The testatrix did not fail in the accomplishment of her purpose because of
the omission to expressly appoint a trustee.  A trust will not be allowed to
fail for want of a trustee, even though none be named.  ( Hill v. Den, 54 Cal.
6, 20; Cauhape v. Barnes, 135 Cal. 107, 110 [67 Pac. 55].) When, by the terms of
a will, a trust is imposed upon property for the purpose of paying over the
income therefrom to designated beneficiaries, and no trustee is named in the
will, the executor is the proper trustee to hold the property during the
existence of the trust.  ( Estate of Tessier, supra, p. 367; 1 Perry on Trusts,
6th ed., sec. 262.) If the executor is not expressly appointed trustee, the
court may determine from the whole will whether or not  he is to act as trustee.
Section 2289 of the Civil Code, following the rule in equity, provides that
"When a trust exists without any appointed trustee . . . the superior court of
the county where the trust property, or some portion thereof, is situated, must
appoint another trustee, and direct the execution of the trust." Section 1702 of
the Code of Civil Procedure is broad enough in its terms to confer that power
upon the superior court sitting in probate, and in which the administration of
an estate is pending.  The respondent bank, named in the will as executor, was,
therefore, properly appointed trustee by the court below.   We find no merit in
appellants' contention to the effect that there is in the will no direct devise
of an estate to a trustee.  In response to a similar contention, advanced in the
Estate of Reith, supra, at page 320, this court held that "it is sufficient to
say that when from the nature of the duties to be performed the taking of such
estate is necessary, 'an estate in the trustees will vest by implication.'"
(See, also, Estate of Tessier, supra, p. 368.)   Neither is there any merit in
the further contention of the appellants that the decree appealed from  declares
a trust other than and different from that attempted to be set up by the
testatrix in her will.

     Finally, the appellants contend that the trust decreed by the probate court
to have been created by the testatrix is void in that it suspends the absolute
power of alienation for a fixed period of years, contrary to the limitations
prescribed by the sections of the Civil Code relating to restraints upon
alienations, when those sections are read in the light of section 9 of article
XX of the state constitution.  That section, taken verbatim from the
constitution of 1849 (art. XI, sec. 16), declares that "No perpetuities shall be
allowed except for eleemosynary purposes."

    Section 715 of the Civil Code, as originally enacted in 1872, provides that
the absolute power of alienation "cannot be suspended, by any limitation or
condition whatever, for a longer period than during the continuance of the lives
of persons in being at the creation of the limitation or condition," except in
the single case of contingent remainders in fee mentioned in section 772 of the
same code -- an exception which has no bearing on the instant case.  It remained
unchanged until 1917, when it was recast and a new subdivision added.  (Stats.
1917, p. 699.) As so amended, the section now reads: "715.  Except in the single
case mentioned in section seven hundred seventy-two, the absolute power of
alienation cannot be suspended, by any limitation or condition whatever,  for a
longer period than as follows:

   "1. During the continuance of the lives of persons in being at the creation
of the limitation or condition; or

   "2. For a period not to exceed twenty-five years from the time of the
creation of the suspension."

   By section 716 (enacted in 1872) every future interest is void in its
creation "which, by any possibility, may suspend the absolute power of
alienation for a longer period than prescribed" in the chapter of the code.  It
would seem that, by the subsequent addition of subdivision 2 to section 715 the
legislature had made provision for the creation of such trusts as the one here
attacked; but it is the contention of the appellants that this amendment, which
permits of a flat period of twenty-five years, independent of lives in being,
within which the absolute power of alienation may be suspended, is
unconstitutional and void  as being in violation of the provisions of the
constitution, supra.  We are of the opinion that this contention has no merit
for the reason that we find no room in this case for the application of the
constitutional inhibition against perpetuities, supra, as rightly interpreted,
nor for the application of the statutory provision against restraints on
alienation; nor do we discover any discord between these two provisions of our
law.  The testatrix did not attempt to dispose of the fee in her real estate.
The utmost which she did was to attempt to create a trust for the period of ten
years through an unnamed trustee who was to have possession and control of her
real estate, with no power of disposition, but with the duty of collecting and
dividing the income thereof equally among her three sons and only heirs during
that period.  By so doing, she carved out of the fee to her real estate nothing
more than an estate for years, that being all that was necessary for the purpose
and full execution of the trust.  ( Title Insurance & Trust Co. v. Duffill, 191
Cal. 629, 648 [218 Pac. 14].) She therefore failed to dispose of other than this
limited interest in her real property, and the fee therein became vested
immediately upon her death in her three sons as her only heirs at law.  In other
words, they became vested with the title to the decedent's real property,
subject only to the trust estate for ten years provided for in her will.  This
being so, and the entire real estate,  including the trust estate for years
created by her will, being thus vested immediately upon her decease, there was
no estate remaining to which the rule against perpetuities could apply, for
vested interests are never obnoxious to the rule.  (Gray: The Rule against
Perpetuities, (3d ed., sec. 99; see, also, Blakeman v. Miller, 136 Cal. 138 [89
Am. St. Rep. 120, 68 Pac. 587].) Assuming that the provision of the constitution
which forbids, but does not define perpetuities has reference to the rule which
had become crystallized under the English common law, that rule merely provides
that "all future estates" which may "arise by way of executory devise,
conditional limitation, or shifting and springing uses, must vest within a life
or lives in being at the  death of the testator, and twenty-one years; and in
case the person in whom the estate or interest should then vest is en ventre sa
mere, nine months more will be allowed; and all estates  created as aforesaid,
and so limited that they may not vest within that time, are void." (1 Perry on
Trusts, secs. 379, 380; Goldtree v. Thompson, 79 Cal. 613, 620 [22 Pac. 50].)
The rule, "as applied to interests in land, may be stated as follows: Any
limitation or provision, the purpose or possible effect of which is to cause an
estate to commence in the future, is invalid if, as a result thereof, an estate
may commence more than twenty-one years after a life or lives in being."
(Tiffany on Real Property, 2d ed., sec. 179; see, also, Estate of Hinckley, 58
Cal. 457.) Decisions from other jurisdictions where a like rule obtains, in
causes similar to that before us, illustrate the nonapplicability of the rule
against perpetuities to the situation presented in the instant case.  (
Armstrong v. Barber, 239 Ill. 389 [88 N. E. 246]; Mettler v. Warner, 243 Ill.
600 [134 Am. St. Rep. 388, 90 N. E. 1099]; Belfield v. Booth, 63 Conn. 299 [27
Atl. 585]; Cowherd v. Fleming, 84 W. Va. 227 [100 S. E. 84]; In re Rhodes'
Estate, 147 Pa. St. 227 [23 Atl. 553].) The substance of these cases is set
forth in the statement of the principle in Gray's Rule against Perpetuities,
supra, section 186 et seq.

     The appellants, however, contend that the statutory rules against
restraints on alienation, supra, have application to the instant case for the
reasons set forth in Estate of Walkerly, 108 Cal. 627 [49 Am. St. Rep. 97, 41
Pac. 772], upon which they strongly rely.  The rule against restraints on
alienation has been, in some cases, confused with the rule against perpetuities;
but the two rules, while having the same end in view, viz., that of preventing
undue interference with the freedom of transfer of property, are of entirely
different origin and application.  The rule against perpetuities, engrafted upon
our system by the constitution, relates only to future interests in property,
the vesting of which is to be postponed beyond the allotted time.  The rule
relating to restraints on alienation, on the other hand, is statutory in origin,
and has reference to an undue prevention of the transfer of estates already
vested. This distinction was clearly pointed out in Strong v. Shatto, 45 Cal.
App. 29 [187 Pac. 159], and in Estate of Cavarly, 119 Cal. 406 [51 Pac. 629]. In
the latter case this court said (p. 409): "Our statute is not, properly
speaking, against perpetuities. It simply prohibits restraints  upon
alienation." The Estate of Walkerly, supra, was a case arising under the
provisions of section 715 of the Civil Code, supra, as it read prior to its
amendment in 1917, and which, at the time the facts in the case arose, forbade
restraints on alienation beyond a life or lives in being.  It is clear that the
amendment to the section (par. 2, supra), which permits of alienation "for a
period not exceeding twenty-five years from the time of the creation of the
suspension," if valid, takes this case entirely out of the operation of the
section, since, even if it should be assumed that there is any suspension of
alienation in the instant case, it could at most be only for the period of ten
years.

   The appellants undertake to argue that the amendment to the section is
unconstitutional as in violation of the constitutional rule against
perpetuities, but in so doing they fall with the confusion of terms to which we
have referred, and we find no merit in their contention.  The Estate of
Walkerly, supra, while doubtless sound law as applicable to the facts of that
case and to the state of the law as it then existed, has no application to
either the facts in the present case or the law as it now exists.

     For the foregoing reasons, the probate court was correct in recognizing and
upholding the trust created by the will of the testatrix and, in the exercise of
its power, in the appointment of a trustee in order to carry into effect the
terms of the trust; but it was in error in providing in its decree that title in
fee to the real property should not vest in those entitled thereto, their heirs
and assigns, until August 19, 1934, on which last named date, the decree further
provided, the trust should terminate and the title in fee of all of the real
property should thereupon vest. It should have distributed the real property of
the testatrix to her heirs at law, or their heirs or assigns, subject to the
terms of the trust estate.

   In so far as the court was in error in respect to the above noted portions of
its decree, the judgment is reversed, with instructions to the court below to
make and enter its decree of distribution of the fee of the real estate to the
heirs at law of the testatrix, their heirs or assigns, in accordance with the
laws of succession and subject  to the terms of the aforesaid trust estate. In
all other respects, the judgment is affirmed.


                              70 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             DOROTHY DEL MAR, Plaintiff and Appellant, v. DENNIS G.
               CASPE, as Executor, etc., Defendant and Appellant

                                  No. H004243

            Court of Appeal of California, Sixth Appellate District

           222 Cal. App. 3d 1316; 272 Cal. Rptr. 446; 1990 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 860


                                August 16, 1990

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Santa Cruz County, No. 100149, Christopher
C. Cottle, Judge.

COUNSEL: Robert C. Landry for Plaintiff and Appellant.

Wyckoff, Richardson, Sanson, Allen & Locke-Paddon, Robert K. Johnson and James
A. Kerr for Defendant and Appellant.

JUDGES: Opinion by Capaccioli, J., with Agliano, P. J., and Bamattre-Manoukian,
J., concurring.

OPINION BY: CAPACCIOLI

OPINION

     Statement of the Case

   Plaintiff Dorothy Del Mar filed an action against defendant Dennis G. Caspe
as executor of the estate of decedent Ole Mohus, seeking treble the amount of
allegedly usurious interest she paid to the estate on three promissory notes.
She now appeals from a judgment entered after the trial court found that the
notes were not usurious. On appeal, she claims the notes were usurious.

   Defendant cross-appeals from a postjudgment order denying his motion for an
award of attorney's fees based on fee provisions in the notes.  ( Code Civ.
Proc., § 904.1, subd. (b).)

   We conclude that one of the notes was usurious. We further conclude that it
was error to deny fees on the ground the action did not involve the notes.
Consequently, we reverse the judgment and remand the matter for further
proceedings.

Facts

   The facts are essentially undisputed.

   Mohus and Del Mar had been personal friends since 1954.  At various times
from 1975 to 1986, Mohus loaned her money.

   In 1982, Mohus retained Caspe, a licensed attorney and real estate broker. He
told Caspe about the loans to Del Mar and explained that periodically he would
have a new promissory note and deed of trust drawn up and executed.  At that
time, he presented Caspe with various checks from Del Mar and asked him to
figure out the current amount due, calculate the interest on advances, and
prepare a new note and deed of trust. Caspe also  checked for prior encumbrances
on Del  Mar's real property and discovered that Mohus had a second deed of
trust.

   Caspe calculated the balance due of $ 37,430.84, and prepared the note.  It
provided a 15 percent interest rate, which, based upon information from lender
quotations and industry publications, he determined to be below the market rate
for second deeds of trust. The note was payable on August 1, 1982, or upon the
sale of Del Mar's residence, the real property securing the note, and it
"replace[d] all prior notes between the parties." On March 19, 1982, Mohus,
Caspe, and Del Mar met, and Del Mar executed the note.

   Between April and August 1982, Mohus made numerous advances to Del Mar, and
in September, Mohus instructed Caspe to prepare a new note and trust deed
reflecting the advances.  Caspe did as he had done before.  The new note was for
$ 42,430.84, provided for 15 percent interest, came due on August 1, 1983, or
upon sale of Del Mar's residence, and superseded all previous notes.  On
September 10, 1982, Del Mar executed this note.

   Thereafter, at various times until January 1986, Mohus advanced Del Mar
additional sums.  In January, Caspe had several conversations with Mohus and Del
Mar about a new note.  Del Mar expected an interest rate of 12 percent, whereas
Mohus expected the same 15 percent he had previously received.  Caspe negotiated
between them, and they eventually agreed to a rate of 13 percent, which was
below the market rate.  Caspe then prepared the note, including the advances.
It was for $ 80,933.21, provided for 13 percent interest, came due on April 30,
1986, or upon the sale of Del Mar's residence, and superseded all previous
notes.  Del Mar executed this note on January 30, 1986.

   Mohus died before this last note came due.  On May 2, 1986, Caspe, executor
of Mohus's estate, wrote Del Mar and demanded payment plus interest.  Del Mar
paid the note in full "under extreme protest."

   At all relevant times, Caspe was an attorney licensed to practice in
California.  Caspe was also a licensed real estate broker from October 1977 to
October 1985, and from June 1986 to the date of trial.

   Discussion

The Appeal

   Del Mar contends that the trial court erred in concluding that because the
three notes were "made or arranged" by a licensed real estate broker  and/or
licensed attorney, they were exempt from the constitutional prohibition against
usury. (See Cal. Const., art. XV.)

The Law

   Article XV of the California Constitution (hereafter article XV) provides,
among other things, that the maximum allowable rate of interest that may be
charged on a loan for "personal, family, or household purposes" is 10 percent
per year. 1 (Cal. Const., art. XV, § 1, subd. (1).)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Article
XV provides in relevant part, "The rate of interest upon the loan or forbearance
of any money, . . . shall be 7 percent per annum but it shall be competent for
the parties to any loan or forbearance of any money, . . . to contract in
writing for a rate of interest: [para.](1) For any loan or forbearance of any
money, . . . for use primarily for personal, family, or house-hold purposes, at
a rate not exceeding 10 percent per annum; . . ."

   Neither party contends that the loans from Mohus to Del Mar were not for
"personal, family, or household purposes."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    In 1979, the Legislature proposed and the electorate enacted Proposition 2,
an amendment to article XV.  Among other things, Proposition 2 exempted from the
interest rate ceiling "any loans made or arranged by any person licensed as a
real estate broker by the State of California and secured in whole or in part by
liens on real property." (Assem. Const. Amend. No. 52 (Stats. 1979 (Reg. Sess.)
res. ch. 49, pp. 4860-4862.).)

   In 1983, the Legislature sought to explain the scope of article XV by adding
section 1916.1 to the Civil Code (hereafter section 1916.1).  (Stats. 1983, ch.
307, § 1, p. 899.) As amended in 1985 (Stats. 1985, ch. 489, § 1, pp.
1837-1838), section 1916.1 provides in relevant part, "The restrictions  upon
rates of interest contained in Section 1 of Article XV of the California
Constitution shall not apply to any loan or forbearance made or arranged by any
person licensed as a real estate broker by the State of California, and secured,
directly or collaterally, in whole or in part by liens on real property. For
purposes of this section, a loan or forbearance is arranged by a person licensed
as a real estate broker when the broker (1) acts for compensation or in
expectation of compensation for soliciting, negotiating, or arranging the loan
for another . . . .   (See fn. 2.) The term 'made or arranged' includes any loan
made by a person licensed as a real estate broker as a principal or as an agent
for others, and whether or not the person is acting within the course and scope
of such license." 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   It is
settled that section 1916.1 is retroactive to loans made before the date of its
enactment and amendment.  ( Stickel v. Harris (1987) 196 Cal.App.3d 575, 582,
fn. 5 [242 Cal.Rptr. 88], and cases cited there.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

The Trial Court's Findings

   In its statement of decision, the trial court found that Caspe "did make and
arrange" all three loans from Mohus to Del Mar.

    The trial court based this finding on the following facts: "(1) Caspe
conducted an informal title search by obtaining recorded encumbrances against
the Plaintiff's property.  [para.](2) Caspe reviewed the recorded encumbrances
and prior notes and deeds of trust executed by Plaintiff to determine their
effect on subject transaction.  [para.](3) Caspe consulted with the lender, Ole
Mohus, and advised the lender, Ole Mohus, of his rights and obligations as well
as the potential problem areas of the subject transaction.  [para.]4. Caspe
reviewed the advance clauses contained in the deeds of trust and discussed the
effect of the advance clauses with the lender, Ole Mohus, and cautioned the
lender, Ole Mohus, about the legal consequences of making advances without a
prior signed promissory note. [para.]5. Caspe reviewed the checks and other
documents evidencing advances made by the lender, Ole Mohus, to the borrower,
Plaintiff.  [para.]6. Caspe calculated the principal amount of the prior loan
and the principal amount of future advances.  [para.]7. Caspe calculated
interest on the prior principal amount and calculated interest on future
advances.  [para.]8. Caspe calculated the amount of the new note by totalling
the prior principal plus interest on principal plus the amount of the new
advances plus interest on the new advances.  [para.]9. Caspe prepared three
promissory notes and two deeds of trust. Caspe secured the January, 1986 note by
the January, 1982 deed  of trust. [para.]10. Caspe discussed the terms of the
new notes and deeds of trust with the lender, Ole Mohus, and advised lender how
calculation was made.  [para.]11. Caspe discussed terms of new notes and deeds
of trust with borrower (Plaintiff) and advised borrower how principal and
interest on notes was calculated. [para.]12. Caspe obtained borrower's signature
on new notes and deeds of trust. [para.]13. Caspe notarized deeds of trust.
[para.]14. Caspe caused deeds of trust to be recorded.  [para.]15. Caspe
negotiated interest on January, 1986 loan with borrower and lender. [para.]16.
Caspe calculated and collected payoff of January, 1986 note (i.e., calculated
amount of principal and interest due for payoff of January, 1986 note and made
demand on escrow holder).  [para.]17. Caspe charged a fee for his services in
making and arranging the loans."

   Del Mar does not claim that these preliminary factual findings are not
supported by substantial evidence. Rather, she challenges the court's conclusion
that these acts constitute "making" or "arranging" a loan within the meaning of
article XV and section 1916.1.  She argues that they are insufficient as a
matter of law.

   The Standard   of Review

     "In usury cases the trier of fact is vested with the power to resolve many
issues attending and including the ultimate question of whether a particular
transaction is usurious." ( Stickel v. Harris, supra, 196 Cal.App.3d 575, 584.)
This power includes the determination as to  whether  a particular loan was
"made or arranged" by a licensed real estate broker. (Ibid.) Our task on appeal
is merely to view all factual matters in favor of the prevailing party and in
support of the judgment, disregarding evidence to the contrary, and decide
whether there is any substantial evidence, contradicted or uncontradicted, to
support the findings and conclusions of the trier of fact.  ( Nestle v. City of
Santa Monica (1972) 6 Cal.3d 920, 925 [101 Cal.Rptr. 568, 496 P.2d 480]; Estate
of Teel (1944) 25 Cal.2d 520, 527 [154 P.2d 384]; Stickel v. Harris, supra, 196
Cal.App.3d 575, 584; Louis & Diederich, Inc. v. Cambridge European Imports, Inc.
(1987) 189 Cal.App.3d 1574, 1584 [234 Cal.Rptr. 889].)

The Meaning of "Made or Arranged"

     In this case, we agree with Del Mar that the evidence of Caspe's conduct as
a matter of law does not establish that he "made" the loans in question.  This
is so because a loan is "made" by a licensed real estate broker within the
meaning of article XV and section 1916.1 "when the broker acts as a principal in
the transaction by lending his own money." ( Winnett v. Roberts (1986) 179
Cal.App.3d 909, 917 [225 Cal.Rptr. 82]; see Green v. Future Two (1986) 179
Cal.App.3d 738, 742 [225 Cal.Rptr. 3]; Orden v. Crawshaw Mortgage & Investment
Co. (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 141, 144-145 [167 Cal.Rptr. 62].) It is undisputed
that Caspe was not a principal in the loans made to Del Mar and did not lend his
own money.

     Thus, the issue is whether the trial court's factual findings support its
conclusion that Capse "arranged" the loans.

   "Courts and commentators have observed that the meaning of 'arranged' is
unclear.  Standing alone and without explication, 'arranged' fails to convey
precisely what activities on the part of a licensed real estate broker
constitute arrangement of a loan.  [Citations.] Like many other words in common
usage [citations], 'arranged' is a term of amorphous dimensions." ( Winnett v.
Roberts, supra, 179 Cal.App.3d 909, 917-918.) Under the circumstances,
therefore, we may look to the legislative history and intent of the exemption
for help in determining the meaning of its terms.  ( Id. at p. 918.) To this
end, we consider the ballot summary, arguments, and analysis for Proposition 2
presented to the electorate and the findings made by the Legislature in enacting
section 1916.1.  ( Id. at pp. 918-920.)

   The ballot pamphlet analysis by the legislative analyst accompanying
Proposition 2 states: "The Constitution specifically exempts the following
lenders from the usury law: savings and loan associations, state and national
banks, industrial loan companies, credit unions, pawnbrokers, personal property
brokers and agricultural cooperatives." However, "loans made or  arranged by any
person licensed as a real estate broker by the State of California and secured
in whole or in part by liens on real property are subject to a 10 percent
interest rate ceiling. Such loans are commonly made by mortgage brokers and
mortgage bankers.  Under this measure such loans would be exempt from the
constitutional limitations on interest rates that may be charged." (Ballot
Pamp., Special Statewide Elec. (Nov. 6, 1979) p. 10.)

   The argument in favor of Proposition 2 explained that current usury law,
"limited the price which many lenders could charge for the use of money to 10
percent.  Unfortunately, inflation and other factors have made that limit
unrealistic.  [para.]Because 10 percent is not enough today, many lenders no
longer loan money in California (although others who are now exempt from the
Usury Law still do).  For example, mortgage bankers, who last year provided $ 13
billion for housing loans in California, are limited to a 10 percent rate and in
1979 have practically abandoned providing conventional mortgage loans.
[para.]This shortage of money is curtailing the building of new homes,
apartments, stores, and factories to provide needed new jobs.  Because this
reduces competition among lenders, it actually forces interest rates up on money
from lenders now exempt from the Usury Law.  [para.]Now,  it might seem good to
be able to have a law which limited the price  of a loaf of bread to 10 cents;
but, if we had such a law, there would be no bread or only black market bread.
We are approaching that stage on the availability of extra money -- for a family
to buy a home, an employer to buy a new factory, tools, a store, or some other
job-creating opportunity.  [para.]Proposition 2 deals with that problem in
realistic and controlled circumstances.  [para.]It is complex and technical
because both the law and the money market are complex and technical.
Proposition 2 is explained in the Legislative Analyst's analysis in this
pamphlet with text of the changes.  [para.]An important fact is that this
constitutional provision retains present provisions enabling a control by law on
'the maximum rate per annum' and on fees or other compensation -- a vital
control against abuse.  Proposition 2 removes the arbitrary, inflexible, and
unrealistic constitutional limits on nonconsumer loans and on exemptions which
have severely limited the flow of money to California to buy homes, create job
opportunities, and for other purposes." (Ballot Pamp., supra, at p. 12, italics
in original.)

   We turn now to section 1916.1.  In its uncodified provisions, the Legislature
declared "that the Legislature in adopting ACA 52 in 1979 . . . , and the people
in approving that measure as Proposition 2 . . . , established an additional
class exempt from interest rate limitations for persons licensed as real estate
brokers by the State of California on the basis that real estate brokers are
qualified by the state on the basis of education, experience, and examination,
and that the licenses of real estate brokers can be revoked or  suspended if
real estate brokers perform acts involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit with
intent to substantially benefit themselves or others, or to substantially injure
others." (Stats. 1983, ch. 307, § 2, p. 899.) 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   We note
that to obtain a real estate brokers license, an applicant must have two years
previous experience as a licensed real estate salesman, or equivalent general
experience in real estate, or a four-year college degree that includes a
specialization in real estate. ( Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10150.6.) The Real Estate
Commissioner is authorized to require proof and to call hearings concerning the
honesty and truthfulness of applicants.  (Id., § 10152.) Applicants must pass a
written examination that tests knowledge of real estate law, the canons of
ethics related to real estate practice, and the regulations of the Real Estate
Commissioner.  (Id., § 10153.) Finally, an applicant must provide evidence of
having satisfied certain educational requirements.  (Id., §§ 10153.2-10153.3.)

   After one becomes a broker, his or her license may be suspended or revoked
not only for the wrongful or negligent performance of licensed activities, but
also for violations of the Franchise Investment Law ( Corp. Code, § 31000 et
seq.), fraudulent or dishonest dealings, or conviction for a crime involving
moral turpitude, regardless of whether the broker was acting in a licensed
capacity at the time.  ( Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10177, subds. (b), (j), (m).)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      The Legislature's interpretation of article XV is not unreasonable.  Thus,
we accept it as controlling.  ( Winnett v. Robert, supra, 179 Cal.App.3d 909,
921 [225 Cal.Rptr. 82]; Garcia v. Wetzel (1984) 159 Cal.App.3d 1093, 1097 [206
Cal.Rptr. 251]; In re Lara (9th Cir. 1984) 731 F.2d 1455, 1459; see Methodist
Hosp. of Sacramento v. Saylor (1971) 5 Cal.3d 685, 692-694 [97 Cal.Rptr. 1, 488
P.2d 161].)

   To summarize, it appears the electorate considered the real estate broker
exemption necessary to increase the availability of money for nonconsumer loans
and essential to the future economic well-being of California and its citizens.
(See fn. 4.) The electorate and Legislature further considered the licensing
requirements for and regulatory control over real estate brokers sufficient to
protect the borrowing public from usury and dishonest real estate brokers. 4

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   Usury
laws are designed to protect the public from sharp operators who would take
advantage of "unwary and necessitous borrowers." ( Buck v. Dahlgren (1972) 23
Cal.App.3d 779, 787 [100 Cal.Rptr. 462]; White v. Seitzman (1964) 230 Cal.App.2d
756, 761 [41 Cal.Rptr. 359, 16 A.L.R.3d 500]; Wooton v. Coerber (1963) 213
Cal.App.2d 142, 148 [28 Cal.Rptr. 635].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      The foregoing background suggests that a broad rather than narrow
construction of the exemption is appropriate and most apt to realize its
purpose.

   The provisions of section 1916.1, as written and construed, tend to support
this view.

    For example, under this section, the exemption for making a loan applies
even if the broker is not acting in a licensed capacity as when the broker is
lending his or her own money.  ( Stickel v. Harris, supra, 196 Cal.App.3d 575,
583, fn. 7.) Thus, a loan by a broker at 250 percent interest was held exempt
from the interest rate ceiling. ( Garcia v. Wetzel, supra, 159 Cal.App.3d 1093,
1097-1098; see also In re Lara, supra, 731 F.2d 1455, 1458-1462 [loan by broker
at over 15 percent interest exempt].) Presumably, the regulatory control over
brokers is considered sufficient to deter and protect against the evils of usury
and fraudulent, dishonest, or unfair practices by the lending broker. (But see
Garcia v. Wetzel, supra, 159 Cal.App.3d 1093, 1098-1100 (dis. opn. of White, P.
J.); Comment, The Usury Exemption:   Should It Apply to Real Estate Brokers
Making Loans? (1986) 26 Santa Clara L. Rev. 403.)

   We further observe that the exemption for "arranging" a loan applies if the
licensed broker "acts for compensation or in expectation of compensation for
soliciting, negotiating, or arranging the loan for another[.]" (§ 1916.1,
italics added.)

   In enumerating soliciting, negotiating, and arranging, the Legislature
recognized the broad range of services that a broker may perform that would
render the exemption applicable.  Significantly, it also distinguished the acts
of soliciting, negotiating, and arranging from each other.  Thus, although these
functions may overlap, listing them in the disjunctive clearly indicates an
intent that the exemption apply when the broker performs any one of these
services. 5

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   In 4
Miller and Starr, California Real Estate (2d ed. 1989) section 10:28, page 766,
the authors opine that the exemption for "arranging" a loan should apply only
upon proof that the lender was the "'procuring cause' for the loan." They
suggest "that a broker who has 'arranged' a loan is one who has (1) introduced
the parties to each other; (2) assisted the borrower in the preparation of the
loan application and supporting documentation; (3) negotiated the terms of the
loan, not only as to term and interest, but also as to the other negotiable
terms; and (4) received compensation for such services." (Ibid.)

   Obviously, proof of all four circumstances would be sufficient to establish
that a broker "arranged" a loan.  However, neither section 1916.1 nor the
relevant case law, which we will discuss, suggests that proof of all four is or
should be required to establish that a loan has been "arranged" by a real estate
broker. (See Jones v. Kallman (1988) 199 Cal.App.3d 131 [244 Cal.Rptr. 609];
Green v. Future Two, supra, 179 Cal.App.3d 738; Chapman v. Farr (1982) 132
Cal.App.3d 1021 [183 Cal.Rptr. 606]; In re Lara, supra, 731 F.2d 1455.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Finally, we note that section 1916.1 does not require or indicate that the
exemption applies only if the broker is somehow involved in determining the
interest rate to be charged on a loan that he or she has solicited, negotiated,
or arranged. Moreover, there is nothing implicit in the common understanding of
these terms that would compel such a view.  (See Madrid v. Justice Court (1975)
52 Cal.App.3d 819, 824 [125 Cal.Rptr. 348] [court should not find hidden
meanings to statutory terms].)

    The relevant case law is consistent with our view that the terms of the
exemption should be given a broad construction so as to effect its purpose.

   In In re Lara, supra, 731 F.2d 1455, 1462-1463, the broker agreed to loan a
certain sum on the condition that the borrowers permit the broker's friend to
lend them half of the funds.  The court opined that merely bringing the friend
into the transaction constituted solicitation within the meaning of section
1916.1.

   In Chapman v. Farr, supra, 132 Cal.App.3d 1021, the exemption was applicable
because the broker "structured" the transaction "as agent"  for his parents.  (
Id. at p. 1026.)

   In Jones v. Kallman, supra, 199 Cal.App.3d 131, the exemption applied where,
"'at the lender's request,'" the broker determined the interest rate and points
to be charged on the loan and similarly set the terms of the forbearance and
reviewed the loan and forbearance documents, which were prepared by  another
nonlicensed person.  ( Id. at p. 135.)

     It is a settled rule of statutory construction that unless otherwise
clearly intended or indicated, statutes should be construed in accordance with
the common or ordinary meaning of the language used, particularly when the law
as so construed is consistent with the general policy of the state.  ( Chavez v.
Sargent (1959) 52 Cal.2d 162, 203 [339 P.2d 801], disapproved on other grounds
in Petri Cleaners, Inc. v. Automotive Employees, etc. Local No. 88 (1960) 53
Cal.2d 455, 473-475 [2 Cal.Rptr. 470, 349 P.2d 76]; Estate of Richartz (1955) 45
Cal.2d 292, 294 [288 P.2d 857].) In essence, we assume  the Legislature "knew
what it was saying and meant what it said." ( Pac. Gas & E. Co. v. Shasta Dam
etc. Dist. (1955) 135 Cal.App.2d 463, 468 [287 P.2d 841].) We believe it
appropriate to apply this rule here.

     The common and ordinary meaning of the word "arrange" includes: "to put in
correct, convenient, or desired order"; to put in order beforehand: make
preparations for"; to effect [usually] by consulting: come to an agreement or
understanding about: settle." (Webster's New Internat.  Dict. (3d ed. 1981) p.
120.)

   Turning to the facts of this case, and given the exemption's legislative
history and purpose, the language of section 1916.1, and the common meaning of
"arrange," we conclude that the services Caspe performed for compensation (title
searches, document reviews, consultation and advisement, calculation of
principal and interest, preparation of loan documents, discussion of documents
and terms with lender and borrower, securing execution of documents) reasonably
fall within the common understanding of the  term "arrange" and "arranging a
loan." His services were not nominal or ostensibly pretextual.  Nor is there
evidence that Caspe merely lent his license to Mohus to avoid the 10 percent
interest limitation.  Rather, Caspe was essential to preparation, execution, and
completion of the loan documents and transaction.

   In sum, therefore, we hold that substantial evidence supports the trial
court's finding that Caspe "arranged" Mohus loans to Del Mar.

   Del Mar argues that if "the consolidation of previous loans and advances into
one current note were to constitute 'arranging' . . . , it would amount to an
easy way to evade the usury laws by simply having a broker draw the new
consolidation note with otherwise usurious interest." We are unpersuaded.

     "'One who contends that a provision of an act must not be applied according
to the natural or customary purport of its language must show either that some
other section of the act expands or restricts its meaning, that the provision
itself is repugnant to the general purview of the act, or that the act
considered in pari materia with other acts, or with the legislative history of
the subject matter, imports a different meaning.'" ( Leroy T. v. Workmen's Comp.
Appeals Bd. (1974) 12 Cal.3d 434, 438 [115 Cal.Rptr. 761, 525 P.2d 665], quoting
2A Sands, Statutes & Statutory Construction (4th ed. of Sutherland, Statutory
Construction, 1973) § 46.01, p. 49.)

     Del Mar has never claimed that the promissory notes in issue do not
represent loans secured by real property and that their execution constituted
loan transactions between Mohus and Del Mar.  The fact that Caspe did not
solicit or negotiate the loans and that they represented consolidation of
previous loans and advances is, in our view, irrelevant to the question of
whether the services Caspe did perform for compensation constituted sufficient
involvement in these transactions to come within the meaning of the term
"arrange." As discussed above, we believe they do.

   Moreover, in rendering his services to Mohus, Caspe needed a license and was
acting in a licensed capacity.  (See Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10131, subd. (d); see
also Stickel v. Harris, supra, 196 Cal.App.3d 575, 583.) And his status as a
licensed broker rendered him vulnerable to scrutiny and potential sanction by
the Real Estate Commissioner if he acted fraudulently or dishonestly.

   Consequently, Del Mar has failed to convince us that Caspe's conduct is not
within the common and ordinary meaning of the word "arrange" or that a narrower,
more technical definition of the word is necessary.

Caspe's Status as a Licensed Attorney

     Del Mar contends that since Caspe was not a licensed real estate broker
when he prepared the 1986 note, that note was not exempt from the constitutional
interest rate ceiling. We agree.

   In its statement of decision, the trial court concluded that even though
Caspe lacked a broker's license when he "arranged" the 1986 note, he
nevertheless was exempt. The court noted that the Constitution exempts, inter
alia, real estate brokers and "any other class of persons authorized by
statute." (Cal. Const., art. XV.) It also pointed out that Business and
Professions Code, sections 10133 and 10133.1 authorize an attorney acting for a
client to perform acts for which a real estate broker's license would otherwise
be required. 6 (See § 10131.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   Business
and Professions Code, section 10131, subdivision (d) provides: "A real estate
broker within the meaning of this part is a person who, for a compensation or in
expectation of a compensation, regardless of the form or time of payment, does
or negotiates to do one or more of the following acts for another or others:
[para.](d) Solicits borrowers or lenders for or negotiates loans or collects
payments or performs services for borrowers or lenders or note owners in
connection with loans secured directly or collaterally by liens on real property
or on a business opportunity."

   Business and Professions Code, section 10133, subdivision (a)(3) provides,
"The acts described in Section 10131 are not acts for which a real estate
license is required if performed by: [para.](3) An attorney at law in rendering
legal services to a client."

   Business and Professions Code, section 10133.1, subdivision (a)(5) provides,
in relevant part, "Subdivisions (d) and (e) of Section 10131 . . . do not apply
to any of the following: [para.](5) Any person licensed to practice law in this
state, not actively and principally engaged in the business of negotiating loans
secured by real property, when that person renders services in the course of his
or her practice as an attorney at law, and the disbursements of that person,
whether paid by the borrower or other person, are not charges or costs and
expenses regulated by or subject to the limitations of Article . . . , provided,
the fees and disbursements shall not be shared, directly or indirectly, with the
person negotiating the loan or the lender."

   Unless otherwise specified, all further statutory references are to the
Business and Professions Code.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The court reasoned that since Caspe was a licensed attorney when he arranged
the 1986 note, he "substantially complied" with the real estate brokers'
licensing requirements and, therefore, enjoyed the benefit of the brokers'
exemption.

   The trial court's analysis is deceptively simple and appealing: since lawyers
are authorized to do what brokers do, why should they not also qualify for the
usury exemption? There are, however, several reasons.

   Initially, we note that article XV explicitly enumerates those who are exempt
from the interest rate ceiling. Lawyers are not listed.   As a  general rule,
where exceptions to a general rule are specified, other exceptions are not to be
implied or presumed.  ( Wildlife Alive v. Chickering (1976) 18 Cal.3d 190, 195
[132 Cal.Rptr. 377, 553 P.2d 537].)

     In addition, since 1979, article XV has authorized the Legislature to
create other statutory exemptions from the interest rate ceiling. As yet,
however, the Legislature has not explicitly decided to create an exemption for
lawyers.

   Despite the Legislature's inaction, the trial court purported to establish
such an exemption, by finding it implicit in the Business and Professions Code.

   First, it does not follow that because sections 10133 and 10133.1 exempt
licensed attorneys working for clients from the statutory brokers license
requirements, they also necessarily exempt licensed attorneys from the totally
unrelated constitutional prohibition against usury. Such an additional exemption
is not naturally or reasonably suggested by the language of these statutes.  And
we have found no legislative history indicating that the Legislature intended
the former exemption to include the latter.  Indeed, the very explicitness of
the existing constitutional exemptions militates against finding usury
exemptions buried implicit in unrelated provisions of the Business and
Professions Code.

   Moreover, if the lawyers exemption from the statutory brokers license
requirement also constituted an exemption from the constitutional interest rate
ceiling, then it could be argued that an exemption should also be implied for
the others, besides lawyers, who are listed in sections 10133 and 10133.1 and
exempted from the brokers license requirement.  These others include, inter
alia, "A regular officer of a corporation or a general partner of a partnership"
(§ 10133, subd. (a)(1)); "A person holding a duly executed power of attorney" (§
10133, subd. (a)(2)); "A receiver, trustee in bankruptcy or other person acting
under order of a court of competent jurisdiction" (§ 10133, subd. (a)(4)); "A
trustee for the beneficiary of a deed of trust" (§ 10133, subd. (a)(5)); "Any
person or employee thereof doing business under any law of this state, any other
state, or of the United States relating to banks, trust companies, savings and
loan associations, industrial loan companies, pension trusts, credit unions, or
insurance companies" (§ 10133.1, subd. (a)(1)); any person licensed as a
"consumer finance lender, or a commercial finance lender when acting under the
authority of that license" (§ 10133.1, subd. (a)(6)); "Any cemetery authority .
. . authorized to do business in this state" (§ 10133.1, subd. (a)(7)); "Any
person authorized in writing by a savings institution to act as an agent of that
institution, . . . when acting under the authority of such written
authorization"  (§ 10133.1, subd. (a)(8)); or "Any person who is licensed as a
securities broker or securities dealer under any law of this state, or of the
United States, or  any employee, officer, or agent of that person, if that
person, employee, officer, or agent is acting within the scope of authority
granted by that license" (§ 10133.1, subd. (a)(9)); "Any lender making a loan
guaranteed or insured by an agency of the federal government" (§ 10133.1, former
subd. (b)).

   We are extremely hesitant to open the door for such a potential flood of
exempt classes.

   We recognize that sections 10133 and 10133.1 exempt several types of lenders
from the brokers license requirement and that some of these lenders are also
explicitly exempted in article XV from the interest rate ceiling, e.g., personal
property brokers, certain types of banks, and certain types of corporations.
This limited overlap, however, suggests that those not separately and expressly
listed in both places do not enjoy both exemptions.

   We also observe that those exempted in article XV are generally in the
business of lending or mortgage brokering.  Their exemptions, in view of the
purpose of the real estate broker's exemption, may be understood as being a
means to increase the amount of funds available for lending and keep down the
cost of borrowing.

   On the other hand, the list of classes exempt from the brokers license
requirement does not focus on lenders or mortgage brokers but rather on those
who may have occasion and need to deal with their own or a client's real
property, which, of course, would include some lenders, but also includes, for
example, cemeteries and those holding powers of attorney.  Given the difference
in focus and purpose between the two kinds of exemptions, we find it difficult,
indeed impossible, to infer that in creating exemptions from the brokers license
requirements, the Legislature intended to exercise its authority, under article
XV, to create exemptions from the interest rate ceiling.

   It could be argued that while it may not be appropriate for all of those
exempted from the brokers license requirement to enjoy a usury exemption, a
lawyers' exemption is appropriate because lawyers, like real estate brokers,
possess expertise and are subject to regulation and disciplinary action.

   There is nothing in sections 10133 and 10133.1 suggesting that lawyers are to
be treated differently from others on the list of exempt classes.  Consequently,
the only reason to single out lawyers for special  treatment would be that we
consider it wise, appropriate,  and safe for lawyers to enjoy the same  usury
exemption as do real estate brokers. Such a conclusion is, however, unmistakably
legislative in nature and, therefore, beyond the proper and appropriate exercise
of our judicial function and power.

     We acknowledge that although courts may not read into a statute an
exception not incorporated therein by the Legislature, they may find implied
exceptions where it is reasonable and necessary to do so to avoid disregarding
or overturning a sound rule of public policy ( Pacific Motor Transport Co. v.
State Bd. of Equalization (1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 230, 235 [104 Cal.Rptr. 558]) or
to avoid absurd and manifestly unjust consequences ( Ex parte Lorenzen (1900)
128 Cal. 431, 439 [61 P. 68]).

     Here, however, we believe the creation of a lawyers exemption is a matter
for the Legislature.

   In light of our discussion, we hold that the exemptions from brokers
licensing requirements for attorneys in sections 10133 and 10133.1 do not also
exempt lawyers from the constitutional limitations on interest rates.

     We next turn to the trial court's finding that Caspe substantially complied
with the real estate brokers licensing requirements and, therefore, was exempt.

   As Caspe notes, the concept of substantial compliance with the real estate
brokers licensing requirements is set forth in case law developed under section
10136.  This section, however, simply provides that to maintain an action for
compensation for brokerage services rendered, a broker must allege and prove
that he or she was a licensed broker at the time the cause of action arose.

   This case does not involve an action for compensation.  Moreover, it is
unclear whether the concept of substantial compliance should apply to defeat the
constitutional command of article XV.

   We need not decide this issue because the evidence does not support a finding
that Caspe substantially complied with the licensing statute.

   Caspe was not a licensed broker when he discussed and prepared the 1986 note.
He was not a licensed broker when the note was executed on January 30, 1986.  He
was not a broker when Mohus died sometime in April 1986.  He was not a broker
when the note came due on April 30, 1986.  And he was not a broker when he wrote
Del Mar on May 2, 1986, demanding that the note be paid.  Only later, in June
1986,  did Caspe reobtain his broker's license.

    These undisputed facts indicate no compliance with the licensing statute.
Indeed, had Caspe not been a licensed attorney, it is doubtful whether he could
have recovered in an action for compensation for the services performed on the
1986 note because he did not have a real estate broker's license either when he
performed the services for Mohus or when the cause of action for compensation
arose, i.e., after the services were rendered.

   Caspe's reliance on Cline v. Yamaga (1979) 97 Cal.App.3d 239, 246 [158
Cal.Rptr. 598], and Brenneman v. Lane (1927) 87 Cal.App. 414 [262 P. 400] is
misplaced.  In Cline, the broker was entitled to sue for a commission because he
was licensed when he performed the services giving rise to the commission.  In
Brenneman, the broker was entitled to sue for a commission because he had a
license when his cause of action for the commission arose.  As noted above,
Caspe did not have a broker's license when he rendered service to Mohus or even
when Del Mar's payment of the note became delinquent and a cause of action
thereon arose.

    Finally, the fact that at all times Caspe as a licensed attorney was
authorized to perform acts without a broker's license does not constitute
substantial compliance with the licensing requirement.  If it did, then, in
effect, licensed attorneys would be exempt from the usury prohibition.  As
previously discussed, however, we believe the creation of such an exemption is
the prerogative of the Legislature.

Conclusion

   In light of our analysis, we conclude that substantial evidence supports the
trial court's finding that the March 1982 and September 1982 notes were not
usurious. However, substantial evidence does not support such a finding as to
the January 1986 note because the note (1) was secured by real property; (2)
charged interest in excess of that permitted by article XV; and (3) was not
"made or arranged" by a licensed real estate broker.

   The Cross-appeal

Attorney's Fees

     Caspe contends the trial court erred in denying the estate's claim for
attorney's fees, which was based on fee provisions in the notes. 7

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   The 1986
note provides, in pertinent part, "If action be instituted on this note I
promise to pay such sum as the Court may fix as attorney's fees."

   Both 1982 notes contained similar clauses.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    In denying Caspe's claim, the trial court stated that "[t]his was not an
action on the contract but an action seeking enforcement of constitutional
protection against usury."

    In Winnett v. Roberts, supra, 179 Cal.App.3d 909, the plaintiffs sued to
enjoin the foreclosure sale of real property under a trust deed securing a
promissory note that called for a 40 percent annual interest rate and that
provided, in pertinent part, "'If action be instituted on this note, I promise
to pay such sum as the Court may fix as attorneys' fees.'" ( Id. at pp. 914, 922
.) The trial court issued a temporary restraining order halting the sale,
conditioned upon plaintiffs paying the principal within five days.  Although
plaintiffs paid the principal, the court denied a preliminary injunction,
stating that the "'note is not usurious because it was arranged by a licensed
real estate broker and is secured by real property.'" ( Id. at pp. 914-915)
After the foreclosure sale, plaintiffs amended their complaint, seeking to set
aside the sale and recover damages on grounds that the note was usurious.  On
appeal, the court declared that "[a]n attorney fee provision in a promissory
note is broad enough to encompass a lawsuit attacking the note as usurious." (
Id. at p. 923.) Thus, the prevailing party was entitled to fees.

   In Thunderbird Investment Corp. v. Rothschild (1971) 19 Cal.App.3d 820 [97
Cal.Rptr. 112], the plaintiffs brought an action seeking to recover treble the
amount of interest paid by them pursuant to the provisions of a promissory note
on the ground the note was usurious. The note contained a fee clause similar to
that in Winnett and those in this case.  ( Id. at p. 830.)

   After commencing the action, the plaintiffs paid the entire amount of
principal and interest due under the terms of the note, reserving their right to
pursue their action for usury. In receiving it, the defendants did not cancel
the promissory note but reserved their right to claim attorney's fees for the
services of their counsel in defending the usury action.  (19 Cal.App.3d at p.
830.)

   Under these circumstances, the appellate court stated that the plaintiffs'
claim that their payment of the note constituted a usurious exaction
"necessarily involved the validity of the provisions of the note relating to
interest and the right of [the defendants] to retain the payment of interest
which they had received pursuant thereto." (19 Cal.App.3d at p. 830.) Thus, the
prevailing party was entitled to fees.

   In this case, Del Mar paid the 1986 note under protest and immediately filed
an action to recover treble the amount of what she considered usurious interest
she had paid.  As in Winnett and Thunderbird, the resolution of her claim
necessarily involved a determination concerning the validity of the interest
provisions in the 1986 note and its predecessors.

   In light of Winnett and Thunderbird, we conclude that the fee provision was
broad enough to support an award of fees  in this action, and the trial court
erred in concluding otherwise.

    We note with interest that in her complaint, Del Mar sought attorney's fees
under the clauses in the notes.  Thus, she believed her action sufficiently
involved the validity of the notes to trigger application of their fee
provisions.

   In reversing her position,  Del Mar now relies on Stout v. Turney (1978) 22
Cal.3d 718 [150 Cal.Rptr. 637, 586 P.2d 1228], McKenzie v. Kaiser-Aetna (1976)
55 Cal.App.3d 84 [127 Cal.Rptr. 275], and Geffen v. Moss (1975) 53 Cal.App.3d
215 [125 Cal. Rptr. 687]. These cases, however, are factually and legally
distinguishable from this case and do not discuss or consider the more pertinent
holdings in Thunderbird Investment Corp. v. Rothschild, supra, 19 Cal.App.3d 820
or Winnett v. Roberts, supra, 179 Cal.App.3d 909. Moreover, we are unpersuaded
by Del Mar's efforts to distinguish this case from Winnett and Thunderbird due
to differences between the nature of those actions and this.  Such differences
are immaterial given the fact that each case required a determination of the
validity of terms in a note containing a fee clause.

   The judgment is reversed and the matter remanded for further proceedings
consistent with the conclusions reached in this opinion.  The parties are to
bear their own costs on appeal.


                              71 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            ROSE MARIE SHEETZ, Plaintiff and Appellant, v. JAMES A.
           EDMONDS, JR., as Real Estate Commissioner, etc., Defendant
           and Respondent; JOHN LIEN et al., Real Parties in Interest
                                 and Appellants

                                  No. B029449

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division Six

           201 Cal. App. 3d 1432; 247 Cal. Rptr. 776; 1988 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 514


                                  May 13, 1988

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of San Luis Obispo County, No. 62829, Warren
C. Conklin, Judge.

COUNSEL: Ronald W. Sabo for Plaintiff and Appellant and for Real Parties in
Interest and Appellants.

John K. Van de Kamp, Attorney General, and Arthur C. de Goede, Assistant
Attorney General, for Defendant and Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Gilbert, J., with Stone (S. J.), P. J., and Abbe, J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: GILBERT

OPINION

     Rose Marie Sheetz appeals the judgment of the trial court denying her
petition for writ of mandamus. ( Code Civ. Proc.,  § 1094.5.) We affirm and hold
that a power of attorney did not exempt her from the  licensing requirements of
the Real Estate Law. ( Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10000 et seq.) 1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Unless
stated otherwise, all statutory references are to the California Business and
Professions Code.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Facts

   From 1983 through 1986, Rose Marie Sheetz managed 23 residential and
commercial properties owned by John and Miriam Lein in San Luis Obispo County.
The Leins employed Sheetz, an unlicensed  property manager, after unsatisfactory
experiences with real estate brokers as managers.  Sheetz solicited tenants,
negotiated leases and collected rents. On October 6, 1986, the Leins executed a
power of attorney empowering Sheetz to perform these specific duties concerning
the properties.

   Mrs. Lein suffered from poor health and Mr. Lein, a commercial fisherman,
often was absent from California.  An administrative law judge found that Sheetz
and the Leins enjoyed a "close personal friendship and caring relationship."
Sheetz received 25 percent of her income from the Leins and spent 10 to 15
percent of her time managing the properties.  She did not manage property for
owners other than the Leins.

   The administrative law judge decided that Sheetz performed these acts in the
capacity of a real estate broker but without a license. He concluded that she
had used a power of attorney to evade the license requirements of the Real
Estate Law. He therefore ordered her to desist from acting as a real estate
broker (§§ 10131, 10133.) The Real Estate Commissioner adopted the decision of
the administrative law judge.  Thereafter, Sheetz filed a petition for writ of
mandamus with the trial  court contending that the law sanctioned her activities
under a power of attorney. (§ 10133, subd. (a)(2).) After the trial court denied
her petition, this appeal followed.

   Discussion

   Sheetz contends that the real estate broker's licensing law expressly allows
her to manage the Leins' property through the power of attorney exemption. (§
10133, subd. (a)(2).) She points out that the Leins enjoyed her friendship and
were unable to manage their properties due to illness and absences from the
state.  She emphasizes that the Leins granted a power of attorney to her alone
and that she did not manage properties for other owners.  Nevertheless, we
decide that the power of attorney granted Sheetz does not exempt her from
licensing.

    It is unlawful for one to act as a real estate broker or real estate
salesman without a license from the Department of Real Estate. (§ 10130.) One
who leases or rents, offers to lease or rent, or collects rents acts as a real
estate broker. (§ 10131, subd. (b).) 2 The license requirement, however, does
not apply to one "holding a duly executed power of attorney from the owner of
the real property with respect to which the acts are performed."  (§ 10133,
subd. (a)(2).) This exemption does not pertain where it is used to evade the
licensing law. (§ 10133, subd. (b).)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Section
10131 provides in part: "A real estate broker . . . is a person who, for a
compensation or in expectation of compensation, regardless of the form or time
of payment, does or negotiates to do one or more of the following acts for
another or others: . . . (b) Leases or rents or offers to lease or rent, or
places for rent, or solicits listings of places for rent, or solicits for
prospective tenants, or negotiates the sale, purchase or exchanges of leases on
real property, or on a business opportunity, or collects rents from real
property, or improvements thereon, or from business opportunities."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Our Supreme Court has concluded that the licensing of those who rent or
collect rents from property for others is a legitimate exercise of the police
power to ensure the integrity of those engaged in the business of real estate. (
Riley v. Chambers (1919) 181 Cal. 589, 593, 597 [185 P. 855, 8 A.L.R. 418].)
Riley v. Chambers, supra, also considered the meaning of the power of attorney
exemption of section 10133 and decided that the exemption "meant written
authority to act for and in place of the principal in  consummating the
transaction as distinguished from merely negotiating it." ( Id., pp. 597-598.)

   The Attorney General has also opined that the power of attorney exemption was
not intended to benefit those engaged in the business of real estate: "The naked
words of the exemption statute permit the argument that the holder of any such
formalized delegation is exempt from real estate licensing requirements.  If
that were true, any unlicnesd [sic] agent or broker could assume to sell the
land of another merely by holding a document designating him as attorney in fact
. . . .  In our view the law permits no such result." (18 Ops.Cal.Atty.Gen. 200,
201 (1951).) Instead, the exemption was to apply in those infrequent
circumstances where personal necessity impelled a property owner to appoint
another as his attorney in fact.  ( Id. at p. 202.)

     We agree with  the Attorney General's opinion that the Legislature intended
the power of attorney exemption to apply only where a property owner is
compelled by personal necessity to empower another to consummate a particular or
isolated transaction. Any other interpretation would defeat the purpose of the
licensing scheme by allowing unlicensed persons to conduct the business of real
estate. Indeed, subdivision (b) of section  10133 specifically prohibits the use
or attempted use of the power of attorney exemption to evade the licensing
requirement.

   Here substantial evidence exists that Sheetz engaged in the business of real
estate without a license. For four years she executed tasks that the Leins had
employed real estate brokers to perform.  Although she may have enjoyed the
Leins' friendship and their personal necessities may have required a property
manager, these factors are not determinative.  Sheetz received compensation for
consistently performing tasks that require licensure under the Real Estate Law.
It is not relevant that the Leins appreciated and were satisfied with her
services.  Since she was not licensed, the decision of the Real Estate
Commissioner was correct.

   The  Real Estate Commissioner contends that Sheetz's reference to a
subsequent administrative proceeding concerning her continued property
management for the Leins is outside the administrative record here.  He is
correct and we disregard this reference.  ( Cal. Rules of Court, rule 18; Gold
v. Los Angeles Democratic League (1975) 49 Cal.App.3d 365, 372, fn. 1 [122
Cal.Rptr. 732].) We also agree that the Leins are not proper parties to this
proceeding since their consent to Sheetz's activities cannot cure her violation
of the Real Estate Law.

   Accordingly, the judgment is affirmed.


                              72 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            VIRGINIA LEE RHOADES, Plaintiff and Appellant, v. W. A.
               SAVAGE, as Real Estate Commissioner, Defendant and
                                   Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 26459

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Three

            219 Cal. App. 2d 294; 32 Cal. Rptr. 885; 1963 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2374


                                August 13, 1963

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied September 10,
1963, and Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court was Denied
October 9, 1963.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  Eugene P. Fay, Judge.

   Proceeding in mandamus to annul an order of the Real Estate Commissioner
suspending plaintiff's licenses as real estate broker, inactive real estate
salesman, and business opportunity broker.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1a) (1b) (1c) Brokers--Licenses--Suspension.  --In a mandamus proceeding to
annul an order of the Real Estate Commissioner suspending petitioner's licenses
as a real estate broker, as an inactive real estate salesman, and as a business
opportunity broker, the trial court properly found that petitioner was proven
guilty of conduct constituting dishonest dealing and of conduct that would have
warranted denial of an application for a real estate or business opportunity
license, though not guilty of conduct constituting fraud, where it was shown
that petitioner had falsely represented to her principals that she expected to
consummate a deal for them with certain prospective buyers at a time when she
had abandoned all efforts to negotiate such sale and was working toward a
transaction between such buyers and another, who subsequently acquired title to
the principals' property through foreclosure of a trust deed.

(2) Id.--Licenses--Suspension--Review.  --In a mandamus proceeding questioning
an order of the Real Estate Commissioner suspending a broker's license, a
conflict in the testimony before the commissioner as to a material fact, which
conflict is resolved by the commissioner, is not subject to review.

(3) Id.--Duties--Good Faith.  --A real estate broker's ignorance of his duty of
fidelity to his principal cannot excuse a violation of such duty.

(4) Id.--Licenses.  --The word "honesty" as used in the licensing provisions of
the Real Estate Law has the broadest possible meaning.

(5) Words and Phrases--"Truthfulness."  --"Truthfulness" means "the truth, the
whole truth and nothing but the truth," and one who makes a statement, while
withholding material facts, in the expectation that the facts stated will be
relied on by another, and creates thereby a false understanding, is as guilty of
untruthfulness as if the facts stated were untrue.

(6) Brokers -- Licenses -- Suspension -- Review.  -- In a mandamus proceeding to
annul an order of the Real Estate Commissioner suspending petitioner's licenses
as a real estate broker, as an inactive real estate salesman, and as a business
opportunity broker, on the ground of dishonest conduct, where the issue was
whether petitioner concealed from her principals secret dealings with the holder
of a trust deed on their property and certain prospective buyers, the trial
court did not err in sustaining an objection to testimony that petitioner's
principals had been informed that the holder of the trust deed was planning to
sell it on foreclosure to these buyers, such testimony being immaterial to the
issue.

(7) Id.--Licenses--Suspension--Hearing: Trial--Findings--Opinion of Judge as
Impeaching Findings.  --Tentative views expressed by the court as the trial
progressed cannot be used to impeach its findings and conclusions. Thus in a
mandamus proceeding to annul an order of the Real Estate Commissioner suspending
certain licenses of petitioner on the ground that petitioner engaged in conduct
which constituted dishonesty in violation of Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10176, subd.
(i), the court's conclusion sustaining the commissioner could not be impeached
by statements made by the court at trial allegedly indicating its belief that
petitioner's conduct was a violation of Bus. & Prof. Code, subd. (d), which
prohibits acting for more than one party to a transaction without knowledge or
consent of all the parties.

COUNSEL: Kennedy & Downes, Brian J. Kennedy and Edward P. Downes for Plaintiff
and Appellant.

Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, and Warren J. Abbott, Deputy Attorney General,
for Defendant and Respondent.

JUDGES: Shinn, P. J.  Ford, J., and Files, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: SHINN

OPINION

     This is an appeal by Virginia Lee Rhoades from a judgment of the superior
court denying her petition for mandate for annulment of an order of the State
Real Estate Commissioner by which her license as a real estate broker, her
license as an inactive real estate salesman, and her license as a business
opportunity broker were suspended for 30 days.  The order in question also
suspended for 30 days the license of Hubert Dean Rhoades, husband of Virginia,
as  a real estate broker, and he joined Virginia in the proceeding in mandate
for annulment of the order insofar as it affected him.  By the judgment of the
court the order was annulled as to Hubert, and the commissioner has not
appealed.

   In the proceeding before the commissioner both petitioners were accused of
violation of sections of the Business and Professions Code, namely, sections
10176, subdivision (a) (making a substantial misrepresentation); 10176,
subdivision (b) (making false promises of a character likely to influence,
persuade or induce); 10176, subdivision (d) (acting for more than one party in a
transaction without the knowledge or consent of all parties thereto); 10176,
subdivision (i) (engaging in conduct which constituted fraud or dishonesty); and
10177, subdivision (f) (acting in a manner which would have warranted denial of
an application for a real estate license); and as to Virginia, that she had
acted in a manner which would have warranted a denial of her application for a
business opportunity license (§ 10302, subd. (e)).  Petitioners were found
guilty by the commissioner of violation of subdivisions (a) and (i) of section
10176, of section 10177, subdivision (f), and Virginia, only, of violation of
section 10302, subdivision (e), but petitioners were not found guilty of
violations of subdivisions (b) or (d) of section 10176.

   After a trial in which the court received and considered the transcript of
the proceedings before the commissioner and certain oral evidence on behalf of
petitioners, the court found and determined that the findings and conclusions of
the commissioner with respect to the charges against Virginia were fully
supported by the evidence, except that the court did not determine that Virginia
had been guilty of conduct constituting fraud.  The court found that Virginia
was guilty of violation of section 10176, subdivision (b) (making a false
promise) but this finding will be disregarded, since the commissioner made no
such finding.  The court determined that the findings of the commissioner as to
Hubert were without support in the evidence.  In other respects, the findings of
the court did not differ materially from those of the commissioner.

   During the trial petitioners offered the testimony of one Howard R. Rogers,
who did not testify in the administrative hearing.  An objection to the offer
was sustained.  Upon the appeal it is contended that the court erred in not
receiving the testimony of Rogers, the findings are without support in the
evidence and that the court in reality found Virginia guilty of violation of
section 10176, subdivision (d) (acting  for more than one party in a transaction
without the knowledge or consent of all parties thereto), whereas the
commissioner had not found her guilty of that alleged violation.

     We need to discuss only the court's findings that Virginia was proven
guilty of conduct which constituted dishonest dealing and of conduct which would
have warranted the denial of an application for a real estate or business
opportunity license. These findings in our opinion have support in the evidence.
Also, we agree with the court that the evidence before the commissioner was
insufficient to justify a finding that Virginia had been guilty of conduct
constituting fraud.

   The material facts were the following.  February 25, 1960, Earl M. Burdo and
his wife (to be referred to as Burdo) owned a home on Virazon Drive in La Habra;
they gave Virginia and Hubert, doing business as Rhoades Realty, the exclusive
right as their agent to sell the property until September 25, 1960; Carl Huff
was a real estate broker associated with Rhoades Realty; in July, Glenn M.
Farrell and wife (to be referred to as Farrell) made a written offer through
Huff to purchase the property for $ 34,000; Paul Beidleman, who had sold the
property to Burdo, was the holder of a second deed of trust on the property and
the offer of Farrell was conditioned upon Beidleman's accepting in exchange for
the trust deed lien a vacant lot and the equity in another house in La Habra.
When the proposal was made to Beidleman it was rejected.  July 16th, documents
were prepared for the purchase of the property by Farrell from Beidleman,
conditioned upon Beidleman's acquiring title to the property through foreclosure
of his trust deed. Huff caused the preparation of these documents.  Virginia
presented the proposal to Beidleman, who declined to execute the documents, but
indicated that the proposal would be acceptable to him, provided he should
acquire title through foreclosure. August 1st, the unsigned documents were
placed with an escrow company and Virginia supplied the information with respect
to the matter of consideration which would be necessary for the closing of an
escrow if one should be entered into by Farrell and Beidleman.  Title was
acquired by Beidleman under foreclosure August 18th and thereafter the sale to
Farrell was consummated. A commission was paid to petitioners in the amount of $
1,428, and $ 612, in addition, was paid to Huff.

   There was uncontradicted evidence that Virginia did not inform  Burdo of the
proposal of Farrell to purchase the property from Beidleman and that Burdo had
no knowledge or information concerning that  transaction.  There was also
evidence before the commissioner that after the first offer of Farrell's was
rejected Virginia continued to assure Burdo that the Farrells still wanted the
property and were trying to sell their lot in order to make a down payment.  It
is noteworthy that when Burdo questioned Mr. Rhoades he replied that he did not
know anything about the deal; however, Virginia assured Mrs. Burdo that she
expected the Farrells in the office at any time with a check as they wanted the
place "very badly." Mrs. Burdo testified that even two hours before the
foreclosure Virginia told her that the Farrells "might be in any time with a
check; in fact, they had been [in] a couple of nights before with the check, but
it wasn't certified." Burdo had no written offer from any other prospective
purchaser.  Mr. Burdo testified that Virginia suggested that the property be
listed with other brokers but he replied that she had an exclusive and if others
wanted to deal they had to deal through her.  He testified that up until the
time of the foreclosure Virginia kept telling him "'Don't worry -- we will sell
it -- the Farrells want the property.' That was right up until the day of
foreclosure." He also testified that no one told him "about another transaction
wherein the same Farrells were the prospective purchasers." Virginia did not
testify to having informed Burdo of the proposed deal between Farrell and
Beidleman; the only testimony that she gave touching that subject was that Burdo
said to her in her office: "I suppose Mr. Beidleman will sell it directly to
him," if Beidleman got it back, and that nobody would have any control over it.
She testified that she personally presented to Beidleman the second offer
submitted by the Farrells.  She denied having assured the Burdos shortly before
the foreclosure that the Farrells had again offered to purchase the property
from them.   This conflict in the testimony as to a material fact was resolved
by the commissioner in favor of the testimony of Mr. and Mrs. Burdo, and, of
course, the conflict is not subject to review.

     As previously mentioned, the trial court impliedly found that Virginia was
not guilty of conduct constituting fraud, but did find that she was guilty of
dishonesty.

   Although we agree with the implied finding of the trial court that Virginia
had no intention to defraud Burdo, whether she was guilty of dishonest conduct
is another matter.

    Dishonesty is a term of broad meaning and the situations in which it may
become manifest are infinite.  Definitions of the term which the court found
useful were stated in Hogg v. Real Estate Comr., 54 Cal.App.2d 712 [129 P.2d
709]. It was held that a real estate broker was not guilty of dishonesty for
refusing to return money to a client where the broker acted in good faith, and
the duty to return the money was debatable.

     In the present case the question is not whether Virginia believed she had a
legal right to undercut Burdo by dealing secretly on the side with Beidleman.
The most that can be said in her favor is that she did not understand she was
acting in violation of a legal duty. But her ignorance of her duty of fidelity
could not excuse her.

   Nothing could be more important in the qualification of one to act as the
agent of another than a full understanding of the essential duties and
obligations of the relationship.  The commissioner may refuse to grant an
application for a real estate license if the applicant does not furnish proof of
"honesty, truthfulness and good reputation" and the license may be suspended for
the same reasons ( Bus. & Prof. Code, §§ 10150- 10152), and before granting a
real estate license the commissioner must be shown that in addition to proof of
honesty, truthfulness and good character the applicant has a "general and fair
understanding of the obligations between principal and agent, of the principles
of real estate practice and the canons of business ethics pertaining thereto, .
. ." etc.  ( Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10153, subd. (c).)

     No doubt the word "honesty" as used in these sections has the broadest
possible meaning.  It has been defined as "a fastidious allegiance to the
standards of one's profession, calling or position; fairness and
straightforwardness of conduct, speech, integrity; truthfulness; freedom from
fraud." (Webster's New International Dictionary, Second Edition.) There can be
no escape from the conclusion that the conduct of Virginia was not reconcilable
with honesty.  Truthfulness means "the truth, the whole truth and nothing but
the truth." One who makes a statement in the expectation that the facts stated
will be relied upon by another, and who withholds material facts and thereby
creates a false understanding, is as guilty of untruthfulness as he would be if
the facts he stated were untrue.   There was evidence that Mrs. Rhoades falsely
represented to Burdo  that she expected to consummate a deal for them with
Farrell, even after she learned that Farrell's offer to Beidleman was acceptable
to him and that a sale would be consummated as soon as Beidleman acquired title
to the property.  In concealing from Burdo that she had abandoned all further
effort to negotiate a sale by Burdo to Farrell, Mrs. Rhoades was guilty of a
failure to tell the truth and of deceit.  There are precepts of conduct in
matters of business that are universally recognized, and of these no one can be
permitted to profess ignorance. Lack of understanding can furnish no excuse for
failure to conform one's conduct to accepted standards of honesty and
truthfulness.

   We must agree with the trial court and the commissioner that the conduct of
Mrs. Rhoades was so lacking in honesty and truthfulness as to have furnished
reason for denial of an application for a real estate or business opportunity
license and a reason for suspension of her licenses.

     After the commissioner had made his order petitioners applied for a
reconsideration. They offered a declaration of Mr. Rogers respecting a
conversation he had had with Burdo in which the latter said that Beidleman was
planning to sell the property to a school teacher (Farrell was a school
teacher); he, Rogers, had later had a talk with Mrs. Rhoades in which he failed
to relate to her this remark of Burdo's.  The petition for reconsideration was
denied.  In the trial petitioners called Rogers and offered to prove the
foregoing facts.  Objection was made that diligence had not been shown to
produce Rogers as a witness at the hearing, and upon other grounds.  The matter
was discussed at length and the court ruled that the testimony of Rogers could
have been produced at the hearing in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and
that it would not change the result in that it "in no wise indicates that Mr.
Burdo had any knowledge that Mrs. Rhoades was in fact during the time of her
exclusive agency was dealing with Mr. Beidleman as a prospective buyer [seller]"
etc.  The testimony would have been immaterial to the issue, which was whether
Mrs. Rhoades concealed from Burdo her secret dealings with Beidleman and
Farrell.  The fact that Burdo suspected that after the foreclosure Beidleman
might sell to Farrell could not excuse Virginia's failure to tell Burdo that she
had switched her allegiance from him to Beidleman.  And it is illogical to claim
that Burdo should have suspected that she might be trying to sell the property
for Beidleman when she was at the same time assuring him that she was about to
sell it for him.  The testimony of Rogers would have been of no benefit to her
and its exclusion was not error.

     In appellant's brief it is said "The findings in the record are no more nor
less than camouflage." It is argued at length that the court believed that
Virginia was guilty of violation of subdivision (d) of section 10176 (acting for
more than one party in a transaction without the knowledge or consent of all the
parties), and that that was the whole case against her.  The argument is built
upon numerous statements of the court which characterized appellant's conduct as
"double dealing,"  and indicated the belief that it was in violation of
subdivision (d).  There was a vast amount of discussion between the court and
counsel upon the nature of the violations, and it would have been remarkable if,
in saying so much, only the matured thoughts of the participants would have been
expressed.  Appellant's argument does not possess merit.  It is true that the
court was of the opinion that appellant's conduct amounted to "dual
representation," which, in the broad sense, it did, even if not in a strictly
legal sense.  But tentative views expressed by the court as the trial progresses
are of no efficacy whatever as impeachment of the court's findings and
conclusions.  ( Oldis v. La Societe Francaise, 130 Cal.App.2d 461 [279 P.2d 184]
.) Any other rule would create hopeless confusion.  The fact is that the court
was at all times convinced of the untruthfulness of Mrs. Rhoades and believed
that her conduct was shown to have been dishonest.

   The judgment is affirmed.


                              73 of 100 DOCUMENTS

               CLARENCE URBAN, as Real Estate Commissioner, etc.,
              Petitioner, v. HARRY B. RILEY, as Controller, etc.,
                                   Respondent

                                S. F. No. 16798

                          Supreme Court of California

                21 Cal. 2d 232; 131 P.2d 4; 1942 Cal. LEXIS 444


                               November 14, 1942

PRIOR-HISTORY:     PROCEEDING in mandamus to compel the controller to retransfer
certain moneys in the general fund.

COUNSEL: Earl Warren, Attorney General, and R. L. Chamberlain, Deputy Attorney
General, for Petitioner.

James W. Hickey and J. D. Lear for Respondent.

JUDGES: In Bank. Spence, J. pro tem.  Gibson, C. J., Shenk, J., Curtis, J.,
Edmonds, J., Carter, J., and Traynor, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: SPENCE

OPINION

     Petitioner seeks a writ of mandate to compel the respondent controller to
retransfer from the general fund to the real estate fund the sum of $
637,851.78, alleged to have been erroneously transferred to the general fund
during the years 1919 to 1929 by respondent's predecessors in office.
Respondent has filed a demurrer and an answer containing certain denials.
Respondent has also pleaded the statute of limitations.  For the reasons
hereinafter stated, we are of the opinion that the petition does not state facts
sufficient to warrant the granting of the relief demanded and we may therefore
rest our decision upon that ground.

   The funds over which the controversy has arisen were collected and were
thereafter transferred to the general fund from time to time under the
provisions of the Real Estate Act. (Stats. 1919, p. 1252, as amended; Deering's
Gen. Laws, Act. 112.) Section 5 of the act, as adopted in 1919, provided as
follows: "All fees charged and collected under this act shall be paid by the
real estate commissioner . . . into the treasury of the state to the credit of a
fund to be known as the 'real estate commissioner's fund,' which fund is hereby
created.  All moneys which shall be paid into the state treasury and credited to
the 'real estate commissioner's fund' are hereby appropriated to be used by the
commissioner in carrying out the provisions of this act . . .  All moneys
remaining in the state treasury to the credit of the 'real estate commissioner's
fund' at noon on the thirty-first day of December of each year shall on or
before the fifteenth day of the succeeding January be transferred from said '
real estate commissioner's fund' to the general fund of the state."

   The last sentence of said section 5 has been amended from time to time. (See
Stats. 1929, chap. 130; Stats. 1933, chap. 691; Stats. 1937, chap. 757.) Said
sentence now reads, "All moneys in excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($
100,000.00) remaining in the State treasury to the credit of the 'Real estate
fund' at noon on the thirtieth day of June of each year shall on or before the
fifteenth day of the succeeding month be transferred from said 'Real estate
fund' to the general fund of the State." The several changes made by said
amendments have affected only dates, amounts and the name of the fund.  The
significant fact is that the general plan of providing for the transfer annually
of excess moneys into the general fund was incorporated into the original act of
1919 and has been retained throughout all subsequent amendments to said act.

   It is alleged in the petition "That respondent's predecessors in the office
of the Controller of the State of California, acting pursuant to the provisions
of Section 5 of the Real Estate Act currently applicable, have heretofore
transferred various sums from the Real Estate Fund to the General Fund, to a
total of $ 637,851.78, as follows: . . ." The petition then sets forth the dates
and amounts so transferred each year from 1919 to 1929 inclusive, totaling the
above mentioned sum.  It is then alleged that petitioner has been advised that
the provisions of said section 5 providing for the transfer of funds in the real
estate fund to the general fund were unconstitutional; that petitioner has
demanded that respondent retransfer said sum of $ 637,851.78 from the general
fund to the real estate fund and that respondent has advised petitioner that
respondent would not comply with said demand.

     It is thus apparent that petitioner concedes that the transfers of the
funds in question have heretofore been made in strict conformity with the
provisions of section 5 of the act, and that petitioner's demand for the
retransfer of said funds to the real estate fund was based solely upon the claim
that said provisions of section 5 were unconstitutional.  In support of this
claim petitioner relied upon the decision of this court in Daugherty v. Riley, 1
Cal.2d 298 [34 P.2d 1005].

   While the position taken by petitioner finds some support  in the language
found in the opinion in the Daugherty case, a careful reading of the provisions
of the Real Estate Act leads us to the conclusion that the decision in the
Daugherty case is not decisive here.  It is only necessary to discuss one
essential difference between the statute involved in the Daugherty case and the
statute involved in the present case.

   In the Daugherty case, this court had under consideration a statute which had
at all times provided "All moneys which shall be paid into the state treasury
and credited to the 'corporation commission fund' are hereby appropriated to be
used by the commissioner in carrying out this act." There was never any
provision in the statute or the amendments thereto for the transfer to the
general fund of any balances in the corporation commission fund.  This court
stated in the Daugherty case (p. 308) that the revenues placed in the
corporation commission fund were "in the nature of a trust fund" and that said
revenues were "permanently set apart under the continuing appropriation under
section 28 of the Corporate Securities Act for the use of the department." It
was therefore held that an appropriation made out of this fund in 1931 (Stats.
1931, p. 51), to meet a deficiency in an appropriation for the construction and
furnishing of a state building, was ineffectual.

   In the present case, the statute before us bears some resemblance to the
statute involved in the Daugherty case but the essential difference is that the
Real Estate Act has always contained a provision for the transfer at the end of
each year of the balance, or a portion of the balance, of the real estate fund
into the general fund. The act has never contained any provision for the
retransfer of such balances to the real estate fund or any provision indicating
that such balances, after transfer to the general fund, should have any
different status from other funds in the general fund. The funds collected under
the act are not "permanently set apart . . . for the use of the department," as
under the statute considered in the Daugherty case, but such funds are merely
temporarily set apart  for such use during each fiscal year with the balance, or
a portion of the balance, reverting to the general fund for general fund
purposes at the end of each fiscal year. This distinction was indicated by this
court in Gillum v. Johnson, 7 Cal.2d 744 [62 P.2d 1037, 63 P.2d 810, 108 A.L.R.
595], where it was said on page 758 with respect to the fund there under
consideration, "The balances therein do not revert to the general fund at the
end  of the fiscal year and under both the state and federal acts constitute
trust funds to be administered by the state commission and subject to its call
at all times." It therefore appears that the wording of the statute before us
does not support the claim that all moneys passing through the real estate fund
were in the nature of trust funds in the sense in which that term was used in
the Daugherty case.  We conclude that the portion of said moneys which was
transferred to the general fund at the end of each fiscal year from 1921 to 1929
under the provisions of section 5 of the act became a part of the general fund,
unencumbered by any trust, and we find no authority for ordering the retransfer
of said money or any portion thereof to the real estate fund in the absence of a
subsequent appropriation made by the Legislature for that purpose.

   Petitioner cites article IV, section 25, subdivision 10; article XIII,
section 1; and article IV, section 34 of the state Constitution, but makes no
argument as to the applicability of any of these constitutional provisions to
the act before us.  As petitioner is apparently raising the constitutional
objection only with respect to that portion of section 5 of the act under which
the transfers were made to the general fund, it appears that petitioner is
relying upon the first above mentioned constitutional provision and the language
used in the Daugherty case with respect thereto.  That language, however, must
be restricted in its application to the particular facts before the court in
that case.  We may assume, without deciding, that the Legislature had the power
to impose the fees provided in the act for the purpose of regulation only and
not for the purpose of revenue (compare Ingels v. Riley, 5 Cal.2d 154, 163 [53
P.2d 939, 103 A.L.R. 1]). This assumption does not, however, render
unconstitutional the portion of section 5 which is under attack.   Even where
the taxing authority has no power to impose fees for revenue, an enactment
imposing fees will not be held invalid unless it clearly appears that an
arbitrary or unreasonable burden has been imposed upon the pursuit of an
occupation under the guise of regulation. The taxing authority may fix the
license fees at a sum sufficient to cover all expenses which may be reasonably
anticipated and "is not limited to the exact amount of the expense, as it may
subsequently develop." ( County of Plumas v. Wheeler, 149 Cal. 758, 765 [87 P.
909].)

     Petitioner does not claim that the license fees fixed by the act imposed an
arbitrary or unreasonable burden upon  the pursuit of an occupation or that the
contemplated revenue from said license fees was disproportionate to the
contemplated expense of regulation. And while it appears from the allegations of
the petition that there was a balance in the real estate fund at the end of each
fiscal year from 1921 to 1929, which balance was transferred to the general
fund, it further appears that there has never been a sufficient balance in the
real estate fund at the end of any fiscal year since 1929 and until 1942 to call
for a transfer to the general fund under the terms of section 5.  We may
conclude that in some years the actual license fees collected under the act
produced an amount in excess of the actual expense involved in carrying out the
provisions of the act while in other years they did not.  This was no doubt due
to fluctuations in business conditions.  In any event, it has been held that
even where the power to license for revenue is not present, the mere fact that
an enactment providing for regulatory fees may incidentally produce some revenue
does not render such enactment unconstitutional.  ( Ard v. People, 66 Colo. 480
[182 P. 892]; State v. Ross, 101 Kan. 377 [166 P. 505]; Cache County v. Jensen,
21 Utah 207 [61 P. 303]; Davis v. Hailey, 143 Tenn. 247 [227 S.W. 1021];
Rhinehart v. State, 121 Tenn. 420 [117 S.W. 508, 17 Ann.Cas. 254].) We find no
valid constitutional objection to the provisions of the Real Estate Act
providing for the transfer to the general fund of the excess money, if any, at
the end of each fiscal year.

   The petition for a peremptory writ of mandate is denied and the alternative
writ is discharged.


                              74 of 100 DOCUMENTS

                    JAMES F. STUART v. CHARLES ALLEN et als.

                            [NO NUMBER IN ORIGINAL]

                          SUPREME COURT OF CALIFORNIA

                        16 Cal. 473; 1860 Cal. LEXIS 257


                                  October 1860

PRIOR-HISTORY:      Appeal from the Seventh District.

   Suit to quiet title. The facts are substantially stated in the opinion. It
may be added, however, that the Probate Court, in confirming the contract
between Mrs. White and Stuart, directed her to make him a deed of the land. The
land, after being advertised for sale as usual, was sold at public auction to
Stuart, for $ 3,000; a report of the sale, in which Stuart was stated to be the
highest and the best bidder, etc., was made to the Court and confirmed, and a
deed of the right, title and interest of the deceased ordered to be executed by
the administratrix to Stuart, which was accordingly done; he entered into
possession of the premises, and now sues, making Mrs Allen--the widow of
White--with her present husband, and the two surviving infant children of White,
defendants. Plaintiff claims title under the Probate proceedings and the deed.
The infant defendants, in their answer, simply set up title as heirs at law of
Charles White, deceased, and also as heirs of their deceased infant brother.
Mrs. Allen and her husband claim that she is owner of the one half of the
property, as survivor of the community between herself and Charles White, and of
one third of the other half as heir of her infant son, deceased. The property
was community property. The case, as made by plaintiff, consisted of the power
of attorney to Crosby, the contract between Mrs. White and Stuart, the Probate
proceedings and the deed to Stuart.

   The only mention in the inventory of real estate--except that stated in the
opinion of the Court--is, "forty acres of land with improvements, in the north
part of the city of San Jose."

   The petition of Mrs White, as administratrix of the estate of Charles White,
deceased, for the sale of the real estate--after first setting forth the debts
of the estate as amounting to $ 63,000--proceeds as follows:

   "That the personal property of said estate, which will appear by reference to
the inventory now on file, is not more than is sufficient for the use and
support of the family of said decedent, and is wholly insufficient to pay said
indebtedness, and that it is necessary to sell real estate to pay the same.

   "Your petitioner further says, that prior to the death of said decedent, he
purchased a claim to a certain rancho, situated in the county of Sonoma and
called 'Arroyo de San Antonio,' of A. L. Dz. Ortega and I. B. Brouillet; which
said claim to said rancho is now being litigated before the Board of United
States Land Commissioners for the adjudication of land claims in California, at
a very great expense to said estate.

   "That the said claim is one of doubt as to whether it will be confirmed by
said Board, as many claims are being rejected by them, and the said claim is of
that class which is exceedingly doubtful, and will require a great outlay of
money and much time in litigating it to a final confirmation; and if the same
should be rejected, it will be very hurtful to the interest of said estate.
Petitioner further says, that she has had an offer for said land claim, and has
contracted the sale of the same with one James F. Stuart, for the sum of $
3,000, by which the litigation and expenses concerning said claim will cease;
and by which she, as the administratrix of said estate, and as one of the heirs
and persons interested therein, may be able to cancel said claim of John Nobilis
for the sum of $ 4,200.

   "Petitioner further says, that there are other and adverse claims presented
to said rancho, and are now being pressed before said Board of Commissioners,
whose owners are interested and are attempting to defeat the claim of said
estate to said rancho.

   "Petitioner, therefore, asks that the said contract for sale of the interest
in said rancho, 'Arroyo de San Antonio,' be confirmed, and that she be ordered
to make a deed of the same to said James F. Stuart, and to stop the expenses and
litigation concerning the same, an being for the best interest of said estate.

   "Petitioner further prays, that if the Court should not consider it for the
best interest of said estate to confirm said contract, that the Court would make
an order for all persons interested in said estate to show cause, on the first
day of next term of the Probate Court, or as soon thereafter as the same can be
heard, in the city of San Jose, why an order of sale, to pay the said
indebtedness of the said estate, as aforesaid, should not be made, to sell the
interest of said estate in said claim to said rancho, 'Arroyo de San Antonio,'
in the county of Sonoma; and also why an order of sale should not be made to
sell block No. 14 in White's addition to the city of San Jose, lying between
Main and Fourth streets, and Jackson and Empire streets in said city; and upon
the hearing of this petition, that such orders and decrees may be made as the
nature and interest of the case may require.

   "Petitioner further alleges, that the inventory heretofore filed gives a
description of all the real estate of which the said intestate died seized, and
the condition and value thereof, which said inventory is made a part of this
petition; that the names of the heirs of said descendent are Ellen E. White,
your petitioner, aged thirty years, James T. A. White, aged thirteen years,
Charles E. White, aged eight years, and Mary E. White, aged six years.

   "(Signed.)   Ellen E. White,

   "Administratrix of estate of Charles White, deceased.

   "Subscribed and sworn to before me, this first day of April, a. d. 1854.

   "John B. Hewson, Clerk.

   "Filed April 1st, 1854.

   "John B. Hewson, Clerk.

   On the same day the Probate Court made an order, which, after reciting the
fact of this petition being filed, and that it appeared necessary, etc., to sell
the real estate--pretty much in the language of the petition--proceeds thus:

   "And it further appearing to said Court that said sale should be confirmed,
as is shown by the said petition of said administratrix;  and it further
appearing to the Court that the attorney for the minor heirs, F. Hall, had
examined the said petition, and making no objection thereto;

   "It is, therefore, considered and adjudged by the Court that the sale of the
interest of said decedent in and to said rancho, 'Arroyo de San Antonio,'
situated in county of Sonoma, and State of California, (being the same bought of
A. L. Dz. Ortega and I. B. Brouillet) made by said administratrix of the said
estate to James F. Stuart, for the sum of $ 3,000, be, and the same is hereby
confirmed; and the said administratrix is hereby ordered to make the said Stuart
a deed to all the rights and interest of said decedent in said rancho, on the
payment of said sum of money. And it is further ordered, that all parties
interested in said estate show cause on the first day of the next term of this
Court, or as soon thereafter as the same can be heard, why an order for the sale
of all the interest of said decedent in the rancho 'Arroyo de San Antonio,'
lying in the county of Sonoma, State aforesaid, should not be made, to pay the
indebtedness of said estate; and, also, why the same order should not be made at
the time for the sale of block No. 14 in White's addition to the city of San
Jose, lying between Main and Fourth streets, Jackson and Empire streets, and for
the sale of such other real property, as may be necessary to pay the
indebtedness of said estate; and that notice of the same be given according to
law."

   On the same day, Hall was appointed attorney for absent and minor heirs. On
the twenty-fourth day of April, 1854, the Probate Court made an order, that
notice be given that the hearing of the application of the administratrix to
sell the real estate would be had on the first day of the regular term of the
Court--it being recited in this order, that due notice had not previously been
given. A notice was accordingly posted in three public places in Santa Clara
county. May 22d, 1854, the Court made this order of sale, etc.:

   "In the matter of the estate of Charles White, deceased.

   "And now comes Ellen E. White, administratrix of the aforesaid estate, by her
attorneys, and asks the Court upon the petition heretofore filed, for an order
of sale of the property hereinafter described; and it appearing to the Court
that the petitioner Ellen E. White, James T. A. White, Charles E. White and Mary
E. White,  are the legal heirs, and representatives of said Charles White,
deceased, and that the said James T. A., Charles E. and Mary E. White are
minors; the Court hereby appoints Frederic Hall as guardian ad litem for said
minors; and the said Frederic Hall having examined said petition for the sale of
said property, and filed his written consent to the same, and the Court being
fully advised in the premises, grants the prayer of the said petitioner Ellen E.
White, administratrix of the said estate. It is, therefore, considered, adjudged
and decreed that said administratrix advertise and sell, according to law, the
following described real property, belonging to said estate, 'to wit:' All the
right, and title and interest which the said decedent had in and to the rancho
called the 'Arroyo de San Antonio,' being in the county of Sonoma, and State of
California, being the same which the said decedent bought of A. L. Dz. Ortega
and J. B. Brouillet; and, also, the following block of lots lying in the city of
San Jose county of Santa Clara, to wit: Block No. 14 in White's addition to the
city of San Jose, lying between Main and Fourth streets, and Jackson and
Empirestreets in said city; and that notice of the sale of said property in the
county of Sonoma be given once a week, for four weeks, in the 'Sonoma Bulletin,'
or whatever newspaper may be published in said county of Sonoma; and if no
newspaper be published there, then in the 'San Francisco Herald; and that notice
of the sale of said property in San Jose be given once a week for four weeks, in
the San Jose Telegraph and Santa Clara Register,' a weekly newspaper published
in the county of Santa Clara; and that said sales be for cash."

   Hall, the guardian ad litem, files his consent for a sale on the same day. It
seems the notice of sale was published in a weekly newspaper in Sonoma county,
where the land lies, for three weeks preceding the sale, and also posted in
three public places in said county; and on the eighteenth of July, 1854, the
property was sold at public auction to plaintiff, he being the highest and best
bidder, for $ 3,000.

   Defendants offered no evidence. The Court below held the probate proceedings
to be void, on the ground, mainly that the petition of the administratrix was
insufficient to give the Court jurisdiction to order a sale of the real estate
of the deceased; and accordingly decreed that the prayer of plaintiff's
complaint be denied; and that his title be held null and void, as against
defendants, etc. Plaintiff appeals.

   Considerable of the argument of counsel is given in this case, because of the
vital importance of one of the questions discussed, and because the Court leaves
that question still open.

COUNSEL: A. P. Crittenden, for Appellant.

I. The agreement between Mrs. White and Stuart was not fraudulent or void. It
was merely a contract on the part of Stuart, that if Mrs White would procure an
order of sale, he would bid so much money; and on the part of Mrs. White, that
she would sell and convey the land to Stuart at such sale, for the sum of $
3,000, provided there was no higher bid. (Hunt v. Frost, 4 Cush. 54.)

The object of the contract was laudable. It was to secure such an offer
beforehand as would satisfy the Probate Court of the propriety of the sale, and
that it would pay off the debts. Mrs. White being under no liability to Stuart
if, at the sale, the property should sell for more than $ 3,000, was not
contracting any obligation whatever in conflict with her duty asadministratrix.


 The appellant claims under the probate sale. The only material question is, Was
that sale valid and effectual? The making of a prior void contract for the sale,
has no bearing upon that question, except so far as it might show that the
administratrix had imposed obligations upon herself which might subject her to
the suspicion of having subsequently made an unfair sale. But such suspicion
would not prove that the sale was unfair.

It might be a circumstance to be considered with others upon any contest as to
the fairness of the sale--as if it were alleged that the sale was fraudulent,
and for a price less than the value of the property, and that the heirs were
injured. Here, there is no suggestion of such a fact. The question of the
fairness of the sale was passed upon by the Probate Court, and its decision is
conclusive. Besides, the answers of respondents do not aver fraud in the sale,
nor that the highest price was not bid at public auction and paid for the land,
nor is there a particle of testimony to countenance such an idea.

II. So far as the interest of Mrs. White is concerned, (five ninths) it vested
in the appellant by force of the deed madeby Mrs. White, as administratrix,
regardless of objections that may have existed on account of irregularities in
the proceedings; she is estopped, by her deed, from denying appellant's title. (
Cable v. Martin & Bell, 1 How. Miss. 558; Raines v. McGee, 1 S. & M. 208;
Sumner, Administrator, v. Williams, 8 Mass. 162; Johnson v. Collins, 12 Ala. 322
; Brown v. Edson, 23 Vt. (8 Wash.) 435; Fairfield v. Williams, 4 Mass. 427.)

The objection that the petition for sale did not set forth sufficient facts,
applies only to the interest of the infants; for, whether there was, or was not,
any order of sale, the deed made by Mrs. White would estop her from claiming
anything against it.

The alleged defect is, that the petition does not set forth the amount of
personal estate that had come to the hands of the administratrix, and how much
thereof remained undisposed of.

Upon the authority only of Gregory v. McPherson (13 Cal. 562), this was held to
be a fatal defect. That case is not a decision of this Court upon the point. It
is the opinion of one Judge only. It is not sustained by any authority. What is
said upon the subject by Judge Bronson, in Bloom v.  Burdick (1 Hill, 130), is a
mere dictum. The account was held sufficient. But this case, if closely
scrutinized, is a strong authority in our favor.

The case before this Court is not within the rule laid down by Judge Baldwin in
Gregory v. McPherson; for the petition presented by Mrs. White did show all that
the statute required. It stated the condition of the estate at the time the
petition was filed. She says the personal property of the estate will (not did)
appear by the inventory, and that the inventory gives (not gave) a description
of the real estate, and she annexes to her petition a copy of the inventory.

The inventory is offered, therefore, not as a statement of property in hand when
the inventory was made, but when the application for an order of sale was
presented. However defective the petition, it gave jurisdiction to the Probate
Court, which acted judicially in passing upon the questions of insufficiency of
personal property, and the necessity for a sale, and the decision of the Court,
was conclusive. (Cases cited above. Butts v. Bagley, 12 Pick. 572, 582-3; King
v. Kent, 29 Ala. 542; Poor v. Boyce , 12 Tex. 448; Mount v. Valle, 19 Mo. 4
Bennett, 621; Frye v. Kimball, 16 Id. 9; Tyler v. Hand, 7 How. U. S. 573.)

Gilbert v. Columbia Turnpike Co. (3 Johns. Cases, 107), Ventress et al. v. Smith
(10 Peters, 161), and Thatcher et al. v. Powell et al. (6 Wheat. 119), are not
in conflict with our position.

Gilbert v. Calumbia Turnpike Co. was an inquisition to condemn property, and the
fact which alone could give rise to the special statutory authority did not
exist, and was not stated. In Ventress v. Smith, a private sale, made by an
administratrix, was declared void, because prohibited by law, and the general
expressions used by the Court are to be considered in connection with the case.

Thatcher v. Powell was a sale for taxes.

It is contended that the order of sale was void, because the Probate Court had
no jurisdiction of the persons of the minors for want of service. It is not
true, that there can be no judgment without service of process. Whether there
shall be any, and if so, what process served, it is for the law to declare.
(Prac. Act, sec. 31; Ware v. Robinson, 9 Cal. 107--Osborn's brief; Sutherland v.
De Leon, 1 Texas, 302-7.)

In an applicationfor an order of sale, the statute does not require service on
the minors. (Act to Regulate Settlement of Estates, secs. 156, 7, 8, 9.)
Otherwise, in proceedings in the District Court. (Prac. Act, sec. 9, 10.)

Burnett, J., in Gray v. Palmer (9 Cal. 838), said: "The appointment of a
guardian dispenses with service." (Bloom v. Burdick, 1 Hill. 138, 140; Barnes v.
Hardeman, 15 Tex. 366; Banta's Heirs v. Calhoun, 2 A. K. Marsh. 167.)

The statute requires the guardian to be appointed only before the Court acts on
the petition--that is, before making any decision upon the application. (Sec.
159.)

The Court only acts on the petition when it comes on for hearing. The Court does
not act at all upon it when first presented. Then it is the Judge, as
contradistinguished from the Court, who makes an order for the appearance of
parties interested. This order which the Judge makes for appearance, is made in
chambers--out of term. The distinction between the action of the Judge and the
Court is carefully preserved by our statutes. (Secs. 63, 64, Wood's Digest, 154,
and Act to Regulate Settlement of Estates, passim.)

The guardian having power to appear forthe minors, and having done so, they were
before the Court, and are bound by its decision. Our statute prescribes no term
of notice to be given to the guardian, and it is for the Court to judge whether
he has had sufficient notice. (Thomas v. LeBaron, 8 Met. 355.)

As to exhausting the personal property before there can be a sale of the real
estate, our statute permits the sale of real estate whenever it appears that the
personal property is insufficient to pay debts. None of the personal property
need be sold first. In this, it differs from the New York statute, and hence the
case of Corwin v. Merritt (3 Barb. 346) is not in point.

As to description of property of which sale was asked, the petition shows that
White had bought the Rancho San Antonio, that is, the whole of it, and that a
claim was pending for it before the Land Commissioners. The description is
sufficient to maintain ejectment. How can a Court anticipate that the Rancho San
Antonio is not a tract of well known boundaries?

As to the objection that the same land is called in the inventory Rancho of
"Petaluma,  " I answer that it is immaterial. Suppose it is the same land, there
is a sufficient descriptionof it in the petition. Suppose it is a different
tract, its ownership would not affect the power of the Court to sell the tract
described in the petition.

As to the value of the land, it is stated in the inventory.

The requirement of the statute in regard to stating the condition of the real
estate means only, that if there is anything peculiar about the property which
might be calculated to influence the judgment of the Court on the question of
sale, it should be stated, as if the land is encumbered by mortgage, or is
improved or productive. In this case there was nothing peculiar, except in
regard to the title of the Rancho San Antonio, and that is stated.

It is further urged, that the estate owned a block in White's addition to San
Jose which is not included in the inventory.

It is the same as the forty acres mentioned in the inventory. If it were not, it
would only follow that the inventory was incorrect in fact, and that is wholly
unimportant in this case, which is purely a question of sufficiency of
allegation to give jurisdiction. It makes no difference if the entire statement,
as to the description, amount, condition, etc., of the real estate, is
absolutelyfalse. It is enough, if it is sufficient in form.

Shattuck, Spencer & Reichert, also for Appellant.

I. Frequent probate sales in the State, and their extent and importance, show
the necessity of some certain rule in regard to them. Ecclesiastical Courts of
England, and Surrogate Courts of New York, are not Courts of record, and
decisions under them have led other Courts astray, where Probate Courts are of
higher dignity.

II. Sales under our Probate Court may have a rule of construction certain and
legal.

They are Courts of record (Wood's Dig. 157), and have general jurisdiction of
probate business, and of sales of land to pay debts. (Id. 154.) Whenever,
therefore, the record shows--1st. The death of the party; 2d. His residence in
the county at the time of his death; then the Probate Court has full
jurisdiction of the subject matter of the estate. (Haynes v. Meek, 10 Cal. 118.)
All subsequent acts are coram judice, if the proceeding is in rem; and in other
matters, if the record shows jurisdiction of the person. The same rule is
established in New York by statute. (Dayton's Surrogate, 6, 7, 586-7.)

It is said, Probate Courts are inferior. So is every Court from which an appeal
lies. (Kemp's Lessee v. Kennedy et al., 5 Cranch. 173; Ex parte Tobias Watkins,
3 Pet. 205.) It is also said, they are of limited jurisdiction. So are the
Courts of the United States; so is the Superior Court of the city of New York;
the late Superior Court of the city of San Francisco; the late Vice Chancery
Court of the State of Mississippi, and many other city Courts of record. Yet the
decisions are uniform, that none of those named are inferior and limited in the
technical sense of that term; and their judgments and decrees, although their
jurisdiction may not appear of record, are not nullities. (Ex parte Tobias
Watkins, 205, citing Kemp's Lessee v. Kennedy et al., 5 Cranch. 173; Williams v.
Armroyd, 7 Id. 423; Williams' Ex'rs v. May's Ex'rs, 6 Id. 267; Kennedy v.
Georgia State Bank, 8 How. 586; 4 Phil. Ev. 189; Pond v. Pond, 10 Cal. 500.)

Their jurisdiction is general over all probate business, and especially so as to
the power of selling lands belonging to the estate of deceased persons for the
payment of debts. Indeed, we should say it was exclusive, had not this Court
decided to the contrary.

Havingthis general jurisdiction over the subject matter, and being
constitutional Courts and Courts of record, why should not the same dignity and
verity attend their decrees that is awarded to other Courts named above? (3
Blackstone's Com. 24, 25; 2 Phil. Ev. 29; 17 Mo. 442.)

III. Whether the Court shall sustain the preceding views or not, to the extent
contended for, the current of authorities sustain the proposition, that a
purchaser at a probate sale has only to look to the order of sale and to the
decree of confirmation, and these, unreversed on appeal, are final and
conclusive except for fraud. (Grignon's Lessee v. Astor, 2 How. 341; McPherson
v. Curtiff, 11 Serg. & R. 433-4; Buck v. Sheldon, 1 Day, 170; Judson v. Lake, 3
Id. 318; Perkins v. Fairchild, 11 Mass. 226; Longtilon v. Atkins, 1 Pick. 535;
Spencer v. Spencer, 1 Gall. 622; Lynch v. Baxter, 4 Texas, 531; Poor v. Royce,
12 Id. 440; Seymour v. Seymour, 22 Conn. 272; Howard v. Moore, 2 Mich. [Gibbs]
226; Bryant  v. Allen, 5 N. H. 116; Coxe v. Davis, 17 Ala. 714; McDade v. Burch,
7 Geo. 559.) It is a judicial sale, and such a sale passes the title. (Halleck
v. Gay, 9 Cal. 195, and cases cited; Lynch v. Baxter, 4 Texas, 431.) Our
statutes say as much for probate sales. A deed in accordance with the decree of
confirmation shall be deemed to convey all the interest of the intestate at the
time of his death. (Wood's Dig. 408, sec. 172.)

IV. But it may be said, that if the Court has no jurisdiction, its decrees will
be invalid. Granted; and what then?

The law gives the Court jurisdiction of every dead man's estate, whose last
residence was in the county. The petition for letters of administration
officially informs the Court of the fact, which gives cognizance of the case.
This is the petition for jurisdictional facts. This informs the Court of the
death, the place of death or the last residence, and of property in the county,
and gives jurisdiction of the estate; all afterward is coram judice, so far as
the subject is concerned; and none of the orders and decrees, of the Court
touching that estate are void, where the proceedings are in rem, nor in any
other matters where the record shows that the Court had jurisdiction of the
person by such notice as the statute requires.

We do not admit, that if this first petition wasdeficient in jurisdictional
facts, the subsequent acts of the Court would be coram non judice, for a trial
is had and the facts are proven, and the Court decides. This gives jurisdiction
of the estate; and if its first decision on a defective petition be valid, how
much more so will be the subsequent ones. It is conceded that respectable
authorities (perhaps the current of authorities) hold that the Court obtains
jurisdiction to order a sale from the petition for a sale. This is when, as
under the common law rule, the lands are not assets in the hands of the
administrator; by our law, they are assets. The Court has jurisdiction of the
estate as an entirety from the first petition, and it becomes its duty to
adjudicate upon all questions that may arise, and to see that it is administered
according to law.

If its situation requires land to be sold to pay the debt, it is as much the
duty of the Judge to order a sale as it is to order a delinquent administrator
to account. True, the law requires that when an order of sale is deemed
necessary by the administrator, he shall file a petition setting forth the
amount of personal property which has come to his hands, and what disposition,
if any, has been made of it, etc.; but this is not to give jurisdiction, for
that the Court has already, and could doubtless order an administrator to file
such petition, if it deemed that justice required it, and the administrator
neglected it, or the Court could receive the petition from a creditor and act
upon it, and compel the administrator to make a sale. (Wood's Dig. 408, sec.
164.)

In Courts of general jurisdiction, we admit that the complaint brings the
subject matter within the jurisdiction of the Court, for that is the
commencement of the action, and without an action--a suit commenced--the Court
has no jurisdiction of any particular matter or thing. The law, likewise,
prescribes what shall constitute a complaint. That law, through carelessness and
want of skill, is frequently violated to such an extent that a demurrer would
lie; yet, though defective, it is still a complaint, and gives the Court
jurisdiction of the subject matter. If personal service is made of the summons,
in any of the modes prescribed, jurisdiction is, likewise, given of the person,
and judgment rendered upon a defective complaint is conclusive, unless reversed.
A sale under it passes the titleof the property sold.

No case, we think, can be found where a sale, under a judgment, has been avoided
because the complaint was defective. Now, if a Court that only obtains
jurisdiction of the case by the complaint, can render a judgment that is not a
nullity, on a complaint acknowledged defective, will not the Probate Court, that
already has jurisdiction of the estate, be sustained, to the same extent, in its
decrees upon a defective petition, made after full jurisdiction of the estate is
obtained? Must a purchaser at a probate sale be responsible for the technical
accuracy of the petition, when the purchaser at a Sheriff's sale is protected,
however defective may be the complaint?

We say, then: 1st, The Probate Court obtains jurisdiction of an estate by virtue
of the law and the facts stated in the petition for letters of administration,
and having once obtained jurisdiction of the estate, its subsequent orders and
decrees, relative to the estate, are judicial acts, and cannot be attacked
collaterally, except for fraud.

2. That the petition for an order to sell land is designed to give information,
and not jurisdiction, to the Court.

3. If the jurisdiction ofthe Court depended on the petition of the
administrator, although defective and subject to a special demurrer, it will
still be sufficient for the purposes of jurisdiction, and the orders and decrees
of the Court, based upon it, and not appealed from, would be valid.

V. The petition, in the record, of Ellen E. White, administratrix, etc., was a
substantial compliance with the statute, in every particular. (Wood's Dig. 106,
sec. 155.)

No exception is taken to the petition in the record, except that it is charged
that the petition does not set forth the amount of personal estate that had come
to her hands, and her disposal of it.

Take the whole of the personal assets, as they are inventoried--$ 2,494--from
the amount of debts, and there remains nearly $ 4,000 deficiency of assets.

These facts are shown by the petition, and they show that land must be sold, or
the debts go unpaid; this gives jurisdiction to, and requires action by, the
Court. But the counsel may say the administratrix presented an inventory, and
not an account of the personal estate; in answer to which, we say: 1st. Our
statute requires neither inventory or account; its requisitions are, "the
amountof personal estate that has come to his hands." It makes no difference in
what shape it comes, if it is there.

2d. The inventory being made part of the petition, and containing a detailed
statement of all the personal property, would be sufficiently definite, even if
our statute required an account.

But conceding, for the sake of the argument, that this Court will disallow any
presumptions in favor of the Probate Court, we contend that the petition for an
order of sale is a substantial compliance with our law, and sustained by
authority. (4 Wend. 436; Leverett v. Harris, 7 Mass. 292; 11 Mass. 226; 12 Pick.
572, 582-3; 2 Cow. & Hills' Notes, 214; King v. Kent, 29 Ala. 542; Poor v. Boyce
, 12 Tex. 448; Mount v. Valle, 19 Mo. [4 Bennet] 621; Tyler v. Hand, 7 How. 573
.)

Gregory v. McPherson (13 Cal.) on this point in not authority; nor is Burdick v.
Bloom (1 Hill, 135). In this latter case, the petition was held sufficient; and
the speculations of the Judge, that under certain other circumstances, he would
have decided it defective, are mere dicta. The facts in the petition, in most of
the above cases, were considered as judicially beforethe Probate Judge, and the
necessity of a sale judicially settled by him. So our statute requires that the
Probate Judge shall hear and determine the necessity for a sale. The order
recites that he has heard and determined; he has found as matter of fact, that
the personal estate is insufficient, and that a sale of real estate is necessary
to pay the debts.

We submit, therefore, first, that conceding that the Probate Court is inferior
and limited, in the technical application of the term, and that no intendments
or presumptions of law can be made in its favor, still the current of
authorities sustains the position that a petition, though defective and subject
to a special demurrer, will give the Court jurisdiction of the case; and second,
that the petition as it stands is a substantial compliance with the statute, and
that even a special demurrer to it could not have been sustained.

VI. It is objected to the sale, that there was an agreement made and price fixed
before the order was obtained. The administratrix was likewise an heir to one
half of the estate, and this half she could sell and convey at private sale,
subject to the debts, or for the payment of them. (Cable v. Martin & Bell, 1
How. [Miss.] 558; Baine v. McGee, 1 S. & M. 208.)

The cases cited by counsel, were cases in which the administrator had no
interest in the thing sold. We admit that this contract, so far as the infant
heirs are concerned, is a nullity, and it is probable, as part of it was against
public policy, that upon the principle that if part of a contract is illegal it
taints the whole, a bill for a specific performance of that agreement would not
have been sustained. But this is not a bill for a specific performance, but to
quiet the title which has already been made; and the question now arises, how
far the deed made estops the parties from disputing it?

She, as heir to half of the estate, was capable of contracting, and did contract
and convey for a valuable consideration; and if she could not convey as
administratrix, still the deed binds her personally, so far as her interest is
concerned, and she is estopped from disputing it. (See cases last above referred
to; also Sumner Adm'r v. Williams, 8 Mass. 162; Johnston v. Collins, 12 Ala. 322
; Brown v. Edson, 23 Vt. [8 Wash.] 435.) This latter case is precisely in point,
and covers the wholeground.

Neither of these grounds will apply to the infant heirs, and if the order of
sale is a nullity, their title did not pass. Assuming that the Court had
jurisdiction of the subject matter, and of the persons of the heirs, then the
fact that an agreement had been made that was a nullity on its face, so far as
it affected the minor heirs, would not affect the power of the Court to order a
sale.

The Court and the parties are presumed to know the law, and they all know that,
as to the infants, the contract was an absolute nullity; that if any person bid
more at the sale than Stuart had offered, he must outbid them or lose the land;
and that if it had been so lost to him, not a dime, for the breach of it, could
have been recovered, even from the adult heir who had made it.

There is no guarantee that he shall have it at his bid; and it is not certain
that damage could be recovered of him were he then to refuse to bid. It is
certain, however, that if he keeps his promise, and makes the bid, the estate is
gainer and not a loser by the transaction.

It will be seen by the order, that the Court--one of the defendants then being
Judge--confirmed the private sale atthe same time that an order to show cause
was made. It seems from this order, that the Court believed that the private
sale was valid as to the widow's share, and that to that extent it should be
confirmed. The order does no harm; at most, it is surplusage. The order to show
cause was regular, and so with all subsequent orders; and the fact that the
Court did a foolish thing previously, would not affect these orders.

Again, there was no fraud in this null agreement. The sale was had according to
the statute. The Court sat in judgment on it and pronounced it legally
conducted, and fairly made. It is res judicata, unless for fraud. (Runyon v.
Newark Ind. Rub. Co., 4 Zabr. 467; Hunt v. Frost, 4 Cush. 54.)

Whatever construction this Court may think such a contract entitled to, it is
not now in controversy. We claim, not through or by virtue of that agreement,
but through and by virtue of a deed--a deed made after a competent Court had
decreed that the sale was legally made, and fairly conducted, and that a deed
should be executed.

Objection is also made, that the record does not show that the Probate Court had
jurisdiction of the infant heirs.

1. A saleof land to pay debts is a proceeding in rem, and passes the title to
the purchaser, irrespective of irregularities; all the purchaser need look to is
the order of sale, the decree of confirmation, and the deed of the
administratrix. (Grignon v. Astor, 2 How. 310; Thompson v. Tohner, 2 Pet. 157;
Sheldon v. Newton, 3 Ohio, [U. S.] 494; Lynch v. Baxter, 4 Tex. 431; Rogers v.
Wilson, 8 Eng. [Ark.] 507; Howard v. Moore, 2 Mich. [Gibb's] 226; Ludlow v. Wade
, 4 How. 504; Wyman v. Campbell, 6 Porter, 219; Gilman v. Thompson, 11 Vt. 643;
McPherson v. Cunliffe, 11 Serg. & R. 429; Perkins v. Fairfield, 11 Mass. 227.)

2. But the act was complied with; and the Court, in ordering a sale of White's
estate, had jurisdiction of the persons of heirs, as well as the subject matter.


Our statute does not require notice to be served on the iufant heirs, and in
that respect differs from the statute of New York. (N. Y. Rev. Laws, sec. 4.)
The probate record shows that notice of the hearing of the petition was ordered
and posted. The presumption which we ask in favor of a Court of Record is, that
the law was fully complied with in every particular. (See the authorities above
cited, and especially Grignon v. Astor.)

But aside from presumption, the record shows that an attorney was appointed for
the absent and infant heirs when the petition was first presented, and that
appointment would give the Court jurisiction of the infants.

There is no provision requiring an attorney of the absent heirs to be appointed
on hearing a petition to sell land; the consequence is, that the attorney thus
appointed must have been intended to represent, and did represent the infant
heirs solely. Hence, the attorney was appointed to represent the infants. His
being called attorney, instead of guardian ad litem, can make no difference.

When this petition was presented, the defendant, Allen, was the Probate Judge.
At the hearing Judge Buckner probably noticed that Mr. Hall was called attorney,
instead of guardian ad litem; and to cure defects, made a new order,  before
acting on the petition, appointing him guardian ad litem. Having been appointed
on the first of April some seven weeks before hearing the petition, he was
prepared to act at once and fulfill his duties, according to the statute, by
"appearing for the infants." (Wood's Dig. 407, sec. 159.)

The only sensible construction, therefore, which can be put upon this proceeding
is, that Mr. Hall was appointed guardian ad litem for the infant heirs on the
filing of the petition on the first of April.

Again, so far as the question of jurisdiction is concerned, the appointment of a
guardian ad litem any time prior to the hearing of the petition, would be a
substantial compliance with the statute.

The action of the Court upon the petition contemplated by the statute, is the
hearing the proof, and the deciding the necessity of the sale. Therefore, the
appointment of the guardian prior to such hearing, would fulfill the
requisitions of the law. Doubtless, as a question of policy, it would be better
for the Court to appoint long enough before the hearing for the guardian to
become acquainted with the facts of the case, but this does not affect the
jurisdiction of the Court as to the person. The power to appoint a guardian is
expressly given; tho duty of that guardian, when appointed, is specific--to
appear for, and take care of the minor's interests in the proceedings. (Wood's
Dig. 407, sec. 159.) This "appearing for them" givesthe Court as full
jurisdiction of their persons as would the appearance by attorney in an ordinary
suit. If the proceeding is not in rem; if its validity depends at all upon the
jurisdiction which the Court may have of the infants, it is all effected by the
appointment of the guardian, and by his appearing for them. The jurisdiction of
the persons of the infants was, therefore, complete in this case.

Should the cases of Bloom v. Burdick (1 Hill), and Schneider v. McFarland (2
Comst.), be considered authority, and applicable under our statute, still they
do not touch this case, for here the infants were in Court.

And should this Court consider that the record should show that notice was
published, or that personal service should have been made upon the infants, as
the better way, yet the act of the Probate Court, would only be irregular, and
not void; for one of the courses prescribed by the statute, to bring the infants
into Court, was pursued. And the law presumes that notice was duly given, or
that the parties were present. (Gerrard v. Johnston, 12 Ind. 637.)

W. T. Wallace, for Respondents.

1. As to the contract made by Ellen E. White, whileshe was administratrix of the
estate, with Stuart.

This was a contract of sale, made without any order of the Probate Court--and
more than that, it was a contract to procure the proper order of the Court, by
which the order of the Court was, before it was obtained, made the subject of
bargain and sale between two persons, both of whom were dealing with trust
property, one of them being the trustee, the other purchasing the same property
with notice of the trust.

This contract was void upon several distinct grounds.

1. Because it is against publie policy that an administratrix should make such
an agreement. (Overseers of Bridgewater v. Overseers of Brookfield, 3 Cow. 301;
Herrick v. Grow & Brown, 5 Wend. 579; Logan v. Gigley, 9 Ga. 114; Perry v. Booth
, 7 Tex. 598.) This last case shows that this contract is not binding upon the
administratrix personally.

2.  It is void, because the express statute laws of the State declare it to be
invalid, (Wood's Dig. art. 2293) and, as affecting by its obligations the
administratrix, and influencing her free and just action in relation to the
property of the intestate, it is made void by the obvious policy andspirit of
Art. 2302, Wood's Digest. By that statute, it is the duty of the administratrix
to report the proceedings upon the sale, and the proportion of the value of the
property which was realized by the sale, for the action of the Court.

Now, her interest under this contract with Stuart, was to make such a report as
would confirm the sale, and thus enable her to discharge the obligation of her
contract with Stuart. The law will not permit this conflict, but will declare
the contract void, and thus avoid the risk of a conflict between the duty of a
trustee and her interest.

II. The proceedings which occurred in and under the orders of the Probate Court
were void, because, by said proceedings, the Court never acquired any
jurisdiction over the persons of the infant heirs, nor jurisdiction to order a
sale of the land.

1. No jurisdiction over the persons of the infants was ever acquired.  (6 Wheat.
123; 1 Hill 135; 15 Mass. 330.) The Probate Court is of inferior and limited
jurisdiction. (Smith v. Anderson, 6 Cal. 659.) That jurisdiction is inquirable
into collaterally, see Elliott v. Pearsol, 1 Pet. 340; and this case was cited
and approved in Hickey v. Stewart, 3 How. 762; Wilcox v. Jackson, 13 Pet. 499.
See Rodgers v. Dill, 6 Hill, 416, where proceedings in chancery, regularly had,
were collaterally avoided for want of jurisdiction.

To bring these infant heirs before the Court, it was necessary that an order to
show cause should be personally served on all persons interested in the estate,
or that it should be published in a newspaper. In this case no personal service
was made, nor any publication had at any time. (Wood's Dig. Art. 2296.)

The proviso in that article, contemplating assent, refers to persons who are "
sui juris," and capable of consenting to any proceeding in Court. But the
attorney or guardian ad litem, appointed by the Court, cannot consent. (Doe dem.
Platter v. Anderson, 5 Port. [Ind.] 33.) Jurisdiction of the person of the
infant must be first obtained, before the Court can appoint a guardian ad litem
for the infant. (Wheatley v. Harvey, 1 Swan, [Tenn.] 484; Dayton on Surrogates,
260.)

It is the personal service, or the service by publication in a newspaper, which
gives the Court jurisdiction of the person; the appointment of a guardian ad
litem is insufficient for thatpurpose, unless followed by or preceded by service
of process. Posting in three places in the county is unwarranted by the statute.
The day set for hearing the petition was the twenty-second of May, 1854. On that
day, the guardian ad litem was appointed by the Court; on that day, he filed his
consent in writing; on that day, the order was made that the property be sold.

It is said, however, by the appellant, that Hall was appointed such guardian on
the first of April, 1854, when the petition was filed. It will be seen, from the
record, that the petition was filed on the first of April, 1854, by the
administratrix, in which she prayed the Court to confirm the contract of sale
with Stuart, but that, "if the Court should not consider it for the best
interest of the said estate to confirm said contract, then that the Court would
make an order for all persons to show cause," etc., why a sale of real estate
should not be made. On the day the petition was filed, Hall was appointed
attorney for the absent and minor heirs, and consented on the same day that an
order should be made confirming the sale of the administratrix to Stuart, and
the order was entered on the same day, to wit: the first day of April, 1854.

Here his functions as attorney ceased; and this is the evident view taken by all
parties, because, when the petition again comes up, on the twenty-second of May
following, upon the application for an order to sell, the Court then distinctly
appoints him guardian ad litem.

Our statute (Wood's Dig. art. 2297) requires that if the minors have a guardian,
the process shall be served upon him; if not, the Court shall appoint a guardian
before proceeding to act on the petition.

If it be held, under the proper construction of the statute, that the Court
should appoint the guardian before the process was served, then such an
appointment, on the very day, at the very instant of time, when the final action
of the Court is to be had, will invalidate the sale. (Sheldon v. Wright, 7 Barb.
44; Corwin v. Merritt, 3 Id. 340.)

Whatever apparent conflict there may be in the authorities in relation to the
question, whether the appointment of the guardian should precede or should
follow the service personally made on the infants of the process of the Court,
no authority can be produced under a statute like ours, which holds that the
singleex parte order of a Court of inferior jurisdiction, appointing A the
guardian ad litem of B, will have the double effect; first, to give the Court
jurisdiction over B; and second, to authorize A to consent to a judgment against
B.

The tenth section of the Practice Act shows that if the District Court were to
appoint a guardian ad litem for an infant, without the summons having been first
served, the order would be a nullity; and yet the District Court is one of
general jurisdiction, while the Probate Court is an inferior Court, and,
therefore, cannot take jurisdiction, nor administer remedies other than those
given, and in the manner prescribed by the statute. (Grimes' Estate v. Norris, 6
Cal. 625.)

III. The petition itself, filed in the Probate Court, praying the order to sell
the real estate, was insufficient.

If our former proposition be correct--  i.e., that there was no jurisdiction
acquired over the persons of these infants--it will be immaterial how complete
and perfect the petition itself may be.

But if these infants had been legally cited, and had appeared in Court, still
the petition was insufficient for the forced divestiture oftheir title, and
consequently there was no authority in the Court to make any order of sale. The
statute declares that the petition shall set forth certain facts. (Wood's Dig.
art. 2295, sec. 155.) Says Mr. Justice Baldwin, in Gregory v. McPherson, 13
Cal.: "This petition, with these required statutory averments, are
jurisdictional facts. Upon such a petition the Court has power to act; upon no
other. There is no difference between no petition at all, and a petition lacking
the substantial statements required by statute."

1. This petition is defective in this: that the administratrix does not
represent to the Probate Court the necessity of selling any real estate, or
ordering any to be sold, only in the event that the contract of sale with Stuart
is not confirmed by the Court; but that contingency never happened, because the
Court instantly, upon filing the petition, entered an order confirming the
contract between the administratrix and Stuart; and after that was done, the
power of the Court under this petition was gone.

2. Treating the petition as an absolute and unconditional application for an
order to sell real estate, it did not set forth the amount of personalestate
which had come to the hands of the administratrix. (Wood's Dig. art. 2295, sec.
155.) It is not pretended by the appellant, that the petition does disclose to
the Court the amount of personal property, except by reference to the inventory,
which had been theretofore filed under Art. 2271. The petition was filed on the
first of April, 1854, and the inventory had been on file ever since the
thirteenth of June, 1853--a period of nine months and seventeen days. This is
insufficient. (Bloom v. Burdick, 1 Hill, 135.)

3. It does not appear positively, or inferentially, by the petition, nor by any
reference whatever, how much of the personal property remains undisposed of.
(Art. 2295, sec. 155.) If the inventory be relied on, it shows that in April,
1854, there was on hand, with the administratrix, about $ 2,500 of personal
property, which was "first chargeable" with the debts of the estate (Art. 2277);
and it is only in the event of their exhaustion, that the real estate may be
sold. (Arts. 2277, 2293, 2294, 2295.)

4. There is in this petition no description of all the real estate of the
deceased, the condition and value of the respective portions. (Art. 2295, sec.
155.)

As to the value of the land, we are referred to the inventory again.

Now, the value was declared to be "uncertain" in June, 1853, and in April, 1854,
in a proceeding to sell real estate, where the administratrix ought to inform
the Court of a description of all the real estate and the condition and value of
the respective portions, she merely refers to the fact that ten months before
that it was registered in the inventory "value uncertain;" and this is all the
averment about value, and there is not even an excuse inserted that the value
could not be ascertained, even if that would excuse the peremptory requirements
of the law.

Again: Where, in the petition, in the inventory, or in any other paper whatever,
was there anything going to give the Probate Court the most distant conception
of the extent or quantity of any tract of land called "Petaluma" or "Arroyo de
San Antonio," (or any other name whatever) situate in Sonoma county?

How did the Court find the extent of the land? How did the Court know whether
the interest of the decedent was an estate in severalty, in joint tenancy, or in
common; whether that interest was one half, or one quarter, or one fiftiethof
the premises? in short, we submit to the Court, if the words "interest" in the
rancho called "Petaluma" in the county of Sonoma, value uncertain, * * * * $
5,000, can be called "a description of the real estate of the deceased, and the
condition and value of the respective portions and lots," such as to enable any
Court to determine whether it was for the interest of the estate that this
property should be sold in preference to any other and all other property of the
deceased.

In relation to that inventory and its reliability, it may be proper to observe,
that the petition also prays for the sale of block No. 14 in White's addition to
the city of San Jose, lying between Main and Fourth streets, and Jackson and
Empire streets, in San Jose; "and for a description of the property and its
value, the Probate Court is also referred in the petition to the inventory," and
the inventory has no allusion to that property whatever.

The proceedings in the Probate Court are, therefore, utterly insufficient in
respect to the jurisdiction of the persons of the infant defendants, and in
respect to the jurisdiction of the subject matter, in other words, there is no
service of process, andthere is no sufficient petition.

But conceding, for the purpose of the argument, that neither of these
propositions is true, then we say all these proceedings are vitiated and avoided
by the apparent fact, that these proceedings were the mere means adopted by the
parties for the purpose of consummating the agreement made between the appellant
Stuart and the administratrix.

By article 2,300, section 165, it is provided: "Upon the making of such order,
(of sale of real estate) a certified copy of the order of sale shall be
delivered by the Court to the executor or administrator, who shall be thereupon
authorized to sell the real estate as directed."

Now it is not averred in the complaint, nor proved in the case, that any such
order was delivered to the administrator. (Youny v. Keough, 11 Ill. 643; Smith
v. Hileman, 1 Scam. 325.)

This is a mere naked power not coupled with an interest, and in such cases the
law must be strictly pursued. (Jackson v. Shephard, 7 Cow. 9; Atkins v. Kennan,
20 Wend. 249.)

The proceedings in this case, if void for want of jurisdiction, could not affect
the right of Mrs. Allen, because she was administratrix. (7 Texas, 498.)

There is no implied warranty in sales by Sheriffs, Executors, Administrators or
other Trustees. Caveat emptor is the rule. (See authorities collected in 3 Phil.
Ev. 27, in the edition of the year 1859.)

JUDGES: Baldwin, J. delivered the opinion of the Court. Field, C. J. and Cope,
J. concurring.

OPINION BY: BALDWIN

OPINION

    This action involves the title to a tract of land in Sonoma county. Charles
White died, in this State, in 1853, seized of this tract. He left a widow and
three infant children. One of the children died after the proceedings hereafter
mentioned, upon the validity and effect of which the questions made by this
record are dependent. Mrs. White--now Allen--administered on the estate of the
decedent. She made a power of attorney to one Crosby, by which she empowered him
to make a contract, upon the best terms he could, for the sale of this tract of
land. Crosby, accordingly, on her behalf, agreed with Stuart that Mrs. White
should procure an order of the Probate Court for the sale of the premises, and
convey them to Stuart, on the payment of $ 3,000. The administratrix then
reported to the Probate Court that she had made the trade with Stuart, and also
filed a petition, praying the Court to confirm the sale; and further, that if
the Court should conclude not to confirm the contract she had made with Stuart,
then an order for sale be made. Upon the filing of this petition, the Court made
an order, appointing Frederick Hall guardian for the absent and minor heirs of
the estate. The petition, after setting out the debts, proceeds, "that the
personal property of said estate, which will appear by reference to the
inventory now on file, is not more than is sufficient for the use and support of
the family of said decedent, and is wholly insufficient to pay said
indebtedness, and that it is necessary to sell real estate to pay the same." The
petition, after giving some further matter, concludes in this wise: "Petitioner
further alleges, that the inventory heretofore filed gives a description of all
the real estate of which the said intestate died seized, and the condition and
value thereof, which said inventory is made a part of this petition." Then
follow the names of the heirs.  The inventory is in the record. It shows some $
1,200 or $ 1,500 of personal assets, and contains a brief account of the real
estate--among other things, this: "Interest in the rancho called Petaluma, in
the county of Sonoma, value uncertain, $ 5,000."

   After the filing of the petition, and the order to show cause, the Court
appointed Frederick Hall as guardian for the absent and minor heirs of the
estate. The guardian, on the same day, consented to the decree. No service seems
to have been made of any order to show cause, upon the heirs. The Court rendered
a decree for the sale of the premises. This first decree is inconsistent in
this, that it confirms the contract between Mrs. Allen and Stuart, and
afterwards proceeds to order a rule to the heirs, to show cause why a sale of
the premises, at public auction, should not be made. Afterwards, a decree of
sale was made, in the usual form. Several objections to these proceedings are
urged by the respondents. We propose to consider them in their order.

   1. It is urged, that this contract by Mrs. Allen was contrary to public
policy, and void, and that the decree entered in execution of it, and to give it
effect, partakes of the same infirmity. The general argument in support of this
proposition is, that it is the duty of the administrator to protect the property
of the estate; that the sale is required to be public; that this was an
arrangement for a private sale; and that, by the contract, the administratrix
placed herself in an antagonistical relation to her duty to the estate--her
interest being one way and that of the estate another. Unquestionably, the
administratrix could make no such bargain as this, so as to be binding upon the
estate, what-ever the effect upon herself, individually. But the question is not
as to the effect of this agreement, as such, upon the estate; but whether,
because of the fact of the agreement, the subsequent decree is a nullity. We do
not see how this is so. It is not every unauthorized agreement that is void, as
against public policy; much less is it true that every such agreement would
destroy the power of the Court to make an order otherwise legal, though that
order was in accordance with the agreement. To make the agreement void, on this
ground, the necessary effect must be to contravene some declared right or
positive duty. But the duty of the administratrix is not, necessarily,
inconsistent with an agreement to ask an order of sale, upon consideration that
a purchaser will give an agreed sum at the sale. This did not amount to a
private sale, for the very agreement contemplates that the sale shall be public,
and the Court had no power to make or authorize any other sale, or a  sale in
any other mode. So far as her own interest was concerned, we see no objection to
such an arrangement, and if the sale was to be public, probably no good reason
exists for holding that the administratrix should not provide or assure herself
in this way, that, if sold, the property would bring a reasonable price before
proceeding to take steps to have a sale ordered. The propriety of ordering the
sale, and of confirming it afterwards, was still left to the Court, uninfluenced
by any such agreement; and it was not thereby deprived of any of its discretion
in the matter. If we were to hold that such an agreement deprived the Court of
its authority, the consequence would be, that the estate might not be sold or
disposed of at all, and the interest of creditors be sacrificed or greatly
postponed; and it would thus result that the jurisdiction of a Court of
unquestioned general authority might be defeated by the mere act of the
administratrix.

   2. The next point is, that the decree is void, because the petition is
fatally defective in this: that it does not simply pray for a decree of
sale--but this prayer is in the alternative--the main object of the petition
being to obtain from the Court a confirmation of the private agreement. There is
some plausibility in this argument. We do not, however think it sound. It is
true, that the petition is defective in in the respect mentioned: but this does
not render the paper a nullity. It would be demurrable for this cause. It asked
what the Court had no authority to grant; but this did not destroy the power of
the Court to grant what it was empowered to give. So far, the petition presented
all the facts necessary to give the Court jurisdiction of the matter of the
sale; and this was enough, whatever else was inserted, to support its action
when attacked collaterally.

   3. Again: it is said that the decree and proceedings are void, because
inconsistent in this,  that the first order confirms the agreement, and then
requires the parties to show cause why the land should not be sold. The second
decree orders the property to be sold, as usual in such cases. This course of
procedure was, certainly, very irregular, and calculated to embarrass the sale;
but we do not see that it made the whole proceedings nullities. It was an
irregular and improper exercise of jurisdiction; but these irregularities and
defects must be corrected on appeal. They cannot be indirectly attacked. The
Court had no power to confirm this private sale. The statute denies it all
jurisdiction to make such an order. The order, therefore, was void; but this act
did not take from the Court any of its powers. It was divested of its  rightful
powers merely because it assumed powers it did not possess. It did have power to
order the sale of the land, and this power is exercised by its final decree.

   4. It is next objected, that the petition does not set forth facts essential
to give jurisdiction to the Probate Court. The alleged defect is, that the
petition does not set forth the amount of personal estate that had come to the
hands of the administratrix, and how much thereof remains undisposed of. The
language of the petition has been already given. We do not understand that
language to be or mean that the personal property was, at the time of the filing
of the inventory, sufficient to pay the indebtedness, but that the property was
so insufficient at the time of this petition. The inventory is referred to for
the purpose of identifying the property. The statute provides as follows:

   "Section 154. When the personal estate in the hands of the executor or
administrator shall be insufficient to pay the allowance to the family, and all
debts and charges of the administration, the executor or administrator may sell
the real estate for that purpose, upon the order of the County Judge.

   "Section 155. To obtain such order, he shall present a petition to the
Probate Court, setting forth the amount of personal estate that has come to his
hands, and how much thereof, if any, remains undisposed of; the debts
outstanding against the deceased, so far as can be ascertained; a description of
all the real estate of which the testator or intestate died seized, and the
condition and value of the respective portions and lots; the names and ages of
the devisees, if any, and of the heirs of the deceased; which petition shall be
verified by the oath of the party presenting the same.

   "Section 156. If it shall appear, by such petition, that there is not
sufficient personal estate in the hands of the executor or administrator to pay
the allowance to the family, the debts outstanding against the deceased, and the
expenses of administration, and that it is necessary to sell the whole or some
portion of the real estate, for the payment of such debts, the Probate Judge
shall thereupon make an order directing all persons interested to appear before
him at a time and place specified, not less than four nor more than ten weeks
from the time of making such order, to show cause why an order should not be
granted to the executor or administrator, to sell so much of the real estate of
the deceased as shall be necessary to pay such debts."

   It thus appears that the power of the Court to order the sale results  from
the fact that the personal estate in the hands of the administrator is
insufficient, etc., and to obtain the order, the act directs the administrator
to present a petition, setting forth the amount of personal estate that has come
to his hands,  and how much, if any, remains undisposed of. Now, in order to the
exercise of jurisdiction, it is not necessary that there should be a literal
compliance with the directions of the statute. A substantial compliance is
enough. Nor is it essential that there should be in the petition itself, and
without reference to any other paper or thing, a statement of these facts. The
main fact required, is the averment of the insufficiency of personal assets, and
mere formal defects in the mode of statement would not affect the jurisdiction.
The reference to the inventory makes, for all purposes of the reference, the
inventory a part of the petition; the amount of the personal estate is shown by
the inventory, as is also the value. Whether the word amount has reference to
quantity or value, therefore, is not material; nor will it do to say that this
petition did not show that no other property except that in the inventory came
to the hands of the administratrix; for the averment, though indirect, is that
the inventory shows the amount, or, in other words, the inventory is referred
to, to show what property belongs to the estate, and then follows the averment
that it is insufficient. It is true, the petition does not expressly show how
much, if any, remains undisposed of; but when reference is made to the
inventory, as showing the property of the estate, the natural meaning of the
language is, that, at the time of the reference, it is the property of the
estate. In other words, the statement is, in effect, that this property has not
been disposed of--for it is spoken of, in the present tense, as the property of
the estate. In cases like this, it is very apparent that many evils and
hardships, affecting titles injuriously, will result from holding Probate Courts
to great strictness of procedure; and it is better, as it is more reasonable,
whenever it can legally be done, to give a fair and liberal construction to
their acts. We think the views we have presented are in harmony with the rules
of law and the dictates of justice and policy. They do not contravene anything
said by either of the Justices sitting in the case of Gregory v. McPherson (13
Cal. 562), though that case is not authority--the Judges not concurring in the
grounds of the judgment. The question there argued in the principal opinion may
still be considered open in this Court. It will be remarked that it is
immaterial, so far as this question of jurisdiction is concerned, whether the
statements of the petition are true or not; the jurisdiction resting upon the
averments of the petition, not upon proof of them.

    5. Another objection is, that the petition only prays a sale in a given
event--that is to say, in the event the contract is not confirmed. Perhaps, if
this were the right construction of this paper, it would not affect the
jurisdiction; but we do not think it is the true construction. The prayer seems
to be in the alternative, and therefore the petition, as a pleading, was
defective; but this defect does not go to the jurisdiction of the Court.

   6. It is argued that, taking the petition and inventory together, it is not
shown by either or both of these papers how much of the personal estate has been
disposed of; and it it argued that this statement is a jurisdictional fact,
with-out which all the proceedings are void. About $ 2,500 worth of personal
estate came to the hands of the administratrix; $ 1,000 seems appropriated for
the support of the family. This would leave about $ 1,500 to be applied to the
payment of the debts. There is no showing how this property was applied, nor can
we presume that it was applied at all. The presumption is, if any, that it was
still in the hands of the administratrix. The statute does not require an
absolute exhaustion of all the personal property, before an order can be made
for the sale of the realty. The one hundred and fifty-fourth section provides,
that when the personal estate shall be insufficient to pay the allowance to the
family, debts, etc., the executor, etc., may sell on the order, etc. And then
the next section proceeds to declare, that to obtain such an order, the petition
shall be presented, setting forth the amount, and how much of the estate remains
undisposed of, etc. Section one hundred and fifty-six then provides, that if it
appears by the petition that there is not sufficient personal estate in the
hands of the executor or administrator to pay the allowance, the debts, etc.,
then the Judge shall order the sale.

   We have already said that we regard this petition, and inventory referred to
therein, as one paper, for all purposes of a statement of facts which they
contain; and that when the petition states that the personal property of the
estate, which will be shown by the inventory, is insufficient, this averment,
though informal and indirect, is equivalent to saying that the personal estate
mentioned in the inventory is still on hand, and therefore undisposed of. The
statement is of a fact existing at the time of the filing of the petition; and
that fact is, that the property of the estate is shown by the inventory, and is
insufficient to pay the debts, etc.; if it be the property of the estate, it has
not been disposed of, of course. We can make no nice criticism of the mere form
of a statement, for the  purpose of ousting a Court of jurisdiction in cases
like this, and holding its proceedings void.

   This view renders it unnecessary to consider whether the averment as to how
much of the personal estate has been disposed of is an essential averment, when
the petition shows that the personal estate, whether disposed of or not, is
insufficient to pay the debts. It is argued, with great force, that the power of
the Court to order the sale of the realty, by the one hundred and fifty fourth
section, comes from the fact that the personal estate is insufficient, that this
is the sole essential required by that section, which imparts the power to the
Probate Court, and that the subsequent sections are mere modes to give effect to
the substantive power; and like other statutory means to carry out a power, are
merely directions to the Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction, and not
conditions to the existence of the jurisdiction. But it is not essential to the
decision of this case to pass upon this point, and we only state it to show that
we have not overlooked it, or in any degree touched it by this opinion.

   The last objection to the opinion is, that the real estate is not
sufficiently described. Taking the whole petition and inventory together, and we
think the proceedings not void on this account. It would be holding the rule
with great strictness, to hold that the sale is void upon its face, because the
petition does not give an exact or accurate description of real estate.

   7. It is objected that the order of sale is void, because there was no
service of the order to show cause entered after the filing of the petition upon
the minor heirs. Sections one hundred and fifty-six and one hundred and
fifty-nine provide:

   "Sec. 156. If it shall appear by such petition that there is not sufficient
personal estate in the hands of the executor or administrator to pay the
allowance to the family, the debts outstanding against the deceased, and the
expenses of the administration, and that it is necessary to sell the whole, or
some portion of the real estate for the payment of such debts, the Probate Judge
shall thereupon make an order, directing all persons interested to appear before
him at a time and place specified, not less than four, nor more than ten weeks
from the time of making such order, to show cause why an order should not be
granted to the executor or administrator to sell so much of the real estate of
the deceased as shall be necessary to pay such debts."

   "Sec. 159. If any of the devisees or heirs of the deceased are minors, and
have a general guardian in the county, the copy of the  order shall be served
upon the guardian. If they have no such guardian, the Court shall, before
proceeding to act upon the petition, appoint some disinterested person their
guardian, for the sole purpose of appearing for them, and taking care of their
interests in the proceedings."

   It is urged that the appointment of the guardian ad litem was made on the
same day on which the order of sale was entered,  and that this vitiates the
proceedings. The statute is silent as to the time of the appointment; and we
cannot hold the act of the Court and of the guardian void on the ground
suggested. It is said again, that the service must be made of a copy of the
order before such appointment. But the statute does not so prescribe. It is not
perceived what useful purpose would be subserved by such a service; for the
infant could make no use of the information thus offered him, and the guardian
would be as well advised by notice of his appointment as if a copy of the order
served on the infant were given him. It seems that in this case, the Court,
"before proceeding to act upon the petition," did appoint a disinterested person
to act as guardian ad litem for the infant heirs; and that this guardian
appeared for them. We cannot conceive of any principle which, after this
appointment and appearance, denied jurisdiction to the Court over this subject
and the parties. At what time the Court should act after this, was within its
discretion. But as the guardian did not contest the case of the petitioner, but
assented to the order of sale, one time was, probably, as good as another for
the action of the Court. If service of the copy of the order to show cause were
necessary to be made on the guardian, to give jurisdiction where no appearance
was made, we presume that the appearance of the guardian was sufficient to give
jurisdiction, the object of the service being to bring the party into Court, or
give him notice of the proceeding.

   We have considered this case upon the grounds presented here and in the lower
Court. The questions made, are as to the jurisdiction of the Probate Court, and
the alleged nullity of the proceedings upon their face. Whether the various
circumstances of the case--the irregularities, the price for which the property
was sold, its real value, its consideration, the effect of these things upon the
sale--entitle the infant heirs to come into a Court of Equity to set aside the
sale, is another question which we do not feel called upon to decide. We simply
hold that the various objections made to the sale are not good grounds to
declare it void upon the face of the proceedings.

   Decree reversed and cause remanded.


                              75 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             Estate of ALFRED C. HELVEY, Deceased.  EVA TAYLOR, as
              Administratrix, etc., Appellant, v. EDNA M. HELVEY,
                                   Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 5291

            Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District

           146 Cal. App. 2d 662; 303 P.2d 1076; 1956 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      1518


                                December 6, 1956

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Riverside
County, which in effect determined title to real property of persons not parties
to administration proceedings.  Hilton H. McCabe, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Decedents' Estates--Jurisdiction--Title of Estate.  --As between the
representative of an estate and the estate, the probate court has jurisdiction
to try title.

(2) Id.--Jurisdiction--Title of Estate.  --A probate court is without
jurisdiction to try title to property as between the representative of the
estate and a stranger to the estate.

(3) Id.--Jurisdiction--Title of Estate.  --On objection to a final account
charging administratrix with concealing estate assets, including realty standing
in the names of persons not named as parties, the probate court may postpone
hearing the petition for approval of the account until title to the realty is
determined, but such court has no jurisdiction to determine title to realty and
render a judgment that would effectively defeat the title of those claiming an
interest in the property who are not parties to the proceeding.

COUNSEL: William Morris Taylor for Appellant.

Jesse E. Jacobson and Harry B. Cannon for Respondent.

JUDGES: Griffin, J.  Barnard, P. J., and Mussell, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: GRIFFIN

OPINION

     The deceased, A. C. Helvey, who specialized in obtaining title to property
at tax sales, etc., was married to K. F. Helvey.  They were close friends to
William M. Taylor, his attorney, who appeared for him in many actions in which
decrees of title were secured under some partnership agreement or arrangement
whereby Taylor would subsequently take an interest in the property acquired.
Often times actions were maintained in the name of K. F. Helvey.  She died after
she executed a general grant deed conveying to A. C. Helvey all interest she had
in any real property in the state.  He, thereafter,  made a will dated April 28,
1950, naming Father Weinig executor and leaving his real and personal property
to Maymie Hoffman.  He and attorney Taylor continued operations in securing
title to real property. Subsequently, he married Edna C. Helvey and did not
change his will naming her as a beneficiary.  He continued to file similar
actions in her name as well as his own.  On December 29, 1952, he executed a
general grant deed of all his interest in any real property in California to
her.  His wife now claims it was never delivered to her but was placed among his
papers and was not found until after his death which occurred as a result of an
automobile accident in November, 1953.  She testified that after the funeral she
sent his box of papers to her advisor and attorney for her husband, Mr. Taylor,
who was familiar with his affairs and he later telephoned her he had discovered
this general grant deed and told her about it, and that he had it recorded in
the several counties in the state where her husband had real property interests.
Taylor testified that Edna gave him the general grant deed and said: "Al gave it
to me" and wanted to know what to do with it and he advised her to record it.

   On December 16, 1953, Taylor prepared some form of agreement between himself
and Edna Helvey.  It recited that she was the sole heir of Al Helvey; that
Taylor and Helvey were partners "in many parcels of land and actions," and to
adjust them Eva Taylor would act as administrator with the  will annexed and
Taylor would act as attorney for the estate and he would waive his ordinary fee;
that it was agreed that Edna Helvey and William Taylor each owned an undivided
one-half interest in certain described property and owned a one-half interest in
all real property or claims thereto in California standing in A. C. Helvey's
name and which belonged to him.  He agreed that if he sold certain of those
properties he would pay her 10 per cent of the sums realized from such sales.
On January 5, 1954, Edna conveyed to Taylor her one-half interest in certain
described real property. On March 23, 1954, she signed a grant deed to Taylor,
for services rendered and to be rendered, of all real property she owned in
California with certain specific exceptions.  Edna Helvey claimed that he
represented to her that all these properties, not excepted, were of doubtful
title and value and it would take considerable legal work to secure any title to
them.  They involved between 25,000 and 30,000 acres of forest lands, oil and
gas leases, reversionary rights in Santa  Ana Line of Pacific Electric Railway
Company, and many other parcels of real estate in several counties of the State.
He produced in evidence an unacknowledged and unrecorded grant deed to him dated
August 17, 1915, from A. C. Helvey of a one-half interest in certain of those
properties.  On January 12, 1955, the administratrix presented her final account
and petition for distribution showing $ 3,436.26 in cash that came into her
hands less certain claimed credits including statutory attorneys' and
administratrix's fees, leaving a balance of $ 2,934.96 for distribution.

   Edna M. Helvey, through her then attorney, filed objections to the hearing of
the final account and petition alleging that it had come to her attention that
through the collusion with her husband William M. Taylor, the administratrix
concealed numerous assets belonging to said estate, consisting of parcels of
real estate in several different counties, and that she failed to include them
in the inventory or final account. She prayed that the hearing on that matter be
continued until further investigation could be made to ascertain the facts.
Apparently she had employed her then attorney under a 40 per cent recovery
contract.  He continued his investigation of the records in these several
counties to ascertain the true facts.

   Eva Taylor, as administratrix, answered the charge, denied generally these
allegations, and alleged that on December 29, 1952, A. C. Helvey made and
executed a general grant deed conveying all of his real property to his wife;
that this deed was exhibited to the administratrix and it appeared regular upon
its face; that she believed it had been duly delivered to Helvey's wife during
his lifetime and had been duly recorded in the several counties; that said deed
conveyed to her all the right, title and interest of A. C. Helvey in his real
property and that she believed Helvey thereafter had no real property to list as
part of the assets of his estate; and that there was no record of him acquiring
any real property since the execution of that deed. She then listed the real
property which she believed was owned by A. C. Helvey separately or held jointly
with William M. Taylor or others and set out the agreement and assignment and
grant deeds by Edna M. Helvey to William Taylor above mentioned.  She stated
that Edna Helvey did not point out any real property that she claims should be
inventoried in said estate but in fact permitted certain portions of it to be
sold under the general grant deed and accepted payments on it.  She further
alleged  that Edna Helvey never before claimed that the general grant deed to
her had not been, in fact, delivered to her by her husband during his lifetime.

   Objection was made that the probate court had no jurisdiction to determine
title standing of record or claimed by third persons.  Considerable evidence was
introduced indicating the record title of considerable real property did stand
in decedent's name prior to the date of the general deed. The court found
generally that the  general deed, dated December 29, 1952, from A. C. Helvey to
Edna M. Helvey, was never delivered to her with intention to pass title and
accordingly was invalid and a nullity and therefore it was true that all the
real property and interest included therein remains a part of the assets of the
estate and the administratrix was directed to account for it in the estate.
Judgment was entered accordingly.  The administratrix appealed.

   Numerous claims are raised, including estoppel on the part of Edna Helvey to
raise the defense that there had been no delivery of the general grant deed
because of the conveyance of certain properties under it and the acceptance of
money from payments due thereon; that objector failed to prove the existence of
real property belonging to said estate; that the objections filed presented no
issue as to the delivery of the general grant deed and if so the probate court
had no jurisdiction to determine its validity in this proceeding.

   Assuming the invalidity of the general grant deed, if established in a proper
proceeding, there is sufficient evidence to show that there would be certain
real property belonging to said estate which was unlisted and for which the
administratrix did not account.

     The jurisdiction of the probate court, when the controversy as to ownership
of property is between a representative of the estate and the estate, indicates
it has jurisdiction to determine the validity of claims of ownership. ( Estate
of Bruck, 140 Cal.App. 300 [35 P.2d 431].)   But it is an established principle
of law that a probate court is without jurisdiction to try title to property as
between a representative of the estate and a stranger to it.

   In Merola  v. Superior Court, 125 Cal.App.2d 1 [269 P.2d 664], it was held
that Probate Code, sections 613- 615, relating to proceedings for discovery of
property, create no exception to this rule, and that a widow who claims that
certain property is her sole property as a result of its having been given to
her by her deceased husband during his lifetime, claims as a  stranger to the
estate and therefore the probate court cannot try title to such property as
between her and the executor. To the same effect is Ex Parte Casey, 71 Cal. 269
[12 P. 118]; Koerber v. Superior Court, 57 Cal.App. 31 [206 P. 496]; Miers v.
Betterton, 18 Tex.Civ.App. 430 [45 S.W. 430]; and West's Annotated California
Codes, volume 53, page 268, Probate Code, section 613, and cases cited.

   Here the title to the real property is directly in issue, depending on the
validity of the general grant deed. Acting under that deed, Edna Helvey granted
her interest in the property to Attorney Taylor, who now holds record title. It
appears that there was other property disposed of to innocent purchasers for
value and for which Edna Helvey was receiving payments.  These parties certainly
were interested parties and were not made parties to these probate proceedings.

     We conclude that the probate court, upon such a summary proceeding as that
taken here, may be justified in postponing the hearing on the petition for
approval of the account until the title to the real property involved is
determined, but it had no jurisdiction to try and determine the title to said
real property and render a judgment which would, in effect, defeat the title of
those claiming an interest in the property, particularly where they were not
made parties to the proceeding.  It therefore becomes unnecessary to determine
the other questions raised.

   Judgment reversed.


                              76 of 100 DOCUMENTS

                                ESTATE OF BOLAND

                                   No. 6,700

                  SUPREME COURT OF CALIFORNIA, DEPARTMENT ONE

                        55 Cal. 310; 1880 Cal. LEXIS 256


                                  April, 1880

PRIOR-HISTORY:      Appeal from an order of the Probate Court of the County of
Sierra, directing a resale of real property. Howe, J.

COUNSEL: Creed Haymond, J. W. Turner, and Thos. Ruthedge, for Appellant.

The Probate Court had no power to vacate the order confirming the sale of real
estate. ( Code Civ. Proc.  § 1554.) It was not necessary that the petition
should be verified. ( Code Civ. Proc.  §§ 1529, 1530, 1533.) All the description
contemplated or made necessary by the Code was given in the petition. (Fitch v.
Miller, 20 Cal. 352.) Appellant is the party aggrieved by the order appealed
from, and may appeal. (Adams v. Woods, 8 Cal. 314; § 933, Code Civ. Proc.;
Williams v. Gwyn, 2 Saund. 40.)

F. D. Soward, and Tubbs & Cole, for Respondent.

The Court had no jurisdiction to make the first order of sale, as the petition
failed to set forth the facts required by § 1537 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
(Pryor v. Downey, 50 Cal. 383; Haynes v.  Meeks, 20 id. 312; Townsend v. Gordon,
19 id. 189.) Even if the petition was sufficient, the Court rightly vacated the
order. (Freeman on Judgments, §§ 98, 100; Millspaugh v. McBride, 7 Paige, 509;
Delaplaine v. Lawrence, 10 id. 602.)

JUDGES: McKee, J. McKinstry, J., and Ross, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: McKEE

OPINION

    This is an appeal from an order of the Probate Court of Sierra County,
authorizing the administratrix of the estate of D. Boland, deceased, to resell
certain real property of the estate, which had been formerly sold by the
administratrix, and confirmed to the appellant as purchaser.

   It is objected that the appellant was in no way a party to the order
directing a resale, and cannot, therefore, appeal. An appeal may be taken by any
party aggrieved, from an order of the Probate Court against or in favor of
directing the partition, sale, or conveyance of real property. ( §§ 969, 938,
Code Civ. Proc.)

   The appellant describes himself in his notice of appeal as "a purchaser who
purchased and paid for the real estate of deceased, described in and confirmed
to him by an order of the Probate Court, made and entered December 9th, 1878."
Assuming  that he is a party aggrieved by the order from which he appeals, (
Adams v. Wood, 8 Cal. 306; Dennis v. T. M. W. Co. 10 id. 369) and that the order
itself is appealable, we find nothing in the transcript to indicate upon what
the order was made, except it be the petition upon which the Court had acted in
making the original order of sale. But the Probate Court had, on the 30th of
December, 1878, vacated and annulled the decree of confirmation of the previous
sale, the sale itself, of which the decree was confirmatory, and the order of
sale upon which the sale had been made, upon the following grounds, as set forth
in the annulling order, to wit:

   "That the petition praying for an order of sale of said real property filed
herein August 30th, 1878, is not verified, and does not particularly describe,
nor describe at all, the condition of the property sought to be sold.

   "That the condition of said property was not proved at the hearing had
pursuant to said petition on October 5th, 1878; and that the condition of said
property is not set forth in the order of sale made herein, October 5th, 1878,
nor in the decree confirming said sales of real property made herein, December
9th, 1878.

   "Wherefore, by reason of the last above recited facts and the premises, it
appears that all the said proceedings are void in this, that the Court never
acquired jurisdiction."

   Neither the appellant nor any one else complained of this annulling order or
decree. No appeal from it was taken by any one purporting to have been aggrieved
by it. It stands in full force, unappealed from and unreversed; and if the
grounds upon which it was made be correct, there was nothing in the application
for a sale of the real property of the intestate which authorized the Court to
order a sale, or a resale, of the property.

   On looking into the record as it has been brought before us on this appeal,
we find that the administratrix, in her petition filed August 30th, 1878, for an
order of sale, described the real property of the estate as follows: "That the
said inventory and appraisement on file contains a full description of all the
real estate of which the intestate died seized, or in which he had any interest,
or in which the said estate had acquired any interest;  and your petitioner, for
a description of said real estate, hereby refers to said inventory, and makes
the same a part of this petition; and that the condition and value of the
respective portions of real estate are described in the said appraisement
heretofore referred to, and made part of this petition."

   There is neither inventory nor appraisement annexed to, or, in fact, made
parts of the petition; but it appears, outside the petition, by the record in
the statement on this appeal, "That on the 8th day of October, 1877, said
administratrix made and duly returned an inventory and appraisement of all the
estate of said deceased which had come into her possession and knowledge."

   That from said inventory and appraisement it is made to appear that said
deceased died possessed of the following real estate, to wit:

   "Two and one-quarter interests in the Consolidated California Gold Mining
Company, located at Table Rock, Sierra County, California, of the value of $
506; also, one parcel of mining ground, known as F. Descombe's Claims, located
on the west bank of the East Fork of Canon Creek, Sierra County, California, and
opposite the mouth of the South Fork of the aforesaid creek, of the value of $
20; also, one ditch heading in the East Fork of Canon Creek, and discharging in
the above claims, of the value of $ 15; and one ditch heading in the South Fork
of Canon Creek, also discharging in the above mentioned claims, of the value of
$ 15."

   This is all of the inventory and appraisement. Of the property described
therein, the Court ordered to be sold the following, as it is described in the
decree of sale: "The following is the real estate hereby authorized to be sold,
being situate in the County of Sierra, State of California, and described as
follows, to wit:

   "Two and one-fourth (2 1/4) interests in the mining claims known as the
Consolidated California Gold Mining Company's Claims, located on the south side
of Table Rock, about one and a half miles from Howland Flats; also, one parcel
of mining ground known as Frank Descombe's Mining Claims."

   Taking the petition and inventory together, the description of the property,
as was held in Stuart v. Allen, 16 Cal. 473, is not  so defective as to render
the sale void. But while the description may be considered sufficient, there is
nothing in the petition, or the inventory and appraisement referred to therein,
which indicates the condition of the mining interests, or of the mining company
in which such interests are held, or of the mining claims. It does not appear
whether they were worked or lying idle, whether they were sources of profit or
loss to the estate. The petitioner alleges that a sale of all the property
described in the inventory was necessary, because the personal property of the
estate was insufficient to pay debts, family allowance, and estimated expenses
of the administration. And the petition shows that the amount of the personal
property of the estate which came into the hands of the administratrix "is the
sum of, in goods, $ 1,600," and that the debts, family allowance, and expenses
amount to $ 2,041. But if the mining interests or claims were yielding an income
which was sufficient to make good the alleged deficiency in the personal estate,
there would not have been any necessity for a sale of the real property. So long
as there is a sufficiency of personal property in the hands of an administrator
to pay the debts and expenses of an administration, a sale of the real property
of an estate cannot be made. ( Haynes v. Meeks, 20 Cal. 288.) Hence the
necessity for setting forth in the petition the condition and situation of the
real property. Section 1530 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides, "that the
executor, administrator, or any heir-at-law, or creditor of the estate, any
partner, or member of any mining company in which interests or shares are held
or owned by the estate, may file in the Probate Court a petition in writing,
setting forth the general facts of the estate, being then in due course of
administration, and particularly describing the mine, interest, or shares which
it is desired to sell, and particularly the condition and situation of the mine
or mining interests, or of the mining company in which such interests or shares
are held, and the grounds upon which the sale is asked to be made." And § 1537
of the same Code, under which the petition in this case seems to have been
filed, provides that, "to obtain an order for the sale of real property, the
executor or administrator must present a verified petition to the Probate Court,
setting forth the amount of personal property that has  come to his hands, and
how much thereof, if any, remains undisposed of; the debts outstanding against
the decedent, as far as can be ascertained or estimated; the amount due upon the
family allowance; the debts, expenses, and charges of administration which have
accrued or are likely to accrue; a general description of all the real property
of which the decedent died seized, or in which he had any interest, and the
condition and value thereof, and whether the same be community or separate
property; the names of all the legatees and devisees, if any, and of the heirs
of the decedent, so far as known to the petitioner." Under either of these
sections the petition under consideration was defective, in failing to set forth
the condition of the property. The Court, say the Supreme Court in Estate of
Smith, 51 Cal. 563, should be informed by the petition of the condition of the
property--that is, whether the property is improved or unimproved, productive or
unproductive, occupied or vacant, and the like. Such information is necessary to
enable the Court to intelligently exercise its judgment in the selection of the
property of the estate which can be most advantageously sold.

   Brought, as this petition evidently was, under § 1537, it is fatal to it that
it was not verified. The verification of the petition, the description of the
property, its condition, value, and character, are jurisdictional facts, which
must affirmatively appear in a verified petition, before a Probate Court can
make any valid order for a sale of the real property of an estate to pay debts.
These are of the essence of the petition, without which it has no legal
existence. The petition is the commencement of a distinct proceeding in the
nature of an action; without it, the Court acquires no jurisdiction to order the
sale, for the jurisdiction for that purpose depends upon the averments of such a
petition. ( Fitch v. Miller, 20 Cal. 385; Spriggs' Estate, id. 125.)

   It has been repeatedly held, that the jurisdiction of the Probate Court
depends absolutely on the sufficiency of the petition--in other words, on its
substantial compliance with the requirements of the probate law. (Fitch v.
Miller, Haynes v. Meeks, supra; Pryor v. Downey, 50 Cal. 388; Estate of Smith,
supra.)

   The appellant tacitly admits the validity of the order of the Probate Court
in setting aside the sale and confirmation; for,  although all the rights which
he claims as an alleged purchaser of the property depend upon the decree of sale
and of confirmation, he took no appeal from the order of the Court disannulling
them; and unless that order has been vacated and set aside, and the original
decrees have been restored, the appellant is in no condition to require a
conveyance; for, those decrees no longer existing of record, there is nothing
upon which his claim of right to the property can be enforced, or upon which
this Court could direct, as he has requested, the execution of a conveyance. Nor
does there appear anything in the record before us to sustain the order appealed
from for a resale. The record contains the original unverified petition, upon
which the Court below acted in directing a sale of the property in the first
instance. It does not appear that it was verified before making the second order
for sale. If it was made upon an unverified petition, it would also, like the
first, be void for want of jurisdiction.

   The order of the Probate Court, made and entered March 1st, 1879, authorizing
the administratrix of the estate to again sell the real property of the estate,
is reversed, without costs to either party; and the cause is remanded to the
Superior Court of Sierra County for further proceedings, with leave to the
administratrix to petition for a sale of the real property de novo.


                              77 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             Estate of KATHERINE RYAN, Deceased.  ELIZABETH LEARY,
               Petitioner and Appellant, v. HELEN SCULLY et al.,
          Respondents and Appellants; KATHRYN NEVILLE ELLIOTT et al.,
                                  Respondents

                                 Sac. No. 5448

                          Supreme Court of California

               21 Cal. 2d 498; 133 P.2d 626; 1943 Cal. LEXIS 275


                                January 23, 1943

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Appellants' Petitions for Rehearing were Denied February
18, 1943.  Shenk, J., Curtis, J., and Carter, J., Voted for a Rehearing.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from an order of the Superior Court of Humboldt County
determining heirship.  Harry W. Falk, Judge.

COUNSEL: John F. Quinn and Irving T. Quinn for Petitioner and Appellant.

Hill & Hill and Lewis T. Sterry for Respondents and Appellants.

Heller, Ehrman, White & McAuliffe, Lawrence C. Baker, Peter A. Breen, Jordan L.
Martinelli and Samuel W. Gardiner as Amici Curiae on behalf of Appellants.

Michael McHugh, Mahan & Mahan, L. E. Mahan, Denver Sevier and Chris R. Petersen
for Respondents.

JUDGES: In Bank. Ward, J. pro tem.  Gibson, C. J., Edmonds, J., and Traynor, J.,
concurred.  Carter, J., concurring and dissenting.  Curtis, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: WARD

OPINION

     In this proceeding to determine heirship the trial court held that the
estate of Katherine Ryan, who died intestate, should be distributed in due
course of administration equally to twenty-six first cousins of the deceased.
The cousins are both paternal and maternal, and in each line some are of the
half blood of the deceased. Elizabeth Leary, the only maternal whole blood
cousin, and the three paternal whole blood cousins have filed appeals, which by
stipulation are submitted on a single bill of exceptions.

   Appellants contend that half blood cousins on the paternal side are excluded
by section 254, Probate Code, from sharing in property which came to Katherine
Ryan from her mother by descent, devise or gift, and that half blood cousins on
the maternal side are excluded from paternal ancestral property.

     Section 254, Probate Code, provides: "Kindred of the half blood inherit
equally with those of the whole blood in the same degree, unless the inheritance
came to the intestate by descent, devise, or gift of some one of his ancestors,
in which  case all those who are not of the blood of such ancestor must be
excluded from such inheritance in favor of those who are." (Formerly § 1394,
Civ. Code.) This case involves particularly the construction of the words "in
favor of those who are."

   The decedent's mother, Julia Leary Ryan, had a full brother, Jeremiah Leary,
and a half sister, Abbie Leary Murray.  Appellant Elizabeth Leary, daughter of
Jeremiah Leary, is decedent's cousin of the whole blood on the maternal side.
The sixteen children of Abbie Leary Murray are decedent's maternal cousins of
the half blood.

   Similarly, decedent's father, John Ryan, had a full sister, Ellen Ryan
Scully, and a half brother, Thomas Neville.  The three children of Ellen Ryan
Scully are decedent's paternal cousins of the whole blood and are appellants
herein.  The six children of Thomas Neville are decedent's paternal cousins of
the half blood.

   The appellants' contention is that as to property which came to Katherine
Ryan by descent, devise or gift from her mother, distribution should be made
equally to the four whole blood cousins and to the maternal half blood cousins,
excluding the six paternal half blood cousins; as to property which came to
Katherine Ryan by descent, devise or gift from her father, it should be divided
between the four full blood cousins and the six paternal half blood cousins,
excluding the sixteen maternal half bloods.

   It is not contended that full blood cousins are excluded from sharing in any
part of decedent's estate because of its ancestral origin.  It is conceded that
full blood cousins on the paternal side share in property of the decedent which
came to her from her mother, and vice versa.

    The problem can be analyzed best by considering the historical background of
section 254.  The section is a survival  of two common law canons of descent. It
was the rule at common law that on failure of lineal descendants the inheritance
descended to the decedent's collateral relations who were of the blood of the
first purchaser. (1 Jones' Blackstone, p. 1007.) For example, using the names
which Blackstone employs in his illustrations, George Stiles purchases land,
which descends to his son, Geoffrey.  Upon the death of Geoffrey, his son John
succeeds. John dies without issue.  John's paternal uncle, brother of Geoffrey,
may succeed, since he is of the blood of George, first purchaser. But John's
uncle on the maternal side could not succeed, since not of the blood of George.

   The reason for the rule, according to Blackstone, was feudal, "that what was
given to a man, for his personal service and personal merit, ought not to
descend to any but the heirs of his person." (1 Jones' Blackstone, p. 1008.) It
has been said of this explanation: "Attempts have been made to represent it as a
specifically feudal rule, one which takes us back to a time when only the
descendants of the original vassal could inherit; but such attempts seem to be
unnecessary; a rule whose main effect is that of keeping a woman's land in her
own family is not unnatural and may well be very ancient." (2 Pollock and
Maitland, History of English Law (2d ed.) p. 300.)

   If a point was reached where it was impossible to trace descent back further,
the law, as it developed, permitted descendants on both sides to succeed. For
instance, if upon the death of John Stiles it was known that his grandfather
George Stiles had inherited the property, but it could not be known whether
George had inherited from his father, Walter Stiles, or his mother, Christian
Smith, the law would admit the descendants of George Stiles either paternal or
maternal in their due order to be heirs of John Stiles.  (1 Jones' Blackstone,
p. 1010.) But while permitting the kindred of the decedent on both sides to
succeed, the common law confined succession to those who were of the whole blood
of the decedent. According to Blackstone, this was because there was a greater
probability, although not a certainty, that collateral relatives of the decedent
would be of the blood of the first purchaser if his whole blood relatives.  " .
. . The whole brother of John Stiles is sure to be descended from that unknown
ancestor; his half brother has only an even chance, for half John's ancestors
are not his.  So, in the second degree, John's uncle of the whole blood has an
even chance; but the chances are three to one against his uncle of the half
blood, for three-fourths of John's ancestors are not his." (I Jones' Blackstone,
p. 1018.)

   The rule limiting descent to whole blood kindred of the decedent was not,
however, confined to cases where it was impossible to trace descent, but was
applied where the first purchaser was known and the collateral relative of the
half blood was known to be of the blood of such purchaser. That  is, if John
Stiles had a half brother, born of his father but of a different mother, John's
half brother could not inherit from John's estate which was known to have
descended to John from the common father.  The estate would pass to more remote
collaterals, in default of which it would escheat, rather than pass to John's
half brother.  (1 Cooley's Blackstone (4th ed.) pp. 615, 618; 1 Jones'
Blackstone, pp. 1014, 1019.) As applied to half blood relatives of the decedent
known to be of the blood of the first purchaser this canon of descent is not
based upon reason and was in fact condemned by Blackstone.  (1 Jones'
Blackstone, p. 1019.)

   Pollock and Maitland say of the rule excluding half bloods from all right of
inheritance as collateral kindred: " . . . we strongly suspect that the rule
that was ultimately established had its origin in a few precedents.  About such
a matter it is desirable that there shall be a clear rule; the import of the
rule is of no great moment.  Our rule was one eminently favorable to the king;
it gave him escheats; we are not sure that any profounder explanation of it
would be true." (2 History of English Law (2d ed.), supra, p. 305.)

   The rule excluding half bloods has been modified in England.  (16 Am.Jur.
838.) In this country a number of states have statutes derived from the common
law which provide for descent of ancestral property among those who are of the
blood of the ancestor from whom the property came to the decedent. (4 Tiffany,
Real Property (3d ed.), p. 386; 16 Am.Jur. 836; 141 A.L.R. 976.) Under such
statutes succession is by those heirs of decedent who are of the blood of the
ancestor from whom the estate passed immediately to the intestate, rather than
of the blood of a more remote "first  purchaser." (16 Am.Jur. 839; 4 Tiffany,
supra, p. 387.) Various restrictions are also made by statutes in this country
on inheritance by kindred of the half blood. (4 Tiffany, Real Property, supra,
p. 383; 16 Am.Jur. 833.) Section 254, Probate Code, combines features of both
doctrines.

     The common law rule excluded half bloods entirely from inheriting real
property. Section 254 only excludes them from succeeding to property which came
to the decedent by descent, devise or gift from an ancestor where they are not
of the blood of such ancestor. Where the half blood kin are of the blood of the
ancestor from whom the estate came to the decedent, they share in it.  There is
no uncertainty in the meaning of section 254 in this particular.  Under  the
section the paternal half blood cousins of Katherine Ryan are entitled to share
in property which came to her from her father equally with paternal whole blood
cousins. The disputed question is as to the right of the paternal half blood
cousins to share in property which came to Katherine Ryan from her mother,  and
as to the right of maternal half blood cousins to share in property which came
to her from her father.

     Under the common law full blood kindred were excluded where not of the
blood of the first purchaser from whom the decedent derived the estate.  In this
state a general rule limiting descent to those who in fact or fiction are of the
blood of the first purchaser or of the decedent's immediate ancestor has never
obtained.  In In re Pearsons, 110 Cal. 524 [42 P. 960], the decedent left as his
heirs aunts and uncles, all of the whole blood, both on the paternal and
maternal sides.  The court upheld the contention of appellants, maternal aunts
and uncles, that they could not be excluded from property which came to the
decedent from his father, which property constituted the larger part of his
estate.  The court held that the exclusionary provision of section 254 applied
only to kindred of the half blood. That section commences: "Kindred of the half
blood inherit equally with those of the whole blood." If the section had stopped
there, kindred of the half blood would have been in exactly the same position as
those of the whole blood, but the section continues with the "unless"  clause.
The court held that such clause made an exception to the rule that kindred of
the half blood inherit equally with those of the whole, and as an exception to
that rule it applied only to kindred of the half blood, who were excluded if not
of the blood of the ancestor from whom the property came to the decedent. This
means, as applied to the instant case, that appellant Elizabeth Leary, cousin of
the whole blood on the maternal side, is not to be excluded from property which
came to decedent from her father, although she is a maternal cousin, nor are the
other appellants, whole blood paternal cousins, to be excluded from property
which came to decedent from her mother.  The parties concede this to be the law.

     A rule excluding half bloods not of the blood of the ancestor from whom the
decedent derived estate, while permitting whole blood relatives not of the blood
of the ancestor  to participate is without reason.  Why should Elizabeth Leary,
full blood maternal cousin, share in estate which came to decedent from her
father, while half blood maternal cousins are excluded?  Elizabeth Leary,
equally with the half blood maternal cousins, is not of the blood of the
decedent's father.  Chancellor Kent's comment is that the laws of this country
in respect to inheritance by the half blood seem to have been the result of
accident or caprice, rather than the dictate of principle.  (4 Kent's
Commentaries, 406, as quoted 61 Am. Dec. 656.)

   Respondents' contention is that in the particular circumstances of this case
section 254 does not exclude half blood cousins not of the blood of the ancestor
from sharing in ancestral property. To develop the argument it is pertinent to
quote section 254 again: "Kindred of the half blood inherit equally with those
of the whole blood in the same degree, unless the inheritance came to the
intestate by descent, devise, or gift of some one of his ancestors, in which
case all those who are not of the blood of such ancestor must be excluded from
such inheritance in favor of those who are." (Italics added.)

   The italicized words were added when the Probate Code was adopted in 1931.
Respondents rely on them and on a line of cases decided before the amendment for
the proposition that heirs of the half blood not of the blood of the ancestor
are excluded only in favor of heirs of the whole blood who are of the blood of
the ancestor.  ( Estate of Sayles, 215 Cal. 207 [8 P.2d 1009]; Estate of Edwards
, 202 Cal. 130 [259 P. 440]; Estate of Belshaw, 190 Cal. 278 [212 P. 13]; Estate
of Smith, 131 Cal. 433 [63 P. 729, 82 Am.St.Rep. 358]; Estate of Warnock, 36
Cal.App.2d 464  [97 P.2d 831].) In view of the plain import of section 254,
paternal half bloods cannot be excluded from sharing in property which came to
the intestate from her father, and under the decision in the Pearsons case,
supra, the maternal full bloods cannot be excluded from paternal ancestral
property herein, but must receive equal shares with the paternal full bloods.
This means, in respondents' analysis, that if maternal half bloods are excluded
from paternal ancestral property, while maternal whole bloods and paternal half
bloods share it with paternal whole bloods, the exclusion of maternal half
bloods takes place not only in favor of paternal whole bloods, but  also in
favor of the single maternal cousin of the full blood and the paternal cousins
of the half blood. Since the maternal half bloods in the circumstances cannot be
excluded from paternal ancestral property "in favor of" paternal full bloods
only, they cannot be excluded at all in this case, in respondents' view.  The
result, according to respondents, is that all cousins of decedent share equally.

   Acceptance of respondents' view would involve these consequences.  If
decedent Katherine Ryan left surviving her maternal cousins of the half blood
and paternal cousins of the whole blood, the maternal half blood cousins would
be excluded from paternal ancestral property. But if she left surviving her
maternal cousins of the half blood and paternal cousins of the half blood, or
paternal cousins of both the whole and half blood, all would share equally in
paternal ancestral property, for the exclusion of the maternal half bloods, in
respondents' view, can take place only in favor of paternal whole bloods.
Similarly, if she left surviving maternal cousins of the whole blood and of the
half blood and paternal cousins of the whole blood, all would share equally in
paternal ancestral property, for the maternal whole blood cannot be excluded
under the rule of the Pearsons case, and their inclusion would result in
excluding maternal half bloods in favor of others than paternal full bloods.
Although a rule excluding half bloods not of the blood of the ancestor while
permitting whole bloods not of the blood to share in ancestral property is
unreasonable, we are of the view that the application of section 254 should not
be limited by interpreting it in a manner which will give rise to further
purposeless distinctions, such as those which result from respondents' analysis.
The remedy is with the Legislature.

   The first fallacy in respondents' argument is their premise that relatives of
the half blood not of the blood of the ancestor are excluded only in favor of
whole blood relatives who are of the blood of the ancestor. The cases which
respondents cite, when read in the light of their facts, cannot be accepted as
authority for respondents' premise.  ( Estate of Sayles, supra; Estate of
Belshaw, supra; Estate of Edwards, supra; Estate of Smith, supra; Estate of
Warnock, supra.) The true rule, before as well as after the amendment of 1931,
is that half blood kindred not of the blood of the ancestor are excluded in
favor of both whole and half blood kindred who  are of the blood of the
ancestor. It was held in Estate of Sayles, supra, that the amendment did not
change the meaning of the section, but merely clarified it.

   The fact that in the present case the exclusion of the maternal half blood
cousins from paternal ancestral property will operate also in favor of the
maternal full blood cousin, Elizabeth Leary, does not mean that the exclusionary
provision becomes a nullity.  The exclusion of maternal half bloods, as directed
by the section, must be given effect notwithstanding its result is to favor also
the maternal full blood cousin. The relatives of the blood of the ancestor are
favored thereby, although less favored than if the maternal whole blood cousin
also could be excluded.  She cannot be excluded because her rights as an heir
are fixed by section 226, Probate Code, and do not depend on the origin of the
estate.  That is, section 254 requires that paternal cousins, both whole blood
and half blood, be favored as to paternal ancestral property where there are
half blood cousins not of the blood of the ancestor. Section 226 demands that
they should not be favored at the expense of the maternal whole blood cousin,
who under that section is entitled to inherit without regard to ancestral origin
of property.  The same analysis applies to the paternal whole blood cousins
sharing in maternal ancestral property.

   The statement is made above that respondents are not correct in their premise
that half blood relatives not of the blood of the ancestor may be excluded only
in favor of whole blood relatives of the blood of the ancestor. In the cited
cases either there was not a relative of the blood of the ancestor, or there was
a whole blood relative of the blood of the ancestor who was  related to the
decedent in a more remote degree than the half blood relative.  For example, in
Estate of Sayles, supra, a first cousin of the decedent of the blood of the
ancestor claimed to be her heir to the exclusion of half-brothers and
half-sisters not of the blood of the ancestor. It is held in this line of cases
that the half blood relative succeeds, to the exclusion of the more remote whole
blood relative, since the section reads: "Kindred of the half blood inherit
equally with those of the whole blood in the same degree . . ." None of the
cases involved a question of succession as between maternal and paternal
relatives in the same degree.  Since the contending relatives were not related
in the same degree, it was not necessary to the decisions to declare  that when
the half bloods and the full bloods are related to the decedent in the same
degree, then half bloods not of the blood of the ancestor are excluded only in
favor of whole bloods of the same degree who are of the blood of the ancestor.
In such cases as Estate of Sayles, supra, and Estate of Warnock, supra, the
kindred of the blood of the ancestor all happened to be of the whole blood,
which may account for the statements made in the opinions.  The weakness of a
rule excluding half bloods not of the blood of the ancestor only in favor of
whole blood relatives of the blood of the ancestor is that it implies that half
bloods of the blood of the ancestor are excluded, contrary to the plain terms of
section 254.

   In the basic case, Estate of Smith, supra, the decedent left paternal
ancestral property. She was survived by her husband and two half sisters on her
mother's side.  Under section 1386(2), Civil Code, one-half of the property
would go to the surviving husband, one-half to the sisters.  The court rejected
the contention that since the sisters were not of the blood of the decedent's
father, they were not entitled to succeed. It said: "And nothing seems plainer
to us than that under this statute the half blood are only excluded when there
are others in the same statutory class who are to be preferred by reason of
being of the blood of the ancestor from whom the estate came to the intestate."
Note that the court did not say of the whole blood of decedent.

   In Estate of Belshaw, supra, where the appellants were whole blood relatives
of the decedent and of the blood of the ancestor, but more remote in degree than
a half blood relative not of the blood of the ancestor, the court stated the
contention of respondent as follows: "Respondent's position is that the second
clause (of section 254) is operative only when there are kindred of the whole
blood of the same degree as the kindred of the half blood and that kindred of
the half blood inherit such property in preference to those of the whole blood
of more remote degree." (Italics added.) The court held in accord with the last
portion of this contention, but it was not necessary for the court to decide,
and we find no statement intimating, that half blood relatives not of the blood
of the ancestor could be excluded only in favor of  whole blood relatives of the
blood of the ancestor.

   The holding herein that half blood cousins not of the blood of the ancestor
are excluded under section 254 in favor of  both whole and half blood cousins in
the same degree who are of the blood of the ancestor, does not conflict with
Estate of Edwards, supra, but is entirely consistent therewith.  In that case,
unlike the present, there were no heirs, either of the whole or half blood, who
were of the blood of the ancestor. There were only whole and half blood heirs
who were not of the blood of the ancestor. The exclusion of half blood kindred
not of the blood of the ancestor is to take place only when there are kindred of
the blood of the ancestor to be favored thereby.  Where none, as in the Edwards
case, it is equitable and in accordance with section 254 that whole and half
blood relatives of the decedent, none of whom are of the blood of the ancestor,
should be on a parity.

   The problem is one of construction of the words "in favor of those who are."
If these words are not given the construction here declared the alternative is
to apply them to those of the half blood who are of the blood of the ancestor.
In re Pearsons, supra, holds that the phrase "all those who are not of the blood
of the ancestor" means all those half bloods who are not of the blood of the
ancestor. The word "those" appearing a third time in the section as it now
stands must mean either all those who are of the blood of the ancestor, whether
of the half blood or whole blood of the decedent, as we have held, or it must
have the same meaning as the second "those." There is no possible basis for
construing the concluding phrase, "those who are,"  as referring only to those
whole bloods who are of the blood of the ancestor. Confining it to half bloods
of the blood of the ancestor would have this consequence.  Only when there were
half bloods of the blood of the ancestor would the exclusion operate.  If there
was only a whole blood relative of the blood of the ancestor, the half blood in
the same degree not of the blood of the ancestor would not be excluded.  This
would be a distinction without reason and is not compelled by the section.

   Amici curiae urge that on the facts of this case maternal whole blood
cousins, as well as maternal half blood cousins, should be excluded from
paternal ancestral property;  that paternal cousins succeed to paternal
ancestral property; maternal cousins to maternal property.  In the Pearsons
case, supra, there were aunts and uncles of the decedent, both paternal and
maternal, all of the whole blood. It was held that all shared equally in
ancestral property. Amici curiae  contend that although the Pearsons case was
correctly decided under section 1394, Civil Code (now § 254, Prob. Code), a
different rule would apply had there been a half blood relative.  Had there been
a maternal uncle of the half blood, for instance, the maternal aunts and uncles
would be excluded from paternal ancestral property, in the analysis of amici
curiae.  Thus amici curiae contend for an extension to whole blood kindred in
certain circumstances of the rule of descent based on origin of property.  The
extension of the rule in the analysis of amici curiae is to depend on the
irrelevant circumstance of whether there are half blood, as well as whole blood,
kindred.

   This construction cannot be accepted.  It is based on a theory that if the
phrase "those who are," concluding section 254, refers to all those who are of
the blood of the ancestor, both half blood and whole blood of the decedent, then
the preceding "those" must have the same reference.  This by necessary
implication changes the rule of the Pearson case, which held that the phrase
"all those who are not" appearing in the section refers to half blood only and
excludes only them.  The limitation which amici curiae place on their
construction excluding whole bloods -- that it should apply only where there is
a half blood relative -- finds no justification in the language of the section.

   We conclude that the maternal half blood cousins are excluded from paternal
ancestral property, which is to be divided equally between the four cousins of
the whole blood and the paternal cousins of the half blood; that the paternal
cousins of the half blood are excluded from maternal ancestral property, which
is to be distributed to the four full blood cousins and the maternal half blood
cousins.

     Respondents further contend that if it be conceded that maternal half blood
cousins are excluded from paternal ancestral property under section 254, and
paternal half bloods from maternal property, it does not appear from the bill of
exceptions that any of the property of the decedent herein is ancestral within
the meaning of the section.  Respondents contend that section 254 applies only
to real property, and that it does not apply unless the identical property which
came to the decedent from the ancestor constitutes part of the estate of the
decedent.

   The bill of exceptions shows the following:

    "That during the hearing one Kenneth D. Sevier was duly sworn, examined and
testified that part of the estate, of which deceased died possessed was received
by said deceased, by descent, devise or gift, from her father, part from her
mother.

   "Whereupon the appellants and their attorneys, requested the said Court to
receive testimony showing the ancestral origin of the estate of said Katherine
Ryan, deceased, but the Court refused to receive further evidence touching the
class or character of the funds or property belonging to the estate of said
deceased, to which ruling the said appellants, the Scully heirs, and others,
then and there excepted."

   Observe that the recital as to the testimony of the witness is in the
language of the code section.  If, as contended by respondents, the section
applies only to real property, the testimony of the witness in the same words
has the same meaning.  If the word "devise" in the code section shows that it
refers to real property only, it has the same connotation when used by the
witness in testimony adduced with reference to that section.

     Since the question whether the section applies only to identical real
property received from an ancestor will necessarily be involved upon further
proceedings had  pursuant to reversal of the order herein, it should be
determined.

   In Estate of Warnock, supra, the court assumed without discussion that the
section would apply to corporate stock, and considered whether it would apply to
stock purchased with the proceeds from the sale of the stock received by the
decedent under the will of his aunt.  It was there held (p. 467) that the
"inheritance, though changed in form, never lost its identity and therefore
still retained its ancestral character." The holding was not necessary to the
decision, since the section was held inapplicable because the half blood and
whole blood kindred were not of the same degree.

   The court relied on the settled interpretation of sections 228 and 229,
Probate Code, and the similar provisions in section 1386, Civil Code, which
preceded the Probate Code.  Those sections provide for division of community
property between relatives of the decedent who dies intestate and relatives of
the predeceased spouse, and for succession by relatives of the predeceased
spouse where the property of the decedent had been the separate property of the
predeceased spouse.  ( Estate of Putnam, 219 Cal. 608 [28 P.2d 27];  Estate of
Brady, 171 Cal. 1 [151 P. 275].) However, there are differences in the wording
of these sections and section 254, to be noticed later.

   Respondents' argument that section 254 applies to real property only rests in
part on its wording and in part on historical considerations.  The common law
canon limiting descent to those of the blood of the first purchaser applied only
to real property. Personal property passed to the administrator, who, "usually,
whether rightly or wrongly, appropriated to his own use all the surplus after
payment of debts, until by statute it was provided that such surplus should be
distributed, in a certain manner, to the widow and children, or, in default of
children, to the next of kin." (4 Tiffany, Real Property (3d ed.), p. 374.)
There seems to have been some uncertainty whether the exclusion of the half
blood applied to personal property, but it was settled in England by 1690 that
it did not.  ( Ector v. Grant, 112 Ga. 557 [37 S.E. 984, 53 L.R.A. 723]; 16
Am.Jur. 833-843; 42 Yale L.J., 102.) In this country, "generally the statutes
relating to the descent of ancestral estates do not cover personal property."
(16 Am.Jur. 843; L.R.A. 1916C, 935.) They have been held to apply to personalty,
however.  ( Rountree v. Pursell, 11 Ind.App. 522 [39 N.E. 747].)

   Respondents find in the use of the words "inherit," "inheritance" and
"devise" indication that section 254 applies only to real property. At common
law "inherit" and "inheritance" related to real property which descended to
heirs. Under our system personal property also passes to those who succeed to
real property, that is, to heirs, rather than to the personal representative.
Use of these words alone would not add much weight to the argument, but their
use with "devise" gives strength to respondents' contention.  The word "devise"
has been held to apply to personal property when necessary to carry out the
intent of a testator (see Black's Law Dictionary (3d ed.), p. 573), and was
construed as applicable to personalty in the ancestral estate statute involved
in Rountree v. Pursell, supra. (In Childs v. Gross, 41 Cal.App.2d 680 [107 P.2d
424], the word "devise" as the last word of section 125, Probate Code, was held
to include personal property. In Estate of Ross, 140 Cal. 282 [73 P. 976], it
was held applicable to real property only as used in section 1310, Civil Code,
which was later amended to include  "bequest.") The word "devise" has not
acquired a broadened meaning applicable to personalty to the same extent as the
word "inherit" and "inheritance." The corresponding word for such property is
"bequest." Sections 228 and 229, Probate Code, construed in Estate of Putnam,
supra, and Estate of Brady, supra, include the word "bequest" in the phrase "by
gift, descent, devise or bequest." The provision for succession to property
which had been community property of the decedent and a predeceased spouse
formerly did not include the phrase "by gift, descent, devise or bequest," and
hence at all times has been distinguishable in its wording from section 254.

   Other sections of the code regulating succession apply alike to real and
personal property. But this does not mean that section 254 could not be confined
to realty if the language of the section, construed in the light of its
historical background, impels such conclusion.  The effect of confining section
254, which is a limitation on succession by kindred of the half blood, to real
property, means that as to personal property they inherit  equally with kindred
of the whole blood. In the absence of an express limitation on succession by
kindred of the half blood it is generally held in this country that they have
the same rights as those of the whole blood. ( Estate of Lynch, 132 Cal. 214 [64
P. 284]; 4 Tiffany, Real Property (3d ed.), p. 383.)

   The doctrine of ancestral estates, whether applied to kindred of the whole or
half blood, is being looked on with increasing disfavor in the states where it
still exists.  (See article, W. W. Ferrier, Jr., Rules of Descent Under Prob.
Code, §§ 228 and 229, and Proposed Amendments, 25 Cal.L.Rev. 261, at 280, citing
supporting references.) "A discrimination against the half blood is the
exception, and is not to be extended beyond the obvious intent." ( Estate of
Smith, supra, p. 436.)  Furthermore, our particular statute, combining features
of both doctrines, is objectionable in that it illogically excludes kindred of
the half blood who are not of the blood of the ancestor, while permitting
kindred of the whole blood who likewise are not of the blood of the ancestor to
share.  These considerations impel a conclusion that section 254 does not apply
to personal property.

   From some of the cases cited it is quite clear that the word "devise" can be
interpreted either to include personal property, or to apply solely to real
property.  How it should  be interpreted in any particular statute depends upon
the legislative intent, which, when not expressed, must be ascertained from all
the circumstances.  In attempting to ascertain such intent, the courts are
permitted to consider the historical background of the statute, consequences
that will flow from a particular interpretation and other factors.   Considering
these factors, we are inclined to the belief that as used in section 254 it was
intended to be limited to real property. For the same reasons the word "gift,"
as used in the particular section, can have no broader significance than the
word "devise."

    The question remains as to whether section 254 applies only to the identical
real property which came to the decedent from his ancestor, and which remains
part of his estate on his death.  An attempt to trace property in changed form
involves administrative difficulties of great complexity.

   The rule was well settled in England that a conveyance of real property
destroyed its ancestral character, that property acquired with the proceeds from
the sale of ancestral property was acquired by purchase and was not ancestral.
The sale of ancestral property was described as breaking the descent by
alienation.  (12 Columb.L.Rev. 625.) The proposition that the ancestral
character of property is destroyed by its alienation is the law in this country
today.  (4 Tiffany, Real Property (3d ed.), p. 389; 16 Am.Jur. 845; L.R.A.
1916C, 913.) Omitting for the moment the California cases of Estate of Putnam,
supra, Estate of Brady, supra, and Estate of Warnock, supra, counsel have cited
no decision where an ancestral estate statute has been applied where the
identical property did not remain part of the decedent's estate, and our
research, so far as it has gone, has disclosed none, except cases involving
partition in kind, and the sale of property of minors and insane persons under
guardianship.  (Notes, 103 A.L.R. 233; L.R.A. 1916C, 910.)

   In Rountree v. Pursell, supra, 753, where the particular statute involved was
held to apply to personalty as well as realty, it was held nevertheless that the
property must remain in specie: "It must be the same thing that came from the
ancestor; the same parcel of real estate; the same article of personal
property."

   The above conclusions are strengthened by the fact that the exclusion of half
blood kindred takes place only on the  condition that the property "came to the
intestate by descent, devise or gift from some one of his ancestors." The word
"one" indicates that the exclusion is intended to operate only as to specific
property which came from a specific ancestor and remained vested in the heir in
kind until the time of his death, intestate.

   We are of the view that the fact that section 254 is derived more
particularly from the common law doctrine of ancestral estates, with a well
defined meaning and historical background, justifies confining it to the
identical property received from the ancestor, although sections 228 and 229,
Probate Code, apply to  property in changed form, under Estate of Putnam, supra,
and Estate of Brady, supra. The dictum in Estate of Warnock, supra, should not
be the law.

   The order is reversed.

CONCUR BY: CARTER (In Part)

DISSENT BY: CARTER (In Part)

DISSENT

   CARTER, J., Concurring and dissenting.  I concur in the judgment of reversal,
although I seriously doubt that the Legislature intended when it enacted section
254 of the Probate Code that kindred of the half blood should be excluded from
an inheritance because they are not of the blood of the ancestor from whom the
estate descended, while kindred of the whole blood likewise not of the blood of
such ancestor are permitted to participate in such estate.  But I can see no
escape from the conclusion that section 226 of the Probate Code controls the
descent of property insofar as kindred of the whole blood are concerned, and the
mere circumstance of the existence of kindred of the half blood in the same
degree who are excluded from the inheritance by the provisions of section 254 of
the Probate Code should not operate to deprive kindred of the whole blood from
succeeding to their inheritance under the provisions of section 226 of the
Probate Code.  I believe, however, that the inequities resulting from the
construction placed upon section 254 of the Probate Code by the majority opinion
should be corrected by the Legislature by appropriate amendment to said section.

   I do not, however, agree with that portion of the majority opinion which
holds that the words "inheritance came to the intestate by descent, devise or
gift of some one of his ancestors" as used in section 254 of the Probate Code
embrace only real property and only the specific real property so received.
Those words cannot be said to have any such restricted meaning.  The thing which
comes to the intestate is described as the "inheritance." Inheritance is used as
synonymous with succession in section 250 of the Probate Code, and the
provisions on succession treat real and personal property the same.  The word
inheritance as used in the law of descent applies to both personal property and
real property. ( In re Turner's Estate, 191 Wash. 145 [70 P.2d 1059].) The
common law definition of inheritance which limited it to real property was
founded upon the rule that title to real property passed on death to the heirs
while title to personal property passed to the personal representative.  (
Center v. Kramer, 112 Ohio St. 269 [147 N.E. 602].) But in California title to
both real and personal property vests in the heirs or beneficiaries under the
will upon death.  (Prob. Code, § 300.) By virtue of the same rule, property
coming by "descent" embraces both real and personal property. Property comes by
descent when it is acquired by an heir by virtue of the intestacy of the
decedent, and inasmuch as title to both kinds of property passes to the heirs
and none to the personal representative, property which comes by descent is both
real and personal.  (See Hudnall v. Ham, 172 Ill. 76 [49 N.E. 985].)

   In a case involving the right of inheritance between whole bloods and half
bloods under a statute, it has been squarely held that the words "gift, devise
or descent" include both real and personal property. ( In re Hullett's Estate,
46 Ind. App. 412 [89 N.E. 509]; Rountree v. Pursell, 11 Ind. App. 522 [39 N.E.
747].)


                              78 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             In the Matter of the Estate of THOMAS MILLER, Deceased

                                   No. 3,004

                          SUPREME COURT OF CALIFORNIA

                        48 Cal. 165; 1874 Cal. LEXIS 118


                                  April, 1874

PRIOR-HISTORY:      Appeal from the Probate Court of the City and County of San
Francisco.

   The will was admitted to probate on the 11th day of August, 1868. On the 26th
day of October following, the executors returned to the Court, an inventory of
the estate of the deceased, in which the real estate was appraised at nineteen
thousand seven hundred and fifty dollars, and the personal property at eleven
thousand four hundred and seventy-six dollars. On the 14th day of January, 1870,
the executors had paid the debts, legacies, and expenses of administration, and
had in their hands the sum of one thousand two hundred and twelve dollars and
nine cents in money, and filed a petition for a distribution of the same. The
deceased left, him surviving, as heirs at law, his mother, Ann Miller, his
sisters of the whole blood, Mary Ann Luke, Sarah McMillan, Honor Farrell, Maria
S. Miller and Lottie J. Waters, his brother of the whole blood, George Miller,
and sisters of the half blood, Frances Holborn and Emma Bennett.

   Ann Miller, the mother, had died on the 20th day of March, 1869, and George
Miller was the administrator of her estate. Emma Bennett, the half sister of the
deceased, filed a petition, in which she prayed that one ninth part of the real
estate might be distributed to her, and one ninth part of the rents and profits
thereof, subsequent to the death of the testator. The Court appointed an
attorney to represent the absent heirs. After argument, the Court entered a
decree distributing the residue of the estate in the hands of the executors to
George Miller, administrator of the estate of Ann Miller. Emma Bennett appealed.

COUNSEL: M. C. Blake, for the Appellant.

That part of the will, "I give, devise and bequeath, all the estate, real and
personal, or mixed, of which I may die seized or possessed, or in any way
entitled," is introductory, and nothing passes to any one by it. At the end of
the next clause, numbered the "First," only the sum of one hundred dollars has
been given, and notwithstanding all that precedes it, if there had been no
further bequest, only one hundred dollars would have passed under the will. At
the end of the first six of the numbered sub-divisions, only certain sums of
money and a promissory note have been disposed of, and at the end of the
seventh, only these sums, the note, and the balance of money. Everything that
passes under the will, passes by virtue of the seven numbered sub-divisions.
Strike out the disputed clause, and the will is not materially affected--the
note, the sums of money, and the balance of money still pass. Strike out the
numbered sub-divisions, and nothing passes. The clause in question, then,
whatever may be its significance, is simply introductory; but, what is more to
the point, it is the kind of clause which the Courts call introductory. In
Beall's Lessee v. Holmes, 6 Har. and Johns. 205, Buchanan, Ch. J., says: "It
appears that James Beall made his will, in which, immediately after an
introductory clause in these words, 'as touching my worldly estate wherewith it
has pleased God to bless me in this life, I give, devise and dispose of in the
following form and manner, viz,' he proceeds: 'Imprimis, I give and bequeath,'"
etc. In the same case the same learned Judge says: "In Doe v. Allen, 8 Term R.
477, the introductory words of the will are, 'as to what real and personal
estate it has pleased Almighty God to bless me with, I give and dispose of the
same as followeth.'" (See other cases referredto in the same connection.) In
Sheafe v. Cushing, 17 N. H. 508, Parker, Ch. J., speaks of a clause nearly
identical in words, and entirely identical in sense, with the one before the
Court, as the introductory clause, and of the next clause, as the devising
clause.

Jarboe, and Harrison & Robinson, for Respondent.

The disposing part of the will reads as though the testator had said, "I give,
devise and bequeath all the estate, real and personal, or mixed, of which I may
die seized or possessed, as follows: that after paying certain legacies, my
mother receive the balance of my money, for her benefit as long as she lives,
and for her heirs after."

This, although an inelegant expression, would be transposed by the Court, under
its powers so to do in order to ascertain the intention of the testator, (I
Redf. 431; 10 Paige, 152), so as to read, "I give, devise and bequeath the
balance of my money, viz: all the estate, real and personal, or mixed, of which
I may die seized or possessed, after paying certain legacies, to my mother, for
her benefit as long as she lives, and her heirs after."

The respondents contend that this is the correct rendering of the
testator'sintention, as expressed by the will, and further, that if the will had
been so drawn, the appellant would not be entitled to any portion of the estate.


Redfield (2 Redf. 437, note) says: "The word 'money' is often and popularly used
as equivalent to 'property' and accordingly has received a similar construction
in some of the cases upon wills."

It is true that the literal significance of "money" is "stamped metal," yet
Courts have always extended the meaning of the word to other objects, when such
appeared to be the intention of the testator.

In Boys v. Morgan (3 Mylne and Craig, 661,) the will read, "I guess there will
be found sufficient in my banker's hands to defray and discharge my debts, which
I hereby desire Mrs. Eliza Morgan to do, and keep the residue for her own use
and pleasure." It was held that by this clause "stock" was bequeathed to Mrs.
Morgan.

"Experience shows that the word 'money' is often used in the sense of property,"
said Lord Langdale in Dawson v. Gaskoin, 2 Keen, 18, and held that by the phrase
"whatever remained of money," all the personal estate passed to the legatee.
(See also, Legge v.  Askill, T. & R. 265, note; Kendall  v. Kendall, 4 Russ.
360; Chapman v. Reynolds, 28 Beav. 221.)

JUDGES: Crockett, J.

OPINION BY: CROCKETT

OPINION

    This appeal is from an order of the Probate Court, making a final
distribution of the estate of Thomas Miller, deceased, who left a last will and
testament, which was duly probated, and of which the following is a copy:

   "In the name of God, amen. I, Thomas Miller, of the City and County of San
Francisco, State of California, being in good health and body and of sound and
disposing mind and memory (praise be to God for the same), and being desirous of
settling my worldly affairs while I have strength and capacity to do so, do make
and publish this my last will and testament. That is to say:

   "I give, devise, and bequeath, all the estate, real and personal, or mixed,
of which I may die seized or possessed, or in any way entitled;

   First. To the Powell St. M. E. Sunday-school, one hundred dollars;

   "Second. One thousand for building a family vault under the superintendence
of my executors;

   "Third. One thousand dollars to be expended in educating Richard and Mary Ann
Luke's sons, viz., Eddy, Richard, and Thomas, the said sum to be truly and
faithfully applied to the purpose above stated, in the best manner that my
executors can devise;

    "Fourth. One certain note which I hold against Cutler Eldridge Waters and E.
T. Batters, for one thousand dollars, to Freddy, son of E. Dewey and Lottie J.
Waters, his wife. Said Lottie J. Waters to receive the income from said note
until said Freddy Waters becomes twenty years of age, or at the executor's
option.

   "Fifth. To Honor and Maria S. Miller each two thousand dollars.

   "Sixth. To each of my executors, five hundred dollars for their trouble, and
that they be not required to give bond.

   "Seventh and lastly. That my mother receive the balance of my money for her
benefit so long as she lives, and for her heirs after.

   "All to be settled and divided as herein mentioned by Donald McMillan, George
Miller, and Henry W. Bennett, whom I appoint my sole executors."

   The controversy hinges upon the construction to be placed upon the word
"money" in the seventh clause; and the question is whether that word, in the
connection in which it is used, is to be interpreted as including the real
estate of the testator. It is conceded by the appellant that the word "money" in
wills has been frequently construed by the Courts, both in England and America,
to include the personal estate of the testator. The following authorities would
seem to place this point beyond all doubt: Dawson v. Gaskoin, 2 Keen, 14; Boys
v. Morgan, 3 Mylne & Craig, 661; Kendall v. Kendall, 4 Russ. 360; Chapman v.
Reynolds, 20 Beav. 221; Levinson v. Lady Lennard, 34 Beav. 490; Morton v. Perry,
1 Metc. 446; Cowling v. Cowling, 26 Beav. 452; Langdale v. Whitfield, 4 Kay & J.
436; 2 Redfield on Wills, 111, 2d ed.; 2 Williams on Executors, 1,025; 2
Redfield on Wills, 437, note; Jarman on Wills, chap. 24, and cases there cited.

   The doctrine of the authorities is, that in order to construe a devise of
"money" as including the personal estate, it must appear from the context and on
the face of the will that such was the intention of the testator, and that he
used the word "money" as the equivalent of "personal estate."

    But the appellant, whilst conceding the rule in respect to personal estate,
contends that a devise of "money" cannot be held to include the real estate. We
are unable, however, to perceive why, under our probate system, and laws of
descent and distribution, there should be any distinction, in this respect,
between the real and personal estate; and have been referred to no authority,
which, in terms makes any such distinction. It may be that in England, where it
is the policy of the government to perpetuate real estate in families, rather
than to disseminate it in small parcels among the masses; and, possibly, in some
of the American States, where the real estate passes immediately to the heir,
and is not assets in the hands of the administrator for the payment of debts, a
more stringent rule of interpretation might be favored, whereby a devise of
"money" would be held not to include the real estate, under any circumstances.
But in this State, both the real and personal estate are assets in the hands of
the administrator for the payment of debts, with only this distinction between
them, viz: that the personalty must be first exhausted before the realty can be
so applied, and our policy, unlike that of England, is to disseminate real
estate, rather than to perpetuate it in families.  Hence, we should adopt the
more liberal interpretation, whereby, in construing a devise of this character,
the real and personal estate would be placed on the same footing. Nor can we see
why, on principle, there should be any difference between them. A devise of
"money" is held to include the personal estate only when it appears on the face
of the will, construed in the light of the surrounding facts that such was the
intention of the testator; and we can see no reason why the same rule ought not
to be applied to the real estate.

   Inasmuch as the appellant concedes that the devise in the seventh clause of
the will is sufficient to include the personal estate, it is perhaps
unnecessary, after what we have said, to inquire whether it also includes the
realty; because the same process of reasoning by which it is shown to include
the personalty, will, on our theory, establish that it includes the realty also.
We will add, however, that in  our opinion, it sufficiently appears on the face
of the will, that the testator intended to devise to his mother the residue of
his entire estate, remaining after the payment of the specific legacies,
enumerated in the first six clauses.  The will was evidently drawn up by an
illiterate person, and the intention of the testator is awkwardly expressed. But
after stating, in the introductory portion, that it was his intention to devise
"all the estate, real and personal or mixed, of which I may die seized or
possessed, or in any way entitled," he proceeds, in the six following clauses,
to make certain specific bequests; and then concludes by expressing the
intention, "that my mother receive the balance of my money for her benefit as
long as she lives, and for her heirs after." The word "money" was evidently used
in its widest and popular sense, in which it is frequently employed as
synonymous with "property" or "estate." The word "money" is often and popularly
used as equivalent to "property," and accordingly has received a similar
construction in some of the cases upon wills. (2 Redfield on Wills, 437.)

   Judgment and order affirmed. Remittitur forthwith.


                              79 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           TRUMAN ELVY DENNY et al., Appellants, v. D. D. WATSON, as
                 Real Estate Commissioner, et al., Respondents

                                 Civ. No. 18990

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division One

            114 Cal. App. 2d 491; 250 P.2d 692; 1952 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      1197


                                December 2, 1952

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Appellants' Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court
was Denied January 22, 1953.  Carter, J., and Schauer, J., were of the Opinion
that the Petition Should be Granted.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  Frank G. Swain, Judge.

   Proceeding in mandamus to compel Real Estate Commissioner to restore to them
their licenses as real estate brokers.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Brokers--Regulation--Real Estate Commissioner.  --Real Estate Commissioner
is empowered to determine whether real estate brokers are guilty of acts
involving dishonest dealings.

(2) Licenses--Revocation.  --In cases where business or professional licensees
are convicted of felonies involving moral turpitude, the judgment of conviction
compels revocation of licenses.

(3) Evidence--Weight.  --Weight of evidence which will warrant a conviction in a
criminal case is materially different from that which will support a judgment in
a civil case.

(4) Brokers--Licenses--Suspension or Revocation.  --Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10177.5
, does not ipso facto require suspension or revocation of a real estate broker's
license; it makes a judgment for fraud in a civil case prima facie evidence on
which the Real Estate Commissioner may suspend or revoke the license.

(5) Id.--Licenses--Suspension or Revocation.  --It is not a denial of due
process of law to have the evidence in fraud actions against real estate brokers
in the superior court taken over again in commissioner's hearings to revoke or
suspend their licenses.

(6) Statutes--Construction--Giving Effect to Statute.  --It is court's duty to
give force and effect to questioned statute unless it appears clearly
unconstitutional.

(7) Constitutional Law--Presumptions as to Constitutionality.  --All
presumptions and intendments are in favor of the constitutionality of a statute,
and all doubts are resolved in favor of its validity and not against it.

(8) Id.--Classification--Presumptions.  --Existence of facts supporting the
legislative judgment is to be presumed, and the burden of overcoming the
presumption of constitutionality is cast on the assailant.

(9) Brokers--Licenses--Suspension or Revocation.  --Bus. & Prof. Code, §§
10176(i), 10177(f), 10177.5, relating to fraud or dishonest dealing of real
estate brokers as ground for suspension or revocation of their licenses, are
constitutional.

COUNSEL: Morris Lavine for Appellants.

Edmund G. Brown, Attorney General, and Lee B. Stanton, Deputy Attorney General,
for Respondents.

JUDGES: Drapeau, J.  White, P. J., concurred.  Doran, J., dissented.

OPINION BY: DRAPEAU

OPINION

     Plaintiffs petitioned the superior court for a writ of mandate, directing
the Real Estate Commissioner of this state to restore to them their license as
real estate brokers. On the commissioner's hearing counsel for the commissioner
introduced in evidence findings of fact and judgment in a civil action for fraud
against petitioners in the superior court, and rested.

    The facts so found were that petitioners were doing business together as
real estate brokers; that they secured a deed from one of their clients to a
motel, on their representations that they would not record the deed until they
had sold the property; that they would keep up payments on trust deeds,  liens
against the property, would manage it, and when they sold it would pay their
clients $ 5,500 clear of the debts.

   Instead of doing as they had agreed to do, petitioners recorded the deed,
failed to keep up the trust deed payments, permitted the property to be sold
under power of sale in one of the trust deeds, and through a confederate
purchased the property for themselves at the sale which followed.

   Upon these facts the superior court rendered judgment against petitioners.
This judgment they paid and satisfied in full.

   Proceedings were commenced by the Real Estate Commissioner to revoke
petitioners' licenses. After due notice, petitioners appeared at the
commissioner's hearing, without counsel.  They were sworn, made their statements
and were cross-examined, and participated in the hearing.

   The commissioner found that petitioners had violated sections 10177.5,
10176(i), and 10177(f) of our Business and Professions Code, and revoked their
licenses.

   The superior court refused to grant the writ of mandate, and petitioners
appeal from that judgment.

    Section 10177.5, Business and Professions Code, provides:

   "Whenever a final judgment is obtained in a civil action against any real
estate licensee upon grounds of fraud, misrepresentation or deceit with
reference to any transaction for which a license is required under this
division, the commissioner may, after hearing in accordance with the provisions
of this part relating to hearings, suspend or revoke the license of such real
estate licensee at any time within three years subsequent to said judgment."

   Petitioners challenge the constitutionality of that code section, and of
sections 10176(i) and 10177(f) of the same code, and assert that each and all of
them violate due process of law guaranteed by our state and federal
Constitutions.  Petitioners also challenge section 10177.5 upon the
constitutional ground that it denies them equal protection of the laws, in that
it singles out real estate brokers and does not extend to other professions and
occupations.

     Undoubtedly the Real Estate Commissioner was empowered to determine whether
petitioners were guilty of acts involving dishonest dealings.  ( Brecheen v.
Riley , 187 Cal. 121 [200 P. 1042]; Sipper v. Urban, 22 Cal.2d 138 [137 P.2d
425]; de St. Germain v. Watson, 95 Cal.App.2d 862 [214 P.2d 99].)

   No cases directly involving the constitutionality of section  10177.5 have
come to the attention of this court, it having been enacted in 1945.

   Our California Real Estate Act was first held to be constitutional in Riley
v. Chambers, 181 Cal. 589 [185 P. 855, 8 A.L.R. 418].

   Other sections of the act have been approved.  (§ 10177(b), in Payne v. Real
Estate Commr., 93 Cal.App.2d 532 [209 P.2d 419].)

     In cases where business or professional licensees are convicted of felonies
involving moral turpitude, the judgment of conviction compels revocation of
licenses. ( Meyer v. Board of Medical Examiners, 34 Cal.2d 62 [206 P.2d 1085];
Murrill v. State Board of Accountancy, 97 Cal.App.2d 709 [218 P.2d 569].)

   It is pertinent here to say, however, that in this case we are dealing with
the effect of a judgment in a civil, not a criminal case.  Upon fundamental and
familiar principles the weight of the evidence which will warrant a conviction
in a criminal case is materially different from that which will support a
judgment in a civil case. And in civil cases nine members of a jury determine
controverted facts, as against all twelve in criminal cases.

     But the statute under consideration does not, ipso facto, require
suspension or revocation of a real estate broker's license. It makes a judgment
for fraud in a civil case prima facie evidence, upon which the Real Estate
Commissioner may suspend or revoke the license.

    A hearing is required.  Licensees under attack may appear and defend
themselves.  And the commissioner in his discretion may continue, or suspend, or
revoke licenses.

   As the attorney general argues, the section commends itself from a practical,
common sense viewpoint.  It saves duplication of proof, -- first, the hearing in
court, and then, the commissioner's hearing.

     In this case petitioners had their day in court.  They were represented by
counsel.  The issue of their fraud was heard and determined in that tribunal.
This court perceives no good reason why it would be a denial of due process of
law to have the evidence in fraud actions against real estate brokers in the
superior court taken all over again in commissioner's hearings to revoke or
suspend their licenses.

   And in this case petitioners again had their day on the commissioner's
hearing.  They told their stories.  They could have been represented by counsel,
but waived that right.  Indeed,  there is force in the attorney general's
argument that the record of the commissioner's hearing contains sufficient
admissions and testimony of petitioners themselves to support the commissioner's
order.

   In passing upon the constitutionality of any law, this court is bound by
rigid rules.

     It is the duty of this court to give force and effect to the questioned
statute unless it appears clearly unconstitutional.  ( Richfield Oil Co. v.
County of Los Angeles, 100 Cal.App.2d 535 [244 P.2d 398].)

     All presumptions and intendments are in favor of the constitutionality of a
statute, and all doubts are resolved in favor of its validity, not against it.
( Clark v. City of Pasadena, 102 Cal.App.2d 198 [227 P.2d 306].)

     The existence of facts supporting the legislative judgment is to be
presumed, and the burden of overcoming the presumption of constitutionality is
cast upon the assailant. ( Dribin v. Superior Court, 37 Cal.2d 345 [231 P.2d
809].)

     Applying these rules to the code sections questioned here, they must be
held to be constitutional.

   The judgment is affirmed.


                              80 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          HERBERT JOHN RICHARDSON, Plaintiff and Appellant, v. SIDNEY
                      J. ROBERTS, Defendant and Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 26318

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Four

            210 Cal. App. 2d 603; 26 Cal. Rptr. 829; 1962 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1608


                               December 10, 1962

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  Macklin Fleming, Judge.

   Action by a licensed real estate broker to recover commissions shared with
one unlicensed to act as a broker or salesman.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Brokers -- Actions for Compensation -- Want of License.  --A licensed real
estate broker who shared commissions with another, not licensed as required by
the Real Estate Act, and not acting within an exception to the licensing
requirement, was not entitled to recover the monies given to the unlicensed
broker where the contract under which the monies were paid was fully and
adequately performed and the licensed broker had not obtained tangible evidence
of compliance with the licensing requirement as demanded by the Real Estate Act,
but, rather, relied on the oral declaration of the unlicensed individual that
his activities fell within an exception to the licensing requirement.

(2) Id.--Compensation--Divided Commissions.  --It is unlawful for a real estate
broker or salesman to split commissions or make other payments for services
embraced within the Real Estate Act to any person, unless that person is known
to be licensed under the act, or presents tangible evidence of the fact.
Further, it is unlawful for an unlicensed person to receive payment or perform
such services (Bus. & Prof. Code, §§ 10137-10139).

(3) Contracts--Legality--Violation of Statute.  --A party to an illegal contract
may not obtain the aid of the courts to recover any consideration parted with
pursuant thereto; the law leaves the parties where it finds them.

(4) Brokers--Licenses--Proof of License.  --Justifiable reliance by a licensed
broker on another's claim that he is acting within the terms of the Real Estate
Act requires, in part, the presentation to the licensed individual of tangible
evidence of compliance with licensing requirements. This element of justifiable
reliance is not fulfilled by reliance on oral representations made by the
unlicensed individual that some exemption in the Real Estate Act has been met so
as to make licensing unnecessary.

(5) Id.--Licenses.  --Where there were 38 transactions between a licensed real
estate broker and an unlicensed individual acting as a broker, under a
representation of a general power of attorney from his clients, such
transactions were unlawful under the Real Estate Act even if the unlicensed
individual, in fact, had a power of attorney in each case from his client, since
the exemption under Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10133, subd. (b), is not intended to
provide the means for a person actively engaging in the loan brokerage business
to avoid the requirement of a license.

(6) Assumpsit--Implied Obligations.  --The gist of an action on an implied
contract is that defendant, upon the circumstances of the case, is obliged by
the ties of natural justice and equity to refund money.

(7) Id.--Implied Obligations.  --To allow plaintiff, in a suit based on implied
contract, restitution of monies paid under an executed illegal contract would be
to give plaintiff the benefit of his bargain and, at the same time, allow a
return of consideration paid. Equity does not sit to confer such a windfall.

COUNSEL: William P. Camusi for Plaintiff and Appellant.

Scales & Henrikson and Harold Lee Henrikson for Defendant and Respondent.

JUDGES: Burke, P. J.  Jefferson, J., and Ford, J., * concurred.

*   Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: BURKE

OPINION

     Appeal from a judgment after demurrer to the second amended complaint was
sustained without leave to amend.

     The question presented is whether or not a licensed real estate loan broker
may recover commissions shared with another who fraudulently represented himself
as holding powers of attorney from lenders, but was not licensed to act as a
broker or salesman under the Real Estate Act.

   The complaint alleged defendant informed plaintiff that he had power of
attorney to irrevocably commit lenders to make loans secured by real property
and that defendant personally guaranteed these loans to his principals.
Defendant told plaintiff that all of his clients desired to net 10 per cent per
annum interest on their loans, the legal limit permitted by law, and  did not
want to diminish their returns by compensating for the considerable accounting
and tax service that he performed in connection with said loans; that since his
activities did not require licensing as a real estate broker plaintiff could
properly compensate defendant for such services out of commissions earned by
plaintiff in obtaining the loans on behalf of his client borrowers; that
defendant would  supply plaintiff with a ready source of funds for his clients
thus avoiding the necessity of plaintiff spending time and money in locating
such available funds.

   The complaint further alleged that plaintiff believed in and relied on the
representations made to him by defendant and agreed to defendant's proposal;
beginning in August 1957 plaintiff requested various loans on behalf of his
clients from defendant which were made by him, defendant handling all of the
details and plaintiff never having any contact with any of the lenders involved.
The total of such commissions paid by plaintiff to defendant for loans
transacted was some $ 29,278.09 between the period August 17, 1957, to March 15,
1960.

   Defendant's plan was approved by his various clients and they knew of the
payments made to him by plaintiff.  In each instance that such a loan was made,
plaintiff always advised his own client making the loan that he, plaintiff,
would have to pay a certain sum to defendant and in almost all such cases the
borrower personally signed escrow instructions setting forth the fact and the
amount of the payment to be made to defendant.  Defendant never at any time
performed any services on behalf of or to any of plaintiff's clients.

   The complaint further alleged that on or about March 15, 1960, plaintiff
prosecuted a loan application on behalf of one of his clients to defendant for
the sum of $ 12,500, the loan to be secured by a second deed of trust on certain
real property.  After reviewing the matter, defendant advised plaintiff he would
make the loan on behalf of one of his clients, but the following day defendant
advised plaintiff that his client had reconsidered and would not make the loan.
The complaint alleged plaintiff realized for the first time that defendant did
not have full authority to commit a client to a loan.  Plaintiff then learned
defendant never held powers of attorney from his clients, that he had had
dealings with other real estate brokers wherein he made loans on behalf of his
clients and rendered no services to those clients other than to negotiate  the
loan, or in other words he acted solely as a real estate loan broker.

   Plaintiff then alleges, on information and belief, that defendant was acting
as a real estate broker without any state license and without any general power
of attorney from his clients.

   Plaintiff contends that because of the misrepresentations of defendant as
above set forth plaintiff was fraudulently induced to pay $ 29,278.09 to
defendant Roberts for his unlicensed and illegal operations as a real estate
broker.

   It is clear from allegations in the complaint that defendant was an
unlicensed person who performed acts within the scope of the Real Estate Act (
Bus. & Prof. Code, §§ 10130- 10221); consequently payment of portions of
plaintiff's commissions as compensation for those acts was unlawful ( Williams
v. Kinsey, 74 Cal.App.2d 583 [169 P.2d 487]). Under such circumstances an action
based on the contract pursuant to which such payments are made must fail.

     The law governing real estate transactions is clear.  It is unlawful for a
real estate broker or salesman to split commissions or make other payments for
services embraced within the Real Estate Act to any person who is not licensed
under the act, unless that person is known to be licensed or presents tangible
evidence of the fact (Bus. & Prof. Code, §§ 10137- 10138).  Further, it is
unlawful for an unlicensed person to receive payment or perform such services (
Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10139).

   "[It] has repeatedly been declared in this state that 'a contract made
contrary to the terms of a law designed for the protection of the public and
prescribing a penalty for the violation thereof is illegal and void, and no
action may be brought to enforce such contract' [citations]; and that 'whenever
illegality appears, whether the evidence comes from one side or the other, the
disclosure is fatal to the case'." ( Loving & Evans v. Blick, 33 Cal.2d 603, 607
[204 P.2d 23]; see Mansfield v. Hyde, 112 Cal.App.2d 133, 138 [245 P.2d 577].)

    Manifestly, defendant could not recover in part commissions on transactions
previously consummated while he was unlicensed. (Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10136; see
Holm v. Bramwell, 20 Cal.App.2d 332, 337 [67 P.2d 114].)   But "[neither] can
plaintiff recover the monies paid pursuant to the terms of the contract.  It is
a well settled general rule that a party to an illegal contract may not obtain
the aid of the courts . . . to recover any consideration parted with pursuant
thereto; the law leaves the parties where it finds them." ( Mansfield v. Hyde,
supra, 112 Cal.App.2d 133, 139; see also Rest., Contracts, § 598.)

     Plaintiff's argument that he relied in good faith on defendant's
representation of possession of a power of attorney from each of his lenders
(which if true he asserts would exempt defendant from the licensing requirements
under Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10133, subd. (b), supra) cannot be sustained.
Section 10138 proscribes payment to anyone who fails to present tangible
evidence of compliance with licensing requirements.  There is no allegation in
the second amended complaint that such evidence was either demanded or
presented.  In that respect it fails to allege justifiable reliance.  A person
making such payments must actively acquire knowledge that the other has been
licensed, or make the payments at his own peril.  We cannot read this section to
permit reliance on oral representations that other exemptions in the Real Estate
Act have been met.  To do so would sanction subterfuge and permit evasion of the
salutary provisions of the act designed to protect the public dealing in real
estate transactions.  Nor can we agree with plaintiff's assumption that the
exemption under the act accorded one who acts for another by power of attorney
can be tortured to fit the facts in this case.   The transactions cover a whole
series of operations for money lenders, each of whom would seek to evade the law
by engaging a nonlicensed broker through the device of making him their attorney
in fact.  The exemption of section 10133, subdivision (b), Business &
Professions Code, is not intended to provide the means for a person actually
engaging in the loan brokerage business to avoid the requirement of a license.
Assuming the allegation was that defendant in fact had a power of attorney in
each case from each lender, the other allegation of the second amended complaint
showing 38 transactions clearly would stamp the activities of plaintiff and
defendant as engaging in a phase of the real estate business and sharing
commissions illegally.

   It should also be noted there is no provision in the act that when the
unlicensed person has completely performed a contract for agreed services and
the person so benefitted has paid the agreed consideration he may recover back
the money so paid.  (See Comet Theatre Enterprises v. Cartwright, 195 F.2d 80.)
To overcome this deficiency plaintiff asserts the action here is one in
assumpsit upon a promise implied by law, and to recover money paid upon mistake
of fact.

     An action upon an implied contract is discussed by the Supreme Court in
Philpott v. Superior Court, 1 Cal.2d 512, 519 [36 P.2d 635, 95 A.L.R. 990],
where it is said in summing up the nature of such a cause of action, "In one
word the gist of this kind of action is, that the defendant, upon the
circumstances of the case, is obliged by the ties of natural justice and equity
to refund the money." In the case at bar the contract is fully executed and
there is no valid claim that defendant's performance was in any way deficient;
the only bases alleged for recovery are collateral misrepresentations respecting
a statute enacted not for the benefit of plaintiff, but for the general public
when dealing with persons of plaintiff's class.  (See Houston v. Williams, 53
Cal.App. 267, 271 [200 P. 55]; Ferguson v. Schuenemann, 167 Cal.App.2d 413 [334
P.2d 668].)  "There is no equitable reason for invoking restitution when the
plaintiff gets the exchange which he expected." ( Comet Theatre Enterprises v.
Cartwright, supra, 195 F.2d 80, 83.)  Any effect of defendant's fraud or
misrepresentation is remote.  To allow recovery here would give plaintiff the
benefit of his bargain and at the same time allow return of the consideration
paid. A court of equity does not sit to confer a windfall.

   The cases relied on by plaintiff to establish a basis for recovery of money
paid under mistake of fact involve overpayment of valid debts and complete
failure of consideration in each case induced by innocent mistake of fact.  Such
factors are not present here.  They have no bearing on the present matter and
need not be considered.

   The trial court construed the second amended complaint as showing the parties
to be in pari delicto and thus left them where it found them.  We agree.

   Judgment affirmed.


                              81 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            LEO J. ANDERSON, as Administrator, etc., Respondent, v.
              MARYLAND CASUALTY COMPANY (a Corporation), Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 4433

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, THIRD APPELLATE DISTRICT

            121 Cal. App. 487; 9 P.2d 343; 1932 Cal. App. LEXIS 1255


                            March 10, 1932, Decided

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing of this Cause was Denied by
the District Court of Appeal on April 9, 1932, and an Application by Appellant
to have the Cause Heard in the Supreme Court, after Judgment in the District
Court of Appeal, was Denied by the Supreme Court on May 9, 1932.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of El Dorado
County. George H. Thompson, Judge.

COUNSEL: John Ralph Wilson for Appellant.

Abe Darlington, Henry S. Lyon and S. H. Jones for Respondent.

JUDGES: PRESTON, P. J. Plummer, J., and Thompson (R. L.), J., concurred.

OPINION BY: PRESTON

OPINION

     PRESTON, P. J. The action is one brought by respondent Anderson, as
administrator with the will annexed of the estate of John Quincy Wrenn against
Maryland Casualty Company and Joseph T. Wrenn to recover on three surety bonds,
wherein the said Casualty Company was the surety and Joseph T. Wrenn was
principal.

   There are three separate undertakings, each given pursuant to the
requirements of section 1389 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

   The facts are, in the main, undisputed. John Quincy Wrenn died testate. In
his will, duly admitted to probate, he nominated Joseph T. Wrenn as executor to
act without  bonds and the latter, after regular proceedings had, was duly
appointed executor and thereafter qualified as of February 18, 1921.

   The said Joseph T. Wrenn was a son of deceased and named in his will as a
legatee. After disposing of various sums of money and certain specific estate
the entire residue was devised to Joseph T. Wrenn and the widow and two other
children, share and share alike. The total value of the estate was approximately
$ 98,000 and the approximate portion thereof to be distributed in specific
legacies was less than one-eighth, leaving seven-eighths to be distributed under
the residuary.

   During the course of probate, it became necessary to sell certain parcels of
real estate. Three different sales were ordered, the sales conducted and the
property sold in each instance, and likewise in each instance, an order was made
confirming the sale and ordering execution of conveyances in conformity thereto.

   On March 20, 1928, an order was made authorizing the executor to sell certain
real estate and in said order an additional bond was required pursuant to
section 1389 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Accordingly, on April 6, 1928, said
bond was presented and approved, being the usual form of bond upon sale of real
property and in the sum and amount of $ 5,500 with the said Joseph T. Wrenn as
principal and Maryland Casualty Company as surety. Thereafter, under similar
sales and orders, two other bonds were given and approved, as follows: May 8,
1928, in the sum of $ 500; June 14, 1928, in the sum of $ 12,000.

   Each bond was under a separate order and on a different piece of real estate.
Each sale was had pursuant to order and the statute governing and thereafter a
full report of proceedings was returned with prayer for confirmation. The return
showed that the sales under the respective orders were for cash in the following
amounts:
Under the first bond                                                    $ 5,500
Under the second bond                                                       500
Under the third bond                                                      4,450

               Making a total received of                              $ 10,450

   It seems conceded that while all of the money was accounted for as having
been received,  yet the same has been  retained by the executor and never
delivered to the plaintiff, who has succeeded to the administration.

   The unchallenged finding of the court below is that Joseph T. Wrenn,
executor, has diverted the money from the estate and wrongfully, unlawfully and
fraudulently appropriated the same, and the whole thereof, to his own use.

   In the trial court judgment went for plaintiff and defendant Maryland
Casualty Company appeals.

   Three grounds of appeal are urged. Inasmuch as one ground is based upon
another, the net result is that there are but two that require consideration.
First, appellant sets forth the admitted fact that Joseph T. Wrenn was an heir
and devisee of the decedent and then cites section 1452 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, which section was in force and effect at all times embraced within
the period of the administration. This section provides as follows:

   "The executor or administrator is entitled to the possession of all of the
real and personal estate of the decedent, and to receive the rents and profits
of the real estate until the estate is settled or until delivered over by the
order of the court to the heirs or devisees; and must keep in good tenantable
repair all houses, buildings and fixtures thereon which are under his control.
After the expiration of the time for the presentation of claims, he is not
entitled to recover the possession of any property of the estate from any heir,
who has succeeded to the property in his possession or from any devisee, or
legatee, to whom the property has been devised or bequeathed, or from the
assignee of any such heir, devisee, or legatee, unless he proves that the same
is necessary for the payment of debts or legacies, or of expenses of
administration already accrued, or for distribution to some other heir, devisee,
or legatee entitled thereto. The heirs or devisees may themselves, or jointly
with the executor or administrator, maintain an action for the possession of the
real estate, or for the purpose of quieting title to the same, against any one
except the executor or administrator; but this section shall not be so construed
as requiring them so to do."

   The specific language relied upon is to the effect that after the expiration
of the time for presentation of claims, the administrator is not entitled to
recover possession of any property  of the estate from any heir, who has
succeeded to the property in his possession, or from the devisee or legatee to
whom the property has been devised or bequeathed or from the assignee of any
such heir, devisee or legatee, unless the administrator proves that the same is
necessary for the payment of debts or legacies or of expenses of administration
already accrued or for distribution to some other heir, devisee or legatee
entitled thereto.

   It is conceded in the instant case the time for presentation of claims has
expired.

      Therefore, argues appellant, there being no showing of such necessity and
the appellant being an assignee of the heir and devisee, the action will not
lie. There is no merit in this contention.

   The defaulting executor at no time claimed or held the funds as heir or as
devisee. He had received the money in his capacity of executor and had returned
accounts of sale and annual accounts showing the funds to be held by him in the
course of administration.

   Under our system of probate, since early times, the policy governing has been
to favor heirs as administrators, as evidenced by section 1365 of the Code of
Civil Procedure, and the language thereof to the end that relatives of a
deceased are entitled to administer only when entitled to succeed to his estate
or some portion thereof. If in every case or proceeding where an heir was
administrator the provisions of section 1452 controlled, the result would be
chaotic.  It would result, as it would here, in a situation where an
administrator could reduce his share to cash by sale of the salable property and
then leave the remaining heirs at the mercy of forced sales of less desirable
property to the detriment not only of the interest of the other heirs, but
likewise to the ruin of the estate. The contention seems too frivolous for
serious consideration. However, it happens that appellant's contention does not
rest upon a solid factual basis.

   In the record before us and specifically a part thereof upon the offer of
appellant, we find certain proceedings denominated as proceedings to abate the
present suit and to apply the remainder of the estate to the discharge of debts,
prorating against the distributive share of the defaulting executor. Issue was
joined in these proceedings and after a  hearing, wherein witnesses were sworn
and examined and documentary evidence received, the court made its findings as
follows:

   That there were debts unpaid and that the legacies remained unpaid as did
likewise the costs of administration; that there was no money or other personal
property in the hands of the administrator with the will annexed; that the
property remaining in the hands of the administrator consisted entirely of real
estate for which there was no ready market and consisted principally of timber
lands; that the value of the real property other than the timber lands is much
less than the amount of debts, legacies and expenses of administration remaining
unpaid and if sold for full value, would not yield a sum sufficient to pay such
obligations and that in order to pay said obligations it would be necessary to
sell the timber lands; that the timber lands are of a character such that they
cannot be sold at a forced sale of any sum approximating their true value or
without great loss or damage to the estate and those interested therein and that
there would be danger that such a sale would leave the estate in an insolvent
condition.

   The order thus made was in reality a judgment in the proceeding and
sufficient to determine the facts necessarily before the court. Being again in
evidence here, the court below, mindful of its own records, accepted as true
these findings and again found substantially the same facts. Therefore, we find
a complete answer to appellant's first contention, regardless of which
construction we place upon section 1452 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

      Next appellant contends that the judgment must be reversed because there
is absolutely no evidence in the record to show when Joseph T. Wrenn, executor,
appropriated to himself the money which the court below found to be due from him
to the estate.

   The record does sufficiently show that the executor sold the real estate
described in the orders of sale and that he received therefor sums totaling the
amount of the judgment and that he has failed to turn it over to the
administrator. Obviously, the moneys received from the sale could not have been
misappropriated before the sale.

       Appellant strenuously contends that the condition of the bonds was
fulfilled when a proper and legal sale was made and the moneys therefrom
received by the executor. The section requiring these bonds in sale of real
estate negatives his contention.  Section 1389 of the Code of Civil Procedure
provides that an additional bond must be required before a sale of real estate
is confirmed and further provides that no additional bond is required if the
bond already given is equal to twice the value of the personal property,
including the annual rents, profits and issues of real estate and twice the
amount to be received from the sale.

   Section 1396 provides that the court may require a bond on sale of real
estate in estates where the will admitted to probate provides that no bond shall
be required. Section 1390 provides the condition of the bond and the condition
is the same whether the bond be given as the original bond upon qualifying or an
additional bond upon sale of real estate. In either case and in both the
condition of the bond is that the administrator shall faithfully execute the
duties of the trust.

   The ordinary procedure in probate is to require a bond from the administrator
in an amount equal to twice the value of the personal property, including the
income from any real estate owned. It often happens that the estate has but
little personal property and a large amount of real estate from which no revenue
is produced. In such cases the bond is nominal at the outset. But as money is
received from a sale of real estate the portability of the estate increases and
the old bond and new bond required under the section in amounts are required to
total only a sum equal to twice the value of the personal property, including
the money about to be received.

   By way of illustration, if an administrator had already given a bond in the
sum of $ 15,000 and the total of personal property and income were less than $
2,000 he would not on a sale of $ 5,000 be required to give another bond, and
the amount required as additional bond is exactly what the words import, namely,
additional bond and not a separate bond.

   The fact that before the sale the executor here was acting without bond does
not alter the principle.    An additional bond given on a sale of real estate is
a general undertaking  and ties to the entire administration of the estate. (
Elizalde v. Murphy, 163 Cal. 681 [126 P. 978].)

   The judgment is affirmed.

   Plummer, J., and Thompson (R. L.), J., concurred.

   A petition for a rehearing of this cause was denied by the District Court of
Appeal on April 9, 1932, and an application by appellant to have the cause heard
in the Supreme Court, after judgment in the District Court of Appeal, was denied
by the Supreme Court on May 9, 1932.


                              82 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              JOHN DEMOCA, Respondent, v. HARRY D. BARASCH et al.,
              Defendants; PACIFIC INDEMNITY COMPANY (a California
                            Corporation), Appellant

                                S. F. No. 13435

                          Supreme Court of California

                  212 Cal. 293; 298 P. 17; 1931 Cal. LEXIS 624


                                 April 17, 1931

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Rehearing Denied.  Langdon, J., Dissented.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of the City and
County of San Francisco.  J. T. B. Warne, Judge Presiding.

COUNSEL: Cooley, Crowley & Gallagher, Cooley & Crowley and Cooley, Crowley &
Supple, for Appellant.

James E. Colston and John G. Alioto, for Respondent.

JUDGES: In Bank.  Preston, J.  Richards, J., Curtis, J., Seawell, J., Shenk, J.,
and Waste, C. J., concurred.

OPINION BY: PRESTON

OPINION

     Plaintiff, seeking to recover damages for the breach of Harry D. Barasch, a
licensed real estate broker, brought this action against him and against
defendant corporation as surety upon his $ 2,000 bond under the Real Estate
Brokers' Act of 1919, as amended (Stats. 1919, p. 1252, Act 61; Stats. 1925,
chap. 341, p. 600).  The cause  was tried before the court without a jury, upon
stipulated facts, and the court thereafter made its findings, and entered
judgment in favor of plaintiff and against defendant corporation, from which
judgment said defendant now appeals.

   Appellant's main contention is that of insufficiency of the evidence to
justify the findings and judgment.  In this behalf, it is urged that the sale
made by defendant Barasch was not a real estate transaction, requiring the
services of a real estate broker, as defined by the act, and that said defendant
was not acting in that capacity, but that said sale was merely one of personal
property, consisting of a poolroom, stock and equipment, carrying with it as
incidental to the interest in the personalty sold, the sale and assignment of
plaintiff's leasehold interest; that the judgment against appellant as surety
should not include the purchase price of the personalty, but should be limited
to the value, if any, of the lease alone; that the evidence failed to show that
said defendant was employed to negotiate a sale or exchange of the lease or to
show what amount, if any, was paid for the transfer thereof; that said defendant
was acting as the attorney-in-fact of plaintiff and therefore the provisions of
said act do not apply.  Lastly, appellant complains of insufficiency in the
allegations of the complaint with respect to the employment of said defendant
and of inconsistencies in the findings.

   These various contentions require us to here set forth briefly the pertinent
provisions of the said statute, of the pleadings, stipulation of facts and of
the findings and judgment herein.

    Section 2 of said Real Estate Brokers' Act (Stats. 1925, p. 600) defines a
real estate broker in part as ". . . a person . . . who, for compensation,
negotiates loans on real estate, leases, or offers to lease, or negotiates the
sale, purchase, or exchange of leases, rents, or places for rent, or collects
rent from real estate . . . for others as a whole or partial vocation . . .".
Said section further reads: "Nor shall the provisions of this act apply to
persons holding a duly executed power of attorney from the owner, nor shall this
act be construed to include in any way the services rendered by an attorney at
law in performing his duties as such attorney at law . . ."

    The second amended complaint herein alleged, among other things, that
plaintiff employed defendant Barasch, under bond of defendant corporation, "as a
real estate broker, to sell and lease and assign that certain real estate . . .
called the Drexal Pool Room"; that said defendant sold it to one Musso for $
5,500; negotiated a transfer of plaintiff's lease to him; collected $ 5,500 plus
$ 675 which plaintiff had posted with the owner of the property for rent; paid
out of said sums $ 2,500 on behalf of plaintiff and was to receive a commission
of $ 300, but that in violation of his trust and the above statute, he embezzled
and fraudulently retained against the will and without the consent of plaintiff,
$ 2,875; wherefore plaintiff prayed for judgment against both defendants for $
2,000 and costs of suit.

   The condition of the bond, which appeared as an exhibit to said amended
complaint, was that said defendant Barasch would comply with the provisions of
said statute and would "faithfully perform every undertaking entered into by him
as a licensed real estate broker under the said act . . . "; further, that any
person injured by his failure to perform his duties or comply with the statute
should have the right in his own name to commence and maintain an action against
him and the surety for the recovery of any damage sustained by his failure or
omission.

   The stipulation of facts substantiated the allegations that said defendant
was a duly licensed broker and that said bond was in full force and effect.  It
showed further that on February 2, 1927, plaintiff executed a written agreement
appointing said defendant his "agent" with the exclusive right for a specified
period "to sell or exchange . . . the property or any portion thereof described
on the reverse side hereof" and also constituting said agent his
attorney-in-fact to consummate said sale, agreeing to pay a compensation for his
services, etc.  The property, the subject of the agreement, was described on the
reverse side thereof in part as follows: "Kind of Property Pool Hall & Cigar
stand consisting of stock and equipment . . . monthly rent $ 225 Monthly Gross
Receipts, $ 2500 Month Net Profits $ 800 . . . Value of fixtures and equipment $
10,000 . . . Length of Lease 4 yrs. & 10 months . . .".  Said stipulation
further showed that on February 10, 1927, said Musso executed an "agreement to
purchase" witnessed by defendant Barasch  and approved and ratified by
plaintiff, reciting that he deposited with said defendant, as agent for the
seller, $ 200 "as part payment of the purchase price of the Drexal Pool Room
consisting of stock and equipment . . . (Lease of said premises to be
approximately five [5] years) . . ."; that plaintiff transferred and assigned to
said Musso his said leasehold interest and said Musso paid defendant Barasch
said sums of $ 675, $ 200 and $ 5,300, respectively, from which said defendant
paid on behalf of plaintiff $ 2,500 to extinguish a chattel mortgage on said
fixtures and equipment, retaining the balance of the sums so received by him
against the will and without the consent of plaintiff.  It was then further
stipulated that the assignment of the lease was a part of the transaction and
part of the duties to be performed by Barasch, that is, that Barasch was to
procure the assignment thereof.

   The case was submitted to the court below upon the above-mentioned
stipulation and oral and written authorities and said court thereafter made its
findings to the effect that all of the allegations of said complaint were true.
It further found that plaintiff employed said defendant "as a real estate
broker, to sell a certain pool room business and sell and assign a certain lease
. . . that said defendant . . . as such real estate broker . . . entered into
negotiations for the sale of said real estate with one . . . Musso", consummated
said sale and embezzled and retained a portion of the proceeds received by him
as above set forth and "that as a part of the transaction between plaintiff and
said . . . Musso, it was necessary to and plaintiff did transfer and assign to
said Musso said lease" and said Musso paid said sum of $ 675 as above set forth.
From these facts the court concluded that plaintiff was entitled to judgment
against defendant corporation in the sum of $ 2,000, with interest from February
11, 1927, and costs, and such judgment was entered accordingly.

     An extended discussion of the numerous points urged by appellant is
unnecessary for we are of the opinion that the only vital and determinative
issue confronting us is whether this entire transaction constituted a real
estate transaction with services rendered by defendant Barasch as a real estate
broker as defined by the act.

    If this question be answered in the affirmative it will at once be seen that
no fatal inconsistency,  constituting reversible error, appears by reason of the
fact that in the complaint the transaction is referred to as the sale, lease and
assignment of "certain real estate . . . called the Drexal Pool Room"; that in
the stipulation of facts it is referred to as a sale or exchange by plaintiff's
"agent" of "property" "Pool Hall & Cigar stand . . .", etc.; that in the
findings the terms used in the complaint are adopted in one place and in another
place the transaction is referred to as the sale of a "certain pool room
business" and sale and assignment of "a certain lease" and of "said real estate
", etc.  In other words, the governing factor is the true nature of the
transaction and where the subject of the sale and the character of the acts
performed by said defendant clearly appear, the fact that the varying, and
perhaps inaccurate terms "said property" or "said real estate", etc., are used,
becomes immaterial.  It is also immaterial that the stock form used by plaintiff
in appointing said defendant his agent, contained a clause also appointing said
agent his attorney-in-fact to consummate the transaction.  Defendant Barasch
expressly limited his capacity to that of an agent and acted solely in that
capacity.

   It is our conclusion that the transaction upon which the liability of
appellant surety is predicated involved services performed by defendant Barasch
as a real estate broker and that it comes within the terms of said bond.  The
sale was one of personal property located upon real estate and of negotiation
for and exchange of the lease of the real property upon which the personalty was
located, constituting one complete and entire transaction. No evidence was
adduced as to the value of the lease, but it appears that the value thereof was
substantial and that the sale of the personalty was incidental to exchange of
the lease rather than that the lease exchanged was an incident to the sale of
the personalty. In other words, the bond was conditioned upon the faithful
performance by defendant Barasch of "every undertaking entered into by him as a
licensed real estate broker under the said act" and having undertaken the
exchange of said lease, with other incidental duties, the entire transaction
must be viewed as a whole and regarded  as coming within the act and the terms
of the bond.  The embezzlement of the above-mentioned sum by said defendant,
therefore, constituted a breach of his obligation as a real estate broker within
the terms of the act, fixing liability upon defendant surety under the terms of
said bond.  In support of this holding see Nittler v. Continental Casualty Co.,
94 Cal. App. 498 [271 Pac. 555,  272 Pac. 309].

     The court allowed interest at the legal rate from the date of the
defalcation.  Inasmuch as the full penalty of the bond is decreed, interest
should not begin until after demand.  ( Trumpler v. Cotton, 109 Cal. 250, 256,
257 [41 Pac. 1033].) The filing of the original complaint is the only definite
date the record fixes as the time of such demand.  Accordingly the judgment is
hereby modified so as to allow interest to begin on July 9, 1927.

   As so modified said judgment is affirmed.


                              83 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           H. E. ROGERS, Plaintiff and Respondent, v. OTTO T. GRUA et
                         al., Defendants and Appellants

                                  Civ. No. 195

            Court of Appeal of California, Fifth Appellate District

           215 Cal. App. 2d 1; 30 Cal. Rptr. 39; 1963 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      2449


                                 April 10, 1963

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Madera
County.  Mason A. Bailey, Judge.

   Action to recover a real estate broker's commission of which plaintiff was
deprived by an alleged conspiracy between defendants.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Appeal--Harmless Error--Error in Findings not Essential to Support of
Judgment.  --On appeal from a judgment for a real estate broker in an action
brought to recover a commission, the trial court's failure to make findings as
to two of the three causes of action alleged could be disregarded on appeal,
where judgment was based on the third cause of action, and detailed findings
made respecting the third cause of action amply supported the judgment.

(2) Brokers--Employment--Written Authorization--Requisites of Contract.  --The
written memorandum required to authorize a broker to sell real estate need not
contain all of the terms and conditions under which the real property is to be
sold, so long as the fact of employment is reduced to writing. (Civ. Code, §
1624, subd. 5; Code Civ. Proc., § 1973, subd. 5.)

(3) Id.--Employment--Written Authorization--Requisites of Contract.  --A letter
from an owner of real estate to a broker designating the property to be sold,
stating a selling price, and authorizing the broker to list the property
constituted a sufficient memorandum under the statute of frauds, since it
clearly expressed the fact of employment.

(4) Id.--Employment--Written Authorization--Authority of Persons Executing
Contracts With Brokers.  --If a real estate broker's contract of employment is
in writing, no written memorandum is required for a property owner's
authorization of his agent to communicate the detailed terms of sale to the
broker.

(5) Id.--Employment--Written Authorization.  --If the fact of a broker's
employment to sell real estate is reduced to writing, the owner may orally
ratify detailed terms of the sale supplied by his agent to the broker.

(6a) (6b) Conspiracy--Civil--Pleading.  --In an action brought by a real estate
broker to recover a commission, where plaintiff alleged in the complaint that
defendants, the property owner and another broker, agreed between themselves to
refuse to consummate a sale to a purchaser secured by plaintiff in order to
deprive plaintiff of his commission, and that pursuant to this agreement
defendant owner, at defendant broker's insistence, sold the property to another,
thus depriving plaintiff of his commission, the allegations in the complaint
were sufficient to state a cause of action based on conspiracy.

(7) Id.--Civil--Illegal Act.  --Although the act that causes plaintiff damage
must be wrongful in civil conspiracy, it need not be a criminal act nor
constitute a statutory violation.

(8) Id.--Civil--When Action Will Lie.  --The elements of an action for civil
conspiracy are the formation and operation of the conspiracy and damage
resulting to plaintiff from an act or acts done in furtherance of the common
design. The cause of action is the damage suffered.

(9) Id.--Civil--Pleading--Sufficiency.  --In an action for civil conspiracy,
where plaintiff real estate broker alleged in the complaint that defendant owner
and defendant broker agreed between themselves that defendant owner would refuse
to consummate a sale to a purchaser secured by plaintiff, in order to deprive
plaintiff of his commission, and that the property was then sold to another
purchaser in furtherance of the common design, and where findings made fully
support these allegations, the allegations of the complaint and the findings
pursuant to it were sufficient to support a judgment against each defendant as a
coconspirator.

(10) Id.--Civil--Liability of Parties.  --In an action for civil conspiracy,
each participant in the wrongful act is responsible as a joint tortfeasor for
all damages ensuing from the wrong, regardless of whether or not he was a direct
actor and of the degree of his activity.

(11) Appeal--Questions of Law and Fact--Sufficiency of Evidence to Support
Findings.  --Where a finding of fact is based on an inference that is not
unreasonable, appellants are bound by that inference.

(12) Interference--With Contract Relations.  --Acts depriving a real estate
broker of his commission constitute an intentional interference with a
contractual relationship; an interference with a contractual relationship,
either by unlawful means or by lawful means that are unjustifiable, is
actionable, and may be the basis for the recovery of civil damages.

(13) Conspiracy--Civil--Actions--Circumstantial Evidence.  --In an action for
civil conspiracy, the trial court may rely on circumstantial evidence if it
finds it credible and finds that the inferences to be drawn from it are
reasonable.

(14) Brokers--Actions for Compensation--Evidence -- Producing Purchaser.  --In
an action brought by a real estate broker to recover a commission, where
plaintiff, pursuant to his listing, secured a buyer who was ready, able, and
willing to purchase the property, and where defendant owner and defendant broker
then conspired to deprive plaintiff of his commission by selling to another
buyer and sold the property to that buyer, plaintiff had earned his fee by
securing the first buyer, and it was immaterial that the subsequent sale was a
better "deal" for the owner.

COUNSEL: Lerrigo, Thuesen & Thompson and Maurice E. Smith for Defendants and
Appellants.

Nichols & Rogers and Harold E. Rogers, Jr., for Plaintiff and Respondent.

JUDGES: Stone, J.  Conley, P. J., and Brown (R.M.), J., concurred.

OPINION BY: STONE

OPINION

     This appeal is from a judgment in favor of plaintiff Rogers, a real estate
broker, for a commission on the sale of real property, and against defendant
Grua, who owned the property, and defendant Hilton, a real estate broker. The
complaint alleged that defendants Grua and Hilton conspired to prevent plaintiff
from collecting a commission he had earned by arranging a sale of the Grua ranch
pursuant to a written authorization to sell.

    The issues before this court arose out of the following sequence of events:
Rogers wrote Grua requesting permission to sell the property, saying, in part:
"I would like to list your land and work on it for you." Grua replied by letter:

   "In reply to your letter of the 29th, relative to my farm in Dairyland
subdivision, It is listed for sale at $ 400.00 an acre.

   "At the present time, the farm is leased and sharecropped on a one-fourth
basis.  The lease is so written, it can be terminated at any time by paying the
tenant for the work he has performed for the current year.

   "You have it's location, and you may have the listing with one or two other
realtors.  The reason for selling it is that it is too far away for me to
supervise.  The balance due on the ranch is $ 32,500.00 at 5 per cent interest."

   Rogers interested a Dr. Braun and a Mr. Welch in purchasing the property,
after which he sought more detailed terms and conditions of the sale from Grua.
Dr. Grua maintained his offices in Los Angeles and because he was busy,
instructed Rogers to see defendant Hilton in Fresno.  He stated that Hilton, a
real estate broker, was an old friend and that he would advise Rogers as to the
terms and conditions upon which he, Grua, would sell the property.

   Pursuant to Grua's instructions, Rogers consulted Hilton and thereafter
arranged a sale of the property to Mr. Welch upon terms agreeable to Hilton.
Welch,  Rogers and Hilton met at the office of a title company in Madera, escrow
instructions were prepared, Welch paid a deposit on the purchase price, he and
his wife signed the escrow instructions and other necessary documents, and a
title company official agreed to forward the escrow documents to Grua for
signature.  During the escrow negotiations plaintiff Rogers and defendant Hilton
agreed to share equally the $ 5,000 real estate commission provided by the
escrow instructions.

   Rogers advised Dr. Braun, his other prospective buyer, of the sale to Welch
and of the escrow that had been opened at the local title company.  Dr. Braun
then consulted Hilton in Fresno and after some negotiating, made an offer to
purchase the property.  This offer differed in some details from the escrow
terms entered into by Welch and his wife.  It differed also in that Hilton was
to receive the entire $ 5,000 commission.

   Rogers testified that after Welch had executed the escrow papers he talked to
Dr. Grua by telephone, that the doctor expressed satisfaction with the
arrangement and said he would execute the papers which were being forwarded to
him by the  escrow company.  However, sometime thereafter he sold the property
to Dr. Braun and Hilton was paid the entire $ 5,000 commission.

   Plaintiff filed this action against Grua and Hilton to recover his real
estate commission for arranging a sale to Welch.  The first two causes of action
are common counts, the third alleges a conspiracy between Hilton and Grua to
deprive plaintiff of his commission for making the sale to Welch.

     The trial court, sitting without a jury, found for the plaintiff on the
third cause of action; findings were made which fully support the judgment.
Defendants complain that no findings were made as to the first two causes of
action predicated upon common count.  The oversight is immaterial in view of the
detailed findings made in support of the third cause of action. In Bohn v.
Watson, 130 Cal.App.2d 24 [278 P.2d 454], at page 41, it was said:

   "It is elementary law that if a judgment is amply supported by findings which
are sustained by sufficient evidence, questions relative to other findings
become immaterial upon appeal and may be disregarded.  [Citations.]" (See also
Sand v. Concrete Service Co., 176 Cal.App.2d 169, 175 [1 Cal.Rptr. 257].)

   Defendants' three principal arguments on appeal are: (1) A real estate
broker's authorization to sell must be in writing, and the writing must contain
the terms and conditions of sale; the letter from Grua to Rogers, supra, falls
short of these requirements.  (2) Hilton's authorization to act as agent for
owner Grua in the sale of the property was not reduced to writing. (3) The third
cause of action inadequately alleges a conspiracy, and the findings in support
of this cause of action lack evidentiary support.

     The letter before us designates the property to be sold, a selling price of
$ 400 per acre, and it gives plaintiff the right to list the property.  As
defendants point out, the detailed terms and conditions of the sale are lacking
and it is their contention that these details cannot be supplied orally.
Defendants base their argument on the provisions of Civil Code section 1624,
subdivision 5, and Code of Civil Procedure section 1973, subdivision 5, which
require that an agreement authorizing or employing an agent or broker to
purchase or sell real estate for compensation or a commission must be in
writing.  The argument equates the requirements of a memorandum of employment of
a real estate broker in an action to recover his fee, with the requirements of a
writing that  will support an action for the specific performance of a contract.
Insofar as the applicability of the statute of frauds is concerned, these two
kinds of action are not apposite.  Equity does require that all of the terms and
conditions of an agreement for the sale of real estate be reduced to writing if
it is sought to be specifically enforced.  An action to recover a real estate
commission, however, is an action at law for damages, not an equitable action to
enforce a contract.  The fact of employment as a broker must, of course, be
evidenced by a writing as required by the code sections cited above, but the
distinction lies in the nature of the memorandum required.

   Unlike the contract for the sale of real property, the broker's authorization
to sell need not contain all of the terms and conditions upon which the real
property is to be sold.  The details of the sale may be supplied orally pursuant
to the broker's authorization, so long as the fact of employment is reduced to
writing.

   The question is not novel, and we find a clear exposition of the applicable
law in Lathrop v. Gauger, 127 Cal.App.2d 754 [274 P.2d 730], at page 765:

   "It is well settled that where the memorandum relating to the contract of
employment of a real estate broker is sufficient to show his agency but does not
set out all the other terms of the proposed transaction, oral evidence may be
admitted to supply the omitted terms.  [Citations.] It follows that since the
statute of frauds governing this type of transaction does not require the terms
of sale to be incorporated into the broker's contract of employment, it was
unnecessary to show that Anderson was clothed with written authorization to
transmit to plaintiff the terms upon which defendant desired to sell."

     The letter addressed by owner Grua to plaintiff real estate broker
specifically stated: "Relative to my farm in Dairyland subdivision, It is listed
for sale at $ 400.00 an acre.  . . .  You have it's location, and you may have
the listing with one or two other realtors."

    This letter constitutes a sufficient memorandum of an authorization to sell
since it clearly expresses the fact of employment within the rationale of
Lathrop, supra, and cases cited therein.

   Defendants lean heavily upon the case of Pacific etc.   Dev. Corp. v. Western
Pacific R.R. Co., 47 Cal.2d 62 [301 P.2d 825], in which the Supreme Court held
that the letter there involved did not constitute a sufficient memorandum of a
contract  employing the broker to sell real estate. The language of the letter
in the Pacific case differs markedly from the language used in the letter before
us.  As the Supreme Court remarked at page 69 of Pacific, the letter "made no
reference to the fact of employment by defendant of plaintiff or to any
compensation."

     Defendants next point out that the detailed terms of sale omitted from the
letter upon which plaintiff relies, were supplied not by Grua, the owner, but by
Hilton, his agent.  The statute of frauds, they assert, requires Hilton's
authority to act for Grua to be evidenced by a note or memorandum thereof in
writing.  As heretofore noted, the details of a listing to sell real property
may be supplied orally by the owner of the property if the real estate broker's
authorization to sell is in writing.  Therefore it should follow that an agent
of the owner, in this case Hilton, could likewise orally supply the details of
the terms and conditions of a sale.  Certainly the authorization for the agent
to act should require no greater formality than is required to legalize the act
of the principal.  Our position finds support in Lathrop v. Gauger, supra,
wherein the detailed terms of a sale of real estate were furnished orally to a
broker by the owner's attorney.

     Furthermore, after Welch went into escrow with the approval of Hilton, Grua
told plaintiff by telephone that he liked the Welch "deal" and that he would
sign the Welch escrow papers.  Since Grua as owner could have supplied the
details orally, certainly he could orally ratify details supplied by his agent.

     Defendants object to the sufficiency of the allegation of conspiracy in
plaintiff's complaint, and additionally assert that the findings fail to reflect
the elements necessary to constitute a conspiracy. The gist of defendants'
contention is that no specific wrongful or illegal act is alleged in the
complaint or is reflected by the findings.  Defendants' discussion of just what
must be alleged and proved in a civil conspiracy action is vague and indecisive.
The thrust of their argument is that the act must be wrongful in the sense that
it is illegal.  Defendants, it appears,  are confusing the elements of civil
conspiracy with those of criminal conspiracy. Although the act that causes
plaintiff damage must be wrongful in civil conspiracy, it need not be a criminal
act nor need it constitute a statutory violation.   The essence of civil
conspiracy is stated in the case of California Auto Court Assn. v. Cohn, 98
Cal.App.2d 145 [219 P.2d 511]. This case  was decided on facts which presented a
question similar to the one before us, and the court said, at page 149: "The
elements of an action for civil conspiracy are the formation and operation of
the conspiracy and damage resulting to plaintiff from an act or acts done in
furtherance of the common design. The cause of action is the damage suffered."

     In the instant case plaintiff alleged that defendants agreed between them
that defendant Grua as owner would refuse to consummate the sale to Welch and
thus deprive plaintiff of his commission for making the sale to Welch; and that
pursuant to the agreement defendant Grua, at the request and insistence of
defendant Hilton, consummated a sale of said property to Dr. Braun, depriving
plaintiff of his commission for making the sale to Welch.  The allegations are
sufficient to state a cause of action, and the findings fully support the
allegations of the complaint.

     The allegations of the complaint and the findings pursuant thereto are
sufficient also to support a judgment against each defendant as a coconspirator.
In California Auto Court Assn. v. Cohn, supra, the court said, at page 149:
"Each participant in the wrongful act is responsible as a joint tort feasor for
all damages ensuing from the wrong, regardless of whether or not he was a direct
actor and of the degree of his activity."

     There is evidence from which the court could infer that Dr. Grua sold the
property to Dr. Braun at Hilton's urging so that Hilton would receive the entire
commission.  This occurred after Grua's oral approval of the Welch sale.  Since
the inference is not unreasonable, defendants are bound by it.  ( Butler v.
Nepple, 54 Cal.2d 589, 597 [6 Cal.Rptr. 767, 354 P.2d 239]; T. V. Wire Products
v. Osipow Electric Supply Co., 204 Cal.App.2d 522, 528 [22 Cal.Rptr. 384];
Berniker v. Berniker, 30 Cal.2d 439, 444 [182 P.2d 557].)

     Plaintiff was deprived of his commission by defendants' acts, which thus
constituted an intentional interference with a contractual relationship. It is
settled that interference with a contractual relationship, either by unlawful
means or by lawful means which are unjustifiable, is actionable, and that it may
be the basis for the recovery of civil damages.  ( California Auto Court Assn.
v. Cohn, supra; Herron v. State Farm Mutual Ins. Co., 56 Cal.2d 202, 205 [14
Cal.Rptr. 294, 363 P.2d 310]; Lipman v. Brisbane Elementary Sch. Dist. 55 Cal.2d
224, 232 [11 Cal.Rptr. 97, 359 P.2d 465].)

     In this connection, defendants argue that there is no direct evidence of a
wrongful act committed by either defendant.  It is true that the finding that
Hilton induced Grua not to complete the sale to Welch depends to a large degree
on circumstantial evidence. But the trial court may rely on circumstantial
evidence if it finds it credible and finds that the inferences to be drawn
therefrom are reasonable.  As was said in California Auto Court Assn. v. Cohn,
supra, page 149:

   ". . . because of the inherent difficulty in proving a conspiracy, it has
been held that a conspiracy may sometimes be inferred from the nature of the
acts done,  the relations of the parties, the interests of the alleged
conspirators, and other circumstances." (See also Bohn v. Watson, supra, 130
Cal.App.2d 24, 34, and cases cited therein.)

     Finally, defendant Hilton asserts that he did nothing wrong in arranging
the sale to Dr. Braun because it was his duty as a real estate broker to make
the best possible "deal" for his client.  He argues that he simply found a more
favorable sale for Dr. Grua.  Plaintiff argues, plausibly, that the terms of the
Welch sale were the more satisfactory, but the entire argument is immaterial to
the issues before us.  Hilton was present with plaintiff and Welch at the title
company office, representing Dr. Grua, at the time Welch went into escrow.
Hilton not only approved the Welch sale but he also required that one-half of
the $ 5,000 commission be paid to him as a condition of the escrow. Therefore,
conceding that Hilton thereafter obtained a better "deal" for his friend, Dr.
Grua, it in no way nullifies the fact that plaintiff had earned his fee by
securing a buyer, nor does it justify Hilton's claim to the entire commission
rather than the one-half he agreed to take at the time he approved the Welch
sale.  If the sale to Dr. Braun was a better "deal" then Dr. Grua has received
the benefit of the better deal, and the only question here is whether Rogers,
pursuant to his listing as a real estate broker, secured a buyer who was ready,
able and willing to purchase the property.

   The evidence which the trial court elected to believe amply supports the
finding that Rogers earned his commission.

   The judgment is affirmed.


                              84 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In the Matter of the Estate of MARY E. TURNER, Deceased. H.
               S. HERRICK, Appellant, v. J. T. HARMES, Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 3730

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FIRST APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION ONE

             51 Cal. App. 317; 196 P. 807; 1921 Cal. App. LEXIS 739


                           February 8, 1921, Decided

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing of this Cause was Denied by
the District Court of Appeal on March 10, 1921.
   A Petition to have the Cause Heard in the Supreme Court, after Judgment in
the District Court of Appeal, was Denied by the Supreme Court on April 7, 1921.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a decree of partial distribution of the Superior
Court of the City and County of San Francisco. George A. Sturtevant, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Estates of Deceased Persons--Dismissal of Petition for Probate of Will--
Nonresident Alien Petitioner--Right to Receive Devise--Order of Dismissal not
Determinative.  --An order dismissing a petition for the probate of a will on
the ground that the petitioner was a nonresident alien and not a person
interested in the estate and that the petition was not signed by the petitioner
personally, but by his attorney in fact, was not a determination of the right of
the petitioner as a nonresident alien to take by devise under the will.

(2) Id.--Nonresident Aliens--Right to Inherit Real Estate.  --A nonresident
alien and subject of Italy is entitled under the "most favored nation" clause of
the treaty between the United States and Italy to receive by devise real estate
in this state, notwithstanding section 17 of article I of the constitution
adopted in 1894.

(3) Constitutional Law--Inheritance by Aliens--Power of Legislature.  --Section
17 of article I of the constitution, adopted in 1894, is not to be construed as
a limitation upon the power of the legislature to deal with the right of
succession of nonresident aliens to real estate, and the passage of the Alien
Land Act of 1913, wherein it is provided all aliens eligible to citizenship may
inherit real property in the same manner and to the same extent as citizens,
except as otherwise provided by the laws of this state, was within the power of
the legislature.

COUNSEL: H. S. Herrick, in pro. per. for Appellant.

Charles A. Christin and Hutchinson, Van Fleet & Christin for Respondent.

U. S. Webb, Attorney-General, and Frank L. Guerena, Deputy Attorney-General, for
State of California.

JUDGES: RICHARDS, J. Kerrigan, J., and Waste, P. J., concurred.

OPINION BY: RICHARDS

OPINION

     RICHARDS, J. This is an appeal from a decree of partial distribution made
and entered in the matter of the estate of Mary E. Turner, deceased. The
appellant is the brother and heir of said decedent and is also one of the
distributees under the decree of partial distribution from which this appeal has
been taken. The respondent is the administrator with the will annexed of the
estate of said decedent. By the terms of said will certain real property in San
Francisco was devised in equal undivided shares to her said brother and to one
A. Basletta. There was also devised to Basletta the whole of certain real estate
in the county of Fresno. The record shows that a petition for letters of
administration with the will annexed was made on behalf of said Basletta, but
that upon a hearing thereon said petition was dismissed by the court. Thereafter
the respondent Harmes applied for and received letters of administration with
the will annexed in said estate. Thereafter and on January 8, 1920, the court
having jurisdiction of said estate made and entered a decree of partial
distribution upon the application of said Herrick, wherein it was  ordered that
there be distributed to said Herrick an undivided one-half of certain real
estate in San Francisco devised to him by the terms of said will. It was further
provided in said decree that before said Herrick should receive said property he
should execute and deliver to the administrator with the will annexed a bond in
the sum of two thousand dollars with proper sureties to be approved by a judge
of said court, conditioned for the payment when required of his proportion of
the debts due from said estate. Thereafter and on February 4, 1920, another
petition for partial distribution was presented by the said administrator
wherein no reference was made to the prior petition for and decree of partial
distribution, but wherein, after reciting at considerable length the previous
proceedings in said estate, and setting forth in full the terms of the will of
said decedent, and of the several contests and controversies which had occurred
as between said Herrick and said administrator and other persons, involving the
right to administer said estate, and also apparently involving the question as
to the right of said Basletta to have and receive any portion of said estate as
one of the devisees of said decedent, the administrator prayed for a decree of
partial distribution awarding an undivided one-half interest in the real estate
of said decedent, situate in San Francisco, to said Herrick, and an undivided
one-half interest in the same property to A. Basletta, and also praying that the
whole of the lot lying in Fresno be distributed to said Basletta. This petition
came regularly on for hearing, whereupon said Herrick presented his opposition
to the same, in so far as it prayed for the distribution of any portion to said
Basletta, upon the ground that as a nonresident alien and a subject of Italy he
was not entitled to take by devise any portion of said estate. In his said
objections to said petition no reference was made by Herrick to the fact that
the court had previously made a decree of partial distribution of the undivided
one-half of the San Francisco property referred to in the petition of said
administrator to him. Upon said hearing the court refused to sustain the several
objections urged by said Herrick against the partial distribution of said
estate, according to the prayer of said petition, and thereupon proceeded to
distribute, in accordance with the terms of the will of said deceased, an
undivided one-half  interest in the San Francisco real estate to said Herrick,
and an undivided one-half interest therein to said Basletta, and further
proceeded to distribute to the latter the whole of the Fresno real estate,
conformably to the terms of said will.

   Up to the time of the making and entry of this decree no bond had been filed
by said Herrick in conformity with the requirements of the former decree of
partial distribution of an undivided one-half interest in the San Francisco
property to him; but a few days after the making and entry of the last decree of
partial distribution he filed said bond, and thereafter took an appeal to the
supreme court from said last made decree of partial distribution, which appeal
the supreme court at a later date transferred to this court for hearing and
determination.

   The appellant presents three points upon this appeal. The first of these is
that the trial court determined the right of A. Basletta as a nonresident alien
to receive by devise any portion of the estate of Mary E. Turner, deceased, by
its order dismissing the petition filed on behalf of A. Basletta for the probate
of the will of said deceased and for the issuance to him of letters of
administration therein.

   The order of said court upon which the appellant relies in support of this
contention reads as follows:

   "This cause coming on regularly to be heard this 23d day of September, 1918,
upon the motion of H. S. Herrick, proponent of the last will of said deceased,
and said proponent A. Basletta being represented by counsel on said motion, and
it appearing to the court that said A. Basletta is a nonresident alien, and not
a person interested in the estate of said deceased, and his said petition for
the probate of the last wills of said deceased was not signed by him personally,
in accordance with the requirement of section 1371, Code of Civil Procedure, but
by his attorney in fact J. T. Harmes;

   "It is hereby ordered that said petition for probate so filed by said
Basletta be and the same is hereby dismissed."

   The parties to this appeal have, for some reason, not seen fit to furnish
this court with any of the proceedings in said estate prior to the making and
entry of this order; but so far as we are able to determine from the face
thereof and from certain indirect references made thereto in other and  later
proceedings, it would appear that the only matter passed upon by the court in
making said order was the right of said A. Basletta to have his petition for the
probate of said will and for the issuance to him of letters of administration
with the will annexed granted; and that the only determinative part of said
order is the concluding portion thereof, in which it is ordered that said
"petition for probate so filed by said Basletta through his attorney in fact be
and the same is hereby dismissed." That sufficient basis existed for the making
of this order cannot be questioned, for the reason that under section 1369 of
the Code of Civil Procedure, the said A. Basletta, not being a bona fide
resident of the state, was not competent nor entitled to act as an administrator
in said estate, and for the further reason, as expressly stated by the court,
his petition for such letters was not properly signed under the requirements of
section 1371 of the Code of Civil Procedure.  So far as appears upon the face of
this order, or so far as appears from the record in the case, the question of
the right of A. Basletta as a nonresident alien to take by devise under the will
of said decedent was not before the court and was not decided by it at the time
of making said order or according to its terms. That this was apparently the
view of this matter taken by the trial court is evident from its later action in
awarding A. Basletta the share of said estate devised to him by the will of said
decedent in the decree of partial distribution, from which this appeal is taken,
and when the direct question of the right of A. Basletta as a nonresident alien
to take by said devise was presented to said court for determination. We find,
therefore, no merit in the appellant's said contention.

     The next contention urged by the appellant is that said A. Basletta, as a
nonresident alien and subject of Italy, is not entitled, under the constitution
and laws of this state, to receive by devise any portion of the real estate of
said decedent, and hence that the decree of partial distribution from which this
appeal has been taken, in so far as it purports to distribute to said Basletta
any property whatever of said decedent, is void. In making this contention the
appellant, in his brief, concedes that at the time of the death of said decedent
and also at the time of making said decree of partial distribution there existed
a treaty  between the United States and Italy in which what is known as the
"most favored nation" clause appeared; but the appellant contends that
notwithstanding the existence of said treaty and the presence and effect of said
clause therein, the constitution of this state, by virtue of the amendment of
section 17 of article I thereof, adopted in 1894, must be held to override said
treaty and must be construed as denying to nonresident aliens the right to take
and hold by succession or devise, real estate in California.

   We are of the opinion that this court is concluded from attempting to
determine either of these two contentions in the appellant's favor by the
decision of the supreme court of this state, in the case of Blythe v. Hinckley,
127 Cal. 431, [59 P. 787]. That case involved the right of a nonresident alien,
a citizen and subject of England, to take by inheritance real estate in
California. The supreme court, in passing upon that question, held, first, that
the treaty-making power of the federal government with respect to the rights of
aliens to inherit property was of controlling force, and that the laws of the
individual states upon that subject, in so far as they were in conflict with the
treaty provisions, were suspended or controlled during the life of the treaty.

   It is true that in that case it appeared that the treaties between Great
Britain and this country were silent upon that subject, but notwithstanding this
fact, the supreme court there decided that the laws of the several states were
subject to treaty control. It is not contended by the appellant herein that the
subjects of Great Britain and of a number of other foreign powers were not
accorded the right under treaties existing at the time of the death of said
decedent and at the time of the making and entry of the decree herein appealed
from, to take real estate by inheritance or devise in this state. In point of
fact, the authorities cited in his brief, notably the case of Succession of
Rixner, 48 La. Ann. 552, [32 L. R. A. 177, and notes thereto, 19 So. 597], show
the existence of such rights under a number of existing treaties between the
United States and foreign powers; while in the case last referred to as cited by
the appellant himself, it is held that a nonresident alien and citizen and
subject of Italy is entitled by the "most favored nation" clause of the Italian
treaty to be accorded the same rights of inheritance and succession which the
citizens and subjects of other nations under the express terms of the treaties
therein referred to enjoy.

   We are, therefore, constrained to hold that the language of the supreme court
in Blythe v. Hinckley, above referred to, determines this point against the
appellant's contention.

     It is further claimed by the appellant that the amendment of section 17 of
article I of the state constitution, adopted in 1894, has the effect of
superseding the decision referred to, and was in fact adopted with the express
intent of so doing. It is to be noted that the case of Blythe v. Hinckley, supra
, was decided by the supreme court six years after the date of said amendment;
and it may be inferred that if any such change in the constitution as is herein
contended for had been effected by said amendment the supreme court would have
so declared; but instead of doing this it appears that the court in its decision
in said case also dealt with the question as to whether section 17 of article I
of the constitution was intended to be a limitation upon the powers of the
legislature to deal with the question of the right of succession of nonresident
aliens to real estate; and in so doing the court expressly held that the
constitutional provision in question was not to be construed as being such a
limitation. A cursory examination of section 17 of article I of the constitution
, as amended in 1894, will show that it does not expressly prohibit nonresident
aliens, eligible to become citizens of the United States under the
naturalization laws thereof, from acquiring by inheritance or devise real estate
, but apparently leaves it to the legislature to determine the extent and
conditions under which such aliens may hold and dispose of such real estate, as
shall be thus acquired by them after the adoption of said amendment. The
legislature of California, acting, apparently, upon this construction of the
state constitution, adopted, in 1913, an Alien Land Act (Stats. 1913, p. 206),
wherein, in section 1 thereof, it is provided that "All aliens eligible to
citizenship under the laws of the United States may acquire, possess, enjoy,
transmit and inherit real property or any interest therein, in this state, in
the same manner and to the same extent as citizens of the United States, except
as otherwise provided by the laws of this state." We are of the opinion that the
state legislature was empowered to pass this provision; and that having done so
prior to the  death of said decedent, and said statute being in force at the
time of her death, she was entitled by her last will and testament to devise to
A. Basletta the portion of her real estate assigned to him by the terms of said
will.

   The third and final contention of the appellant is that since the trial court
by its decree of partial distribution, made on January 8, 1920, distributed to
him an undivided one-half of the San Francisco real estate of said decedent, and
that since its decree of partial distribution made and entered on March 17,
1920, also distributed to him an undivided one-half interest in the same
property, he is entitled to the whole thereof under said decrees, or at least
that the second of said decrees was in error in awarding to A. Basletta an
undivided one-half of said property, since the court thereby attempted to
dispose of more by one-half than the whole thereof.

   We find no merit in this contention, since aside from the fact that up to the
time of the making of said second decree the appellant had not complied with the
requirement of the first decree in the matter of filing the bond provided for
therein; and also since in his opposition to the making of said second decree he
altogether failed to refer to the fact that he had already received an undivided
one-half of said property by said former decree, we are of the opinion that
these two decrees should be construed together, and that when so construed it
must be held that it was not the intention of the trial court to do otherwise
than to dispose of the real estate of said decedent, in conformity with the
terms of her will, and hence by its second decree to assign to the appellant no
more than that share of said property which he had been declared entitled to
receive upon the accomplishment of the yet unfulfilled requirements of the first
decree. This being our construction of said decrees it follows that there is no
merit in the appellant's contention as to the effect of said decrees.

   Judgment affirmed.

   Kerrigan, J., and Waste, P. J., concurred.

   A petition for a rehearing of this cause was denied by the district court of
appeal on March 10, 1921, and the following opinion then rendered thereon:

    THE COURT. The petition for rehearing presented by the attorney-general
herein is denied.

   The case of Blythe v. Hinckley, 127 Cal. 431, [59 P. 787], cited in the main
opinion herein, was not referred to as one involving the question of the right
of the alien therein concerned to inherit real estate in California under a
treaty provision, but was relied upon for the reason that the supreme court did
expressly declare in that case that state laws "in so far as they are in
conflict with treaty provisions are suspended or controlled during the life of
the treaty." It is not the province of this court to treat as dicta and
disregard as such this express declaration of the supreme court.

   The case of Sullivan v. Kidd, 254 U.S. 433, [65 L. Ed. 344, 41 S. Ct. 158],
cited by the petitioner, does not, in our opinion, sustain his contention as to
the effect of the "most favored nation" clause in treaties upon state statutes
undertaking to regulate or restrict the inheritance of real estate by
nonresident aliens.

   A petition to have the cause heard in the supreme court, after judgment in
the district court of appeal, was denied by the supreme court on April 7, 1921.

   All the Justices concurred, except Sloane, J., who was absent.


                              85 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            Estate of CHARLES J. ARBULICH, Deceased.  JOHN ARBULICH,
               JR., Appellant, v. THOMAS S. ARBULICH, Respondent

                                S. F. No. 18194

                          Supreme Court of California

                41 Cal. 2d 86; 257 P.2d 433; 1953 Cal. LEXIS 254


                                  May 26, 1953

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Appellant's Petition for a Rehearing was Denied June 18,
1953.  Carter, J., and Traynor, J., were of the Opinion that the Petition Should
be Granted.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of the City and
County of San Francisco determining heirship.  T. I. Fitzpatrick, Judge.

COUNSEL: Haas & Schwabe, Hubbard & Hubbard, Peter A. Schwabe and Emmet B. Hayes
for Appellant.

Frank J. O'Brien for Respondent.

JUDGES: In Bank. Schauer, J.  Gibson, C. J., Shenk, J., Edmonds, J., and Spence,
J., concurred.  Carter, J., dissents.

OPINION BY: SCHAUER

OPINION

     Following hearings on petitions to determine heirship in this estate the
probate court found that on March 21, 1947, the date of death of the decedent
(see Estate of Giordano (1948), 85 Cal.App.2d 588, 594 [193 P.2d 771]), the
reciprocal inheritance rights prescribed by section 259 of the Probate Code did
not exist between residents and citizens of this nation and those of Yugoslavia
as to either real or personal property. Judgment was thereupon entered to the
effect that decedent's surviving brother Thomas (respondent herein), residing in
and a citizen of the United States, is entitled to distribution of decedent's
entire estate, to the exclusion of a surviving brother, John, who resides in and
is a national of Yugoslavia.  The two brothers are decedent's sole heirs at law.
John appeals, contending that the evidence is not sufficient to support the
finding of nonreciprocity. The question before us is not whether we, if we were
viewing the evidence initially, should find that the greater weight seemed to
favor appellant or the respondent but is, rather, whether we can hold that as a
matter of law the finding of the probate court is without substantial
evidentiary support.   Every reasonable inference must be drawn in favor of the
respondent.  ( Holmberg v. Marsden (1952), 39 Cal.2d 592, 596 [248 P.2d 417].)
So viewing the evidence we have concluded that  appellant's contention cannot be
sustained and that the judgment should be affirmed.

    Charles J. Arbulich, the decedent, was a naturalized citizen of the United
States who died in San Francisco.  By his will he left his entire estate,
consisting of both real and personal property, to his father if the father
survived the testator, otherwise to the testator's brother, appellant John
Arbulich, Jr., of Yugoslavia.  The father predeceased Charles.  Both respondent
Thomas and appellant John (by the Consul General of Yugoslavia, who purports to
be John's attorney-in-fact) filed petitions to determine heirship, and this
proceeding followed.

   The question on the merits, as already indicated, is whether the evidence
supports the court's finding that the reciprocal rights required by the
provisions of section 259 of the Probate Code did not exist on March 21, 1947.
1  Treaties, statutes, and other evidence of the foreign domestic law may be
considered.  ( Estate of Knutzen (1948), 31 Cal.2d 573, 579 [191 P.2d 747];
Estate of Bevilacqua (1948), 31 Cal.2d 580, 582 [191 P.2d 752].)   Where
treaties or statute law alone are before the court the construction thereof is a
matter  of law, but the question of how the foreign country has construed and
applied such treaties or statutes is a question of fact.   A finding by the
trial court on the issue of reciprocity is to be treated like a finding on any
other issue of fact and if there is evidence to support it such finding will not
be disturbed on appeal.  (See Estate of Schluttig (1950), 36 Cal.2d 416, 423-424
[224 P.2d 695]; Estate of Reihs (1951), 102 Cal.App.2d 260, 268 [227 P.2d 564];
Estate of Miller (1951), 104 Cal.App.2d 1, 4 [230 P.2d 667].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Section
259 read as follows on that date: "The right of aliens not residing within the
United States or its territories to take real property in this State by
succession or testamentary disposition, upon the same terms and conditions as
residents and citizens of the United States is dependent in each case upon the
existence of a reciprocal right upon the part of citizens of the United States
to take real property upon the same terms and conditions as residents and
citizens of the respective countries of which such aliens are residents and the
right of aliens not residing in the United States or its territories to take
personal property in this State by succession or testamentary disposition, upon
the same terms and conditions as residents and citizens of the United States is
dependent in each case upon the existence of a reciprocal right upon the part of
citizens of the United States to take personal property upon the same terms and
conditions as residents and citizens of the respective countries of which such
aliens are residents. It shall be presumed that such reciprocal rights exist and
this presumption shall be conclusive unless prior to the hearing on any petition
for distribution of all or a portion of such property to an alien heir, devisee
or legatee not residing within the United States or its territories a petition
is filed by any person interested in the estate requesting the court to find
that either one or both of such reciprocal rights does not or do not exist as to
the country of which such alien heir, devisee or legatee is resident. Upon the
hearing of such petition the burden of establishing the nonexistence of such
reciprocal right or rights shall be upon the petitioner.  Notice of such hearing
shall be given in the manner provided by Section 1200 of this code."

   Effective in September, 1947, section 259 was amended by striking therefrom
the last three sentences as quoted hereinabove.  At the same time section 259.1
(added to the Probate Code in 1941 and repealed in 1945) was added, as follows:
"The burden shall be upon such nonresident aliens to establish the fact of
existence of the reciprocal rights set forth in Section 259."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The following documentary evidence was included in that before the court in
this proceeding:

   1. A copy of the Constitution of Yugoslavia, which apparently became
effective on January 31, 1946.  It is declared therein, among other things, that
(Article 18), "Private property and private initiative in economy are
guaranteed.  The inheritance of private property is guaranteed.  The right of
inheritance is regulated by law.  No person is permitted to use the right of
private property to the detriment of the people's community . . .  Private
property may be limited or expropriated if the common interest requires it, but
only in accordance with the law.  It will be determined by law in which cases
and to what  extent the owner shall be compensated.  Under the same conditions
individual branches of national economy or single enterprises may be
nationalized by law if the common interest requires it.  [Article 19.] The land
belongs to those who cultivate it.  The law determines whether and how much land
may be owned by an institution or a person who is not a cultivator.  There can
be no large land-holdings in private hands on any basis whatsoever.  The maximum
size of private land-holdings will be determined by law."

   2. A Yugoslav decree dated July 16, 1946, pertaining to the acquisition of
real property by foreigners. It provides, in part, that "Foreign citizens may
acquire rights to ownership of real estate in . . . Yugoslavia either by legal
business among the living or by legacy (in case of death) only by previous
approval of the competent government agency.  . . .  [Such] limitations . . .
shall not refer to acquisitions of real estate by legal inheritance . . .
Permits . . . shall be issued by the Chairman of the Economic Council of
[Yugoslavia] . . ." with an appeal "to the Government" allowed if a permit is
refused.  The Chairman of the Economic Council is "authorized to issue
instructions and explanations in connection with the application of this
decree." The decree  provides no guide or standard to control the chairman or
"the Government" in determining when and whether permits shall issue.

   3. A Yugoslav decree dated March 20, 1948, entitled "Control of Real Estate
Transactions," which provides in article 5 thereof that "Foreign citizens may
not acquire right of property on real estate [in] . . . Yugoslavia, except on
the basis of legal inheritance," and in article 8 that "The provisions hereof
are not valid for acquiring real estate by Yugoslav citizens on the basis of
legal inheritance or on the basis of inheritance through testaments." Article 10
invalidated the decree of July 16, 1946 (item No. 2, hereinabove).

   4. A copy of a letter 2 dated January 19, 1949, from A. G. Heltberg, American
Consul in Belgrade, Yugoslavia, addressed to the Controller of the State of
California, in which it is stated, among other things, that the provision of the
Yugoslav decree of March 20, 1948, that "Foreign citizens may not acquire right
of property or real estate [in] . . . Yugoslavia except on the basis of legal
inheritance," has been "informally interpreted" by the claims office of the
Yugoslav Ministry of Foreign Affairs "to mean that foreign citizens may inherit
property if they, under Yugoslav law, are considered to be the natural heirs of
the deceased.  If property is willed to some other person than the natural heir
that person may not succeed to the property in question."

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Admitted
into evidence without objection from appellant.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      It is apparent that the evidence summarized hereinabove is sufficient to
support a finding that on the date of decedent's death in 1947 reciprocal rights
did not exist with respect to real property. In the decree of July 16, 1946
(which remained in effect until invalidated by the decree of March 20, 1948), it
is declared that foreign citizens may acquire real property "by legacy (in case
of death) only by previous approval of the competent government agency," and
that such limitations shall not refer to acquisitions by "legal inheritance." As
already noted herein, no standards are provided to guide either the government
agency or a testator in determining in what situations, if any, such acquisition
by legacy would be approved, and it is inferable that the granting, the
withholding, or the conditions of granting, approval may vary from case to case
according to the discretion of the governmental agency as exercised in an
unbounded field  and unguided by standards of equality of application.  The
situation thus appears to be comparable to that before the court in Estate of
Schluttig (1950), supra, 36 Cal.2d 416, 425, in which it was held that when "the
taking of estates by testamentary disposition or succession is a matter of
sufferance determinable in accordance with directions of the Nazi officials and
their concepts of national sentiment, there is no 'reciprocal right' as that
term is used in the Probate Code."

    Furthermore, it is to be noted that section 259 of the Probate Code, which
is here involved, limits the right of the nonresident alien "to take real
property in this State by succession or testamentary disposition," to those
instances where there is "a reciprocal right upon the part of citizens of the
United States to take real property upon the same terms and conditions as
residents and citizens" (italics added) of the country of the alien's residence.
That the terms and conditions on which foreigners may acquire real property in
Yugoslavia by testament differ from those on which it may be so acquired by
Yugoslav citizens is a reasonable inference to be drawn from the decree of July
16, 1946.  Although the provisions of the decree of March 20, 1948, and of the
interpretation thereof by Yugoslav authorities which is set forth in the
consular letter of January 19, 1949, do not directly establish Yugoslav law as
of the date of the testator's death herein (March, 1947), they do tend to
confirm that under the decree of July 16, 1946, a differentiation was
established between the right of foreigners who are natural heirs of the
deceased to succeed to real estate "by legal inheritance" and any rights claimed
by other foreigners to take real estate "by legacy (in case of death)."

     Appellant contends, nevertheless, that the provisions of article II 3 of a
treaty entered into in 1881 between the United States and the Kingdom of Serbia
(of which the present Republic of Yugoslavia is the successor government) and
certified by the Secretary of State of the United States as remaining  in full
force and effect between this country and Yugoslavia, are applicable and
controlling in appellant's favor on the issue of reciprocity. It may be noted
that the first paragraph of article II seemingly treats only of "citizens of the
United States in Serbia [Yugoslavia] and Serbian [Yugoslav] subjects in the
United States," rather than, as is the situation in the present case, of a
United States citizen who dies in the United States and leaves property to a
Yugoslav subject who is in Yugoslavia , and therefore is not here applicable.
Even if we assume its applicability in that respect, however, the rights granted
are only those given by each of the contracting nations "to the subjects of the
most favoured nation," and do not purport to equal the rights given or
guaranteed by each of the contracting nations to its own citizens.  Consequently
the treaty provisions do not establish the reciprocal rights required by the
Probate Code.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Article
II of the treaty reads as follows: "In all that concerns the right of acquiring,
possessing, or disposing of every kind of property, real or personal, citizens
of the United States in Serbia and Serbian subjects in the United States, shall
enjoy the rights which the respective laws grant or shall grant in each of these
states to the subjects of the most favoured nation.

   "Within these limits, and under the same conditions as the subjects of the
most favoured nation, they shall be at liberty to acquire and dispose of such
property, whether by purchase, sale, donation, exchange, marriage contract,
testament, inheritance, or in any other manner whatever, without being subject
to any taxes, imposts, or charges whatever other or higher than those which are
or shall be levied on natives or on the subjects of the most favoured state.

   "They shall likewise be at liberty to export freely the proceeds of the sale
of their property, and their goods in general, without being subjected to pay
any other or higher duties than those payable under similar circumstances by
natives, or by the subjects of the most favoured state."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      Testimony by the Ambassador of Yugoslavia to the United States that
"Yugoslavia accords to citizens and residents of the United States their full
and equitable rights of inheritance under . . . the Convention [treaty] of 1881,
. . . [and that] whether the Convention itself is applicable or not . . .
Americans do have their full, complete and unabridged rights of inheritance to
inherit from their relatives or from their estate in Yugoslavia," serves at most
to create a conflict in evidence as to the ultimate fact and is not controlling
on the issue of reciprocity. Upon the record we are bound to hold that the
evidence is not as a matter of law insufficient to support the finding of the
trial court that at the time of decedent's death reciprocal rights within the
meaning of the applicable statute did not exist as to real property.

     As to whether reciprocity existed with respect to personal property, there
is a substantial conflict of opinion evidence and both appellant and respondent
urge that evidence of that nature, offered by the other, was improperly
received.  We need not pass upon such contentions, however, because it does not
appear that the errors, if any,  in regard to the admission of opinion evidence
were prejudicial.  In the light  of the other evidence upon the subject,
hereinafter mentioned, we do not think it likely that a different result would
have been reached in the trial court if the disputed opinion evidence had not
been received.  (Cal. Const., art. VI, § 4 1/2.)

     Aside from the expressions of opinion, a copy of the Yugoslav Constitution,
as hereinabove mentioned, and copies of Yugoslav decrees governing transactions
with foreign countries and their nationals were received in evidence without
objection, and such Constitution and decrees in themselves support the finding
of the trial court that reciprocity did not exist with respect to personal
property. Provisions of the Constitution have already been mentioned.  The first
of the decrees, which became effective September 7, 1945, provides: "630.  By
virtue of Article 2 of the Resolution of November 30, 1943 on the Supreme
Legislative and Executive People's Representative Body of Yugoslavia as a
provisional organ of the supreme people's authority in Yugoslavia and in
connection with the Resolution of August 10, 1945 covering the change of name of
the Antifascist Council of National Liberation of Yugoslavia into Provisional
People's Assembly of the Democratic Federative Yugoslavia, and at the suggestion
of the Minister of Finance, the Presidium of the Provisional People's Assembly
of the Democratic Federative Yugoslavia decree.

   "The Law

   "Regulating Payment Transactions With Foreign Countries

   "(Foreign Exchange Law)

   "Basic Rules

   "Article 1

   "All financial transactions with foreign countries, as well as all
transactions within the country in relation to foreign countries that may affect
the development of the credit balance of our country and the international value
of our domestic currency (foreign exchange transactions) are subject to the
control of the Federal Minister of Finance (foreign exchange control).

   "Article 2

   "Primarily the following transactions are subject to control.

   "(a) All transactions within the country and with foreign countries: in
foreign exchange, claims and debts in foreign currency and other values in
foreign currency;

    "(b) All transactions with foreign countries: in domestic currency, credits
and debits in domestic currency and other values in domestic currency;

   "(c) All transactions with foreigners within the country, causing changes in
property relations between our country and foreign countries; and . . .

   "Article 3

   "The term transaction from Articles 1 and 2 as used in this law means the
transfer of values and metals and payments, it also means the establishment,
cancellation and change of obligations and actual rights to values and metals,
as well as changes of holders of rights and obligations.

   "Article 4

   "Permission must be had for transactions described in Articles 1 and 2 of
this Law according to foreign exchange regulations.

   "Article 5

   "It is forbidden to conclude business in the country the amount of which in
domestic currency is tied to gold or some foreign currency. . . .

   "Article 6

   "(1) The Federal Minister of Finance as the supreme foreign exchange
authority, exercises his control over foreign exchange through: [various
agencies] . . .

   "(2) The Federal Minister of Finance regulates the limits of jurisdiction  as
between the foreign exchange authorities in regard to the exercising of foreign
exchange control, be it by Regulations from Article 25 of this Law, or by
separate decisions.

   "Article 7

   "(1) Transactions,  subject to foreign exchange control according to this
Law, may be conducted only by persons and establishments authorized to do so by
the competent foreign exchange authorities, unless the conduct of such business
is permitted by the foreign exchange rules themselves.  . . .

   "Article 8

   "The National Bank, whenever authorized by the Federal Minister of Finance,
may at any time request the holders in the country to offer for sale to the
National Bank all their foreign exchange (regardless whether it be in the shape
of claims in foreign currency, checks, drafts, etc.), foreign currency,  foreign
values and precious metals.  If the National Bank decides to buy, it shall fix
the terms.  . . .

   "Article 12

   "(1) The term 'devisa' as used in the foreign exchange regulations means a
claim abroad on whatever basis, in whatever currency, regardless of the manner
of disposal.  . . .

   "Article 13

   "(1) The term foreigners as used in this Law means all persons and
corporations with permanent residence or seat abroad, regardless of citizenship
of persons and ownership of enterprises.

   "(2) The term domestic persons means all persons and corporations with
permanent residence or seat within the country, regardless of citizenship of
persons and ownership of enterprises.  . . .

   "Article 16

   "(1) The penalties for foreign exchange infractions are: . . .


        "2. Confiscation of objects or values constituting the foreign
     exchange infraction, in full or in part.  . . .



   "(2) The Federal Minister of Finance shall pronounce penalties.  . . .

   "Article 25

   "The Federal Minister of Finance shall issue more detailed rules, regulations
and decisions for the execution of this Law, upon consulting the National Bank.
. . ."

   The second decree, effective October 25, 1946, confirms the decree of
September 7, 1945, and amends it in various respects which appear to be largely
immaterial here.  However, article 24 of the second decree provides that "The
Minister of Finance of FPRY is herewith authorized to issue regulations,
instructions, orders and decrees for the execution of this law," thus confirming
the apparently unlimited power of the Minister of Finance over foreign exchange
transactions.

   Appellant urges that the "Foreign Exchange Law" has no materiality in
relation to the question of reciprocity; that it is merely "regulatory of
foreign exchange and has no reference whatever to rights of inheritance." But a
reading of the entire substance of the documents mentioned makes it apparent
that the trial court was justified in reaching the conclusion that under
Yugoslav law a citizen of the United States, at the time of decedent's death,
had no definitely ascertainable and enforceable right to receive Yugoslav
property by  testament, and that the receipt of any such property would depend
in each case upon the largely, if not entirely, uncontrolled discretion of the
Minister of Finance.  This is far different from a standardized regulation which
might merely delay the transmission of gold, money, or other stores of value
from one nation to another.  (See Estate of Schluttig (1950), supra, 36 Cal.2d
416, 425; cf. Estate of Miller (1951), supra, 104 Cal.App.2d 1, 12, 13.)   Here
it is pertinent to observe, as was declared in Estate of Blak (1944), 65
Cal.App.2d 232, 238 [150 P.2d 567]: "The 'right' to take property by inheritance
and the 'right to receive' that inheritance by payment in money, have long been
recognized  as part of the substantive, legal and sanctioned incidents of the
normal legal order of society.  . . .  The 'right' to receive the benefits of
the inheritance is a necessary and inherent corollary to the 'right' to take by
inheritance. One is not separable from the other.  The one includes the other.
If the right to take exists . . . the right to receive exists . . ."

     Upon the record before us, which includes the Constitution and the
Resolutions and Decrees of Yugoslavia as above mentioned, we cannot hold that as
a matter of law the trial court was not justified in concluding that whether a
citizen of the United States, as of the date of decedent's death, might in any
particular case actually receive possession and marketable title to real estate
in Yugoslavia devised to him or personal property, or its value, bequeathed to
him, was a matter of grace or individual indulgence rather than of right based
on uniform law.

   By reason of our conclusion that no prejudicial error is shown and that the
evidence supports the finding of the trial court that on the date of decedent's
death reciprocity as contemplated and defined by our law did not exist in
Yugoslavia with respect to either real or personal property, it becomes
unnecessary to consider or decide respondent's further contentions.

   The judgment is affirmed.

DISSENT BY: CARTER

DISSENT

   CARTER, J.  I dissent.

   The majority opinion is out of harmony with my concept of the principles of
law applicable to this case and I am in full accord with the views expressed in
the able and learned  opinion prepared by Mr. Justice Peters when this case was
before the District Court of Appeal and adopt said opinion as my dissent:

   "Charles J. Arbulich, the decedent, was born in the country now known as
Yugoslavia, came to the United States, became an American citizen, died in San
Francisco on March 21, 1947, and left an estate consisting of real and personal
property. By his will he disinherited his American citizen brother, the
respondent Thomas S. Arbulich, and left his entire estate to his father, if he
should survive the testator, and if not then to his brother, the appellant, John
Arbulich, Jr., a Yugoslav citizen and resident. The father predeceased Charles.
Both Thomas and John (John through the Consul General of Yugoslavia) filed
petitions to determine heirship, it being contended by Thomas that John was
ineligible to take under the will for the reason that Yugoslavia, so it is
claimed, does not grant reciprocal rights of inheritance to American citizens
inheriting from citizens of Yugoslavia within the meaning of section 259 of the
Probate Code.  John claimed such reciprocal rights existed.  A petition by one
claiming to be the widow of Charles was also filed, but the issues presented by
that proceeding have been settled and are not here involved.

   "After a trial which spread over many months because of numerous continuances
granted to permit the parties to secure and to present evidence on the basic
issue of reciprocity, the trial court determined that reciprocity did not exist,
that John was therefore ineligible to take under the will, and that the entire
estate should be distributed to Thomas as the sole remaining heir at law.  John,
through the consul general, appeals.

   "Before discussing the evidence which, except for the testimony of the
Yugoslav ambassador to the United States, is almost entirely documentary in
character, some reference should be made to the general law governing such
proceedings.  It should be pointed out that section 259 of the Probate Code is
not merely a procedural statute, but is part of the substantive law of
succession. That being so, the statute as it read at the time of the death of
the testator desiring to leave property to an alien governs.  ( Estate of
Giordano, 85 Cal.App.2d 588 [193 P.2d 771].) Charles died March 21, 1947.

   Section 259 as it read in March of 1947 (Stats. 1945, p. 2208, chap. 1160)
and until its amendment in September of that year, then provided: 'The right of
aliens not  residing within the United States or its territories to take real
property in  this State by succession or testamentary disposition, upon the same
terms and conditions as residents and citizens of the United States is dependent
in each case upon the existence of a reciprocal right upon the part of citizens
of the United States to take real property upon the same terms and conditions as
residents and citizens of the respective countries of which such aliens are
residents and the right of aliens not residing in the United States or its
territories to take personal property in this State by succession or
testamentary disposition, upon the same terms and conditions as residents and
citizens of the United States is dependent in each case upon the existence of a
reciprocal right upon the part of citizens of the United States to take personal
property upon the same terms and conditions as residents and citizens of the
respective countries of which such aliens are residents. It shall be presumed
that such reciprocal rights exist and this presumption shall be conclusive
unless prior to the hearing on any petition for distribution of all or a portion
of such property to an alien heir, devisee or legatee not residing within the
United States or its territories a petition is filed by any person interested in
the estate requesting the court to find that either one or both of such
reciprocal rights does not or do not exist as to the country of which such alien
heir, devisee or legatee is resident. Upon the hearing of such petition the
burden of establishing the nonexistence of such reciprocal right or rights shall
be upon the petitioner.  Notice of such hearing shall be given in the manner
provided by Section 1200 of this code.'

   "Thus, as the section then read, there was a statutory rebuttable presumption
that reciprocity existed, and the one contending there was a lack of reciprocity
had the burden of proving that fact.

   "The cases have also established the law to be that while the interpretation
of foreign statutes and of treaties, when they alone are before the court, is a
question of law, the question of how such statutes and treaties have been
interpreted and applied by a foreign country is a question of fact.  The
appellate courts will not disturb a finding of reciprocity or of nonreciprocity
that is supported by a presumption or is based on conflicting evidence.  (
Estate of Schluttig, 36 Cal.2d 416 [224 P.2d 695] -- finding of nonreciprocity
with Germany on April 3, 1945, affirmed; Estate of Miller, 104 Cal.App.2d 1 [230
P.2d 667], finding of reciprocity with Germany as of April 22, 1942, affirmed;
Estate of Blak, 65 Cal.App.2d 232  [150 P.2d 567], a finding of reciprocity with
the Netherlands (date of death not disclosed, but prior to 1942 and during
German occupation of Holland) affirmed; Estate of Giordano, 85 Cal.App.2d 588
[193 P.2d 771], a finding of nonreciprocity with Italy as of January 17, 1945,
affirmed; Estate of Reihs, 102 Cal.App.2d. 260 [227 P.2d 564], a finding of
reciprocity with Germany as of November 24, 1946, affirmed; Estate of Kennedy,
106 Cal.App.2d 621 [235 P.2d 837], a finding of reciprocity with Romania as of
March 15, 1949, affirmed.) In all of these cases it was held that where the
finding of reciprocity or nonreciprocity was based on conflicting evidence or
supported by a rebuttable presumption it would not be disturbed by an appellate
court, even where, as to the same country, one trial court had found reciprocity
to exist and another that it did not.  (Compare the Schluttig, Miller and Reihs
cases, cited supra.)

   "The case of Estate of Kennedy, 106 Cal.App.2d 621 [235 P.2d 837], sets forth
several other rules that are here applicable.  It held that the facts that a
limited nationalization or socialization of property and industry had taken
place in Romania, or that that country was communistic in nature and dominated
by Russia, did not compel a finding of nonreciprocity. It also held that once a
statute enacted prior to the death of the testator involved is proved to exist,
a presumption that such statute continued to exist arises under the provisions
of section 1963, subdivision 32, of the Code of Civil Procedure, and that once
such a statute is proved to exist, it will be presumed that the terms of such
statute have been carried out under the provisions of section 1963, subdivisions
15 and 33, of the Code of Civil Procedure.

   " The cases of Estate of Miller, 104 Cal.App.2d 1 [230 P.2d 667], and Estate
of Blak, 65 Cal.App.2d 232 [150 P.2d 567], held that the fact that the property
inherited in a foreign country could not be immediately transferred to the
United States, due to the war or to foreign exchange regulations, was not
relevant on the issue of reciprocity.

   "Thus, in the instant case, appellant was entitled, in the trial court, to
the rebuttable presumption that reciprocity existed.  If he could prove the
existence of a treaty or statute of Yugoslavia enacted prior to March 21, 1947,
granting reciprocity, he was then entitled to the rebuttable presumptions that
that law continued to exist, and that such law was and would be enforced
according to its terms.  Since the trial court has found against these
presumptions and against  reciprocity, the question is whether, keeping in mind
the burden of proof and these presumptions, there is any substantial evidence or
reasonable inferences therefrom to support the finding.

   "Although the burden was on respondent to prove nonreciprocity, the appellant
agreed to present his evidence that reciprocity existed before respondent
offered his evidence.

   "The appellant first introduced a treaty of 1881 between Serbia and the
United States, and the certificate of then Secretary of State George C. Marshall
dated May 21, 1948, duly authenticated, certifying that such treaty is still in
force and effect between Yugoslavia and the United States.  That certificate
traces the history of the Kingdom of Serbia into the Kingdom of the Serbs,
Croats and Slovenes, into the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, and finally, in November of
1945, into the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia, and certifies that by
agreement between the two countries the Serbian treaty of 1881 was still in full
force and effect.  The final clause of the certificate states 'that the said
treaty remains in full force and effect between the United States of America and
Yugoslavia.'

   "Article II of that treaty reads as follows:

   "'In all that concerns the right of acquiring, possessing, or disposing of
every kind of property, real or personal, citizens of the United States in
Serbia and Serbian subjects in the United States, shall enjoy the rights which
the respective laws grant or shall grant in each of these states to the subjects
of the most favoured nation.

   "'Within these limits, and under the same conditions as the subjects of the
most favoured nation, they shall be at liberty to acquire and dispose of such
property, whether by purchase, sale, donation, exchange, marriage contract,
testament, inheritance, or in any other manner whatever, without being subject
to any taxes, imposts, or charges whatever other or higher than those which are
or shall be levied on natives or on the subjects of the most favoured state.

   "'They shall likewise be at liberty to export freely the proceeds of the sale
of their property, and their goods in general, without being subjected to pay
any other or higher duties than those payable under similar circumstances by
natives, or by the subjects of the most favoured state.'

   "There was next introduced the certificate of Sava N. Kosanovic, Ambassador
to the United States for Yugoslavia, duly authenticated by our State Department,
and dated May 15,  1948, concerning the law of Yugoslavia with respect to the
estates of decedents. The certificate contains the categorical assertion that
reciprocity exists within the meaning of section 259 of the Probate Code.  The
certificate states that the ambassador knows of his own knowledge that the
Constitution and laws of Yugoslavia 'accord to citizens of the United States of
America, including citizens of the State of California, though not residing in .
. . Yugoslavia, the reciprocal rights of inheritance prescribed and referred to
in Sections 259 . . . of the Probate Code of the State of California.  The
Constitution and laws of the Federal Peoples Republic of Yugoslavia permit and
grant to citizens of the United States of America, including citizens of the
State of California, though not resident in . . . Yugoslavia rights equal to
those accorded to Yugoslav citizens residing in . . . Yugoslavia to take by will
or succession any and all property located  within . . . Yugoslavia,' subject to
the Nationalization Law of December 5, 1946, as amended April 28, 1948.  The
certificate then states that this Nationalization Law as amended provides for
'the nationalization of real property owned by foreigners, except immovable
property of farmers tilling their own land, buildings serving in the main as the
homes of the owners thereof,' but, under the provisions of that act 'all the
owners of nationalized property, are entitled to full compensation for such
property.'

   "The certificate then goes on to state that by agreement with the United
States 'all treaties previously concluded with the former Kingdom of Serbia . .
. are in full force and effect' between the United States and Yugoslavia.  The
certificate then quotes article II of the United States and Serbia treaty of
1881, above quoted, and then certifies that the government of Yugoslavia 'has at
all times construed and does now construe and respect said treaty as providing
for and guaranteeing complete reciprocal rights of inheritance between the
United States of America and . . . Yugoslavia so that citizens of the United
States of America, including citizens of the State of California, residing in
the United States or wherever they may reside have the full and unabridged right
to inherit and to receive and have paid to them all inheritances, by last will
and testament or by succession, all money and property, real and personal,
bequeathed, devised or due to them by the laws of the succession situated in the
Federative Peoples Republic of Yugoslavia from the estates of deceased citizens'
of Yugoslavia, subject only to the Nationalization Law as amended.

    "A supplemental certificate of the ambassador, duly authenticated and dated
October 14, 1948, was also introduced.  The ambassador there certifies that the
rights of foreigners to inherit property in Yugoslavia as set forth in the
original certificate has been the law since 1918 and up to the present time, and
that there has been no change in such laws and none is contemplated.  It is
certified that 'it has always been the fixed policy of my Government and its
predecessors to fully protect, preserve and assure the rights of all foreigners
and residents outside of Yugoslavia to enjoy, take and receive full rights of
inheritance of property, real, personal or mixed, without discrimination, in the
same manner and to the same extent as residents and nationals of Yugoslavia'
subject only to the Nationalization Laws.  It is further certified, when moneys
are due and payable to Yugoslav residents from United States decedents as a
result of inheritance, that the recipients in Yugoslavia receive such moneys in
Yugoslavia at the official rate of exchange free of any imposts, levies or
taxes, 'and they have free and unabridged use and enjoyment thereof' subject
only to such limitations as are imposed on Yugoslav nationals for the protection
of the state.  This supplemental certificate also notes that on July 19, 1948,
the United States and Yugoslavia negotiated a claims agreement by the terms of
which the Yugoslav government engages to authorize Yugoslav nationals indebted
to anyone in the United States 'to meet such indebtedness on maturity.' By the
terms of that agreement Yugoslavia agreed to pay $ 17,000,000 to the United
States for American property nationalized in Yugoslavia, to be distributed by
the United States among the rightful claimants.

   "In addition to these two certificates, Ambassador Kosanovic was called as a
witness by appellant.  He testified that he was not only the Yugoslav ambassador
to the United States, but also a minister in the cabinet and a member of the
Praesidium, the highest authority in his country.  He presented a copy of the
Constitution of Yugoslavia adopted in 1946 which, according to his testimony and
supported by an examination of the document, makes no discrimination, so far as
the right to enjoy and inherit property is concerned, between Yugoslav citizens
and foreigners. The Constitution provides that the 'inheritance of private
property is guaranteed.  The right of inheritance is regulated by law.' In
addition, the ambassador testified that there was no discrimination as against
foreigners in connection with the right of inheritance, and that if inheritance
taxes are paid in the United States on a bequest to a Yugoslav  citizen, that
person will receive the inheritance without further tax.  He several times
reiterated his statement that there were no laws or rules or regulations in any
way restricting the right of an American to receive and to enjoy his inheritance
in Yugoslavia.  On cross-examination he testified that his country had exchange
controls, and that under Yugoslav law anyone in the country receiving foreign
exchange could be compelled to sell it to the state bank at regular exchange
rates.  He testified that there were no big estates in Yugoslavia, that the land
formerly owned by big landowners had been nationalized, and that the maximum
ownership of one individual is twenty-five hectares, * but that former owners
including foreigners, were compensated.  He also testified that money received
by inheritance by Yugoslav citizens could be fully owned and enjoyed by such
citizens.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*   A hectare
is 2.471 acres.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   "Appellant then, over the objection that it was incompetent, irrelevant and
immaterial, introduced as an official document an official communication between
the Yugoslav Ministry of Justice and the Yugoslav Ministry of Labor dealing with
the reciprocity question.  This document states that under Yugoslav law 'the
courts extend protection to all individuals in the exercise of their
[inheritance] rights, regardless of whether they be Yugoslav nationals or
foreign nationals.' It also states that under the 1881 treaty, which Yugoslavia
recognizes, American citizens inheriting from Yugoslav nationals enjoy exactly
the same rights and privileges over such property as do Yugoslav nationals.  It
is also asserted that the Ministry of Justice has always informed Yugoslav
courts that reciprocity of inheritance exists between Yugoslavia and the United
States.  Attached is a copy of a decree of a Belgrade court distributing a
portion of an estate in Yugoslavia to a United States citizen.

   "Another official communication between the Yugoslav Ministry of Finance and
the Ministry of Labor, over objection, was introduced in which it is stated that
the Ministry of Finance has never issued any regulation limiting the right of
inheritance of estates of Yugoslav citizens by American citizens.  The document
states that, due to the shortage of foreign exchange, it has not always been
possible to transfer funds from Yugoslavia to the United States, but that it is
the intention of the government to allow such transfers as soon as conditions
permit.

    "This was appellant's case.  It is obvious that such evidence, independent
of the presumption of reciprocity, would fully support a finding of such
reciprocity. But the trial court found that reciprocity did not exist.  The
question is whether there is any substantial evidence to support that finding.

   "Respondent first offered two letters, one from C. W. Cannon, United States
Ambassador to Yugoslavia, dated August 14, 1947, and addressed to the then
Attorney General of California, and the other from A. G. Heltberg, American
consul at Belgrade,  dated November 4, 1948, and addressed to Frank O'Brien,
respondent's attorney.  Neither of the letters to which these two letters were
responses was offered.  Both letters introduced purport to discuss certain laws
and regulations of Yugoslavia and purport to give opinions as to how they are
enforced.  Appellant objected to the introduction of these letters on the
grounds that they were incompetent, irrelevant, and immaterial, were hearsay and
that no proper foundation had been laid for their introduction.  The objections
were good.  The letters should not have been admitted.  There was no showing
that Cannon or Heltberg were experts on Yugoslav law.  In fact, the Heltberg
letter states that 'this office can not assume responsibility for statements
made in respect to the laws of Yugoslavia.' The letters were merely informal
documents, and certainly were not official documents.  The important question of
whether a sovereign state abides by its laws and treaties should not be made to
depend upon informal offhand opinions of officials who may or may not be
experts.  Without a further showing, the letters should not have been admitted.

   " It must not be assumed that these two letters support the finding of
nonreciprocity. They do not.  Both relate primarily to the foreign exchange
controls limiting the transfer of funds from Yugoslavia to this country, a
factor which, under the cases already cited, is not relevant on the issue of
reciprocity. Cannon's letter was apparently in response to a letter from the
attorney general telling Cannon that several Yugoslav residents and citizens had
applied to recover funds on deposit in California banks, and inquiring if
American citizens with money on deposit in Yugoslavia could withdraw such money,
and requesting information about any currency regulations that might exist.
Cannon replied that there were stringent regulations in force 'with regard to
the export of foreign exchange and the transfer of property abroad.' Reference
is made to pertinent provisions of the Foreign Exchange Law putting all foreign
exchange transactions under government control, and requiring a permit for such
transactions.  The following paragraph of the letter is particularly relied upon
by respondent:

   "'According to the Embassy's information, the Yugoslav authorities have, so
far, not only granted no foreign exchange permits to American claimants to the
proceeds of property in Yugoslavia, but have, with minor exceptions, made it
impossible for American citizens to establish their claims.  In only one known
instance has an American citizen actually been able to bring his claim to the
point where his attorney could apply for a foreign exchange permit, and that
application has been refused.  This case involved a legacy.'

   "The letter then refers to the confiscation and nationalization of many
American properties.  This letter was written before the claims settlement
agreement, already referred to, was entered into between the two countries.

   "The letter of Heltberg to O'Brien also deals primarily with the foreign
exchange law, a copy of which was enclosed.  The letter states that the 'law
provides for a tight control of all foreign currencies held by Yugoslavia, and
it is the opinion of the Embassy that American heirs ordinarily would not be
able to transfer their inherited monies [sic] into American currency.' Attention
is then called to the fact that the embassy has records of but one case of such
a transfer since the end of the war, and to a communication from the Yugoslav
government informing the embassy that 'it would grant transfers of funds derived
from legally inherited properties within the limits of available foreign
exchange stocks.  However, because of lack of foreign exchange, the amounts for
the time being would have to be deposited with the National Bank of the
Federative People's Republic of Yugoslavia in Yugoslav currency as property of
foreign successors.'

   "The letter goes on to mention the fact that the Yugoslav decree of March 20,
1948 'permits acquisition of real estate in Yugoslavia by foreigners but only on
the basis of legal inheritance or for official use.  All other real estate owned
by foreigners would be nationalized. The American heir, however, would have
little control over his inherited properties.  He would have to have the
approval and consent of the competent state authorities before he could sell,
transfer or dispose of the property.  He would not be able to sell, transfer or
dispose of the property to a non-Yugoslav citizen.  The amount of income
derived from the property and the use of the property would be determined by
local housing authorities.  Furthermore, to complicate matters, the Yugoslav
Government does not recognize the right of their citizens to be nationalized as
American citizens.  The Embassy believes it possible that a person possessing
Yugoslav nationality under Yugoslav law and American citizenship under American
law could inherit Yugoslav real estate in the same manner as other purely
Yugoslav citizens.  When such a dual national is subsequently divested of his
Yugoslav nationality, his previously inherited properties in Yugoslavia would
presumably be seized without right of indemnity.'

   "There was next introduced into evidence by respondent, without objection
from appellant, a letter with six enclosures to Lawyer O'Brien dated December
24, 1948, from Francis E. Flaherty, Acting Assistant  Chief, Division of
Protective Services, Department of State, Washington, D. C.  The letter calls
attention to the decree of March 20, 1948, passed a year after the death of the
decedent here involved, which contains the following sentence: 'Foreign citizens
may not acquire right of property on real estate on the territory of the
Federative People's Republic of Yugoslavia, except on the basis of legal
inheritance.' The letter then states that it had been thought that the
Nationalization Law, which provides:  'On the day this law becomes effective,
all real estate owned by foreigners . . . will be nationalized,' nullified the
right of aliens to inherit at all, but by a decree of June 23, 1948, the right
of foreigners to gain ownership of real property 'on the basis of legal
inheritance' was reaffirmed.  The letter then sets forth the same restrictions
on such ownership as were set forth in Heltberg's letter above quoted, and then
states that the Nationalization Law and the June decree 'are presently
interpreted by Yugoslav officials so as to permit alien heirs to inherit or
succeed to property only when, under Yugoslav law, they are also natural heirs
of the deceased.'

   "The enclosures are translations of various laws and decrees and of a note
from the Yugoslav Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the United States dated October
9, 1948.  Several of the enclosed laws and decrees relate to the foreign
exchange controls that have already been mentioned.  One of the enclosures is a
decree dated March 20, 1948, relating to the 'Control of Real Estate
Transactions.' This decree was not in effect when decedent died.  It provides
that all transfers of real property  are 'subject to prior approval by the
competent state authorities,' and provides that such authorities shall deny such
approval when the transfer is made for speculative purposes, or when such
transfer will produce a larger income than needed for livelihood, or would
exceed the maximum area allowed for agricultural ownership.  This decree also
prohibits a foreign citizen from owning land 'except on the basis of legal
inheritance.' Attached to this decree is an 'Obligatory Interpretation' by the
Praesidium, the highest authority in Yugoslavia, to the effect that a Yugoslav
who acquires another citizenship forfeits his real estate to the state without
compensation.

   "The official note above referred to from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Yugoslavia to this country stated that the 'Yugoslav Courts strictly apply all
Yugoslav provisions, laws and international agreements clearly regulating the
rights of foreign citizens to acquire or inherit to [sic] real or personal
property situated in Yugoslavia, within the limits of the existing provisions
and without any discrimination, i.e., under the same conditions as citizens of
the most favoured nation.' Reference is then made to the decree of March 20,
1948,  limiting foreign real estate holdings to those acquired as 'heirs at
law,' and then it is argued that such provision is consistent with treaty
obligations because all foreigners are treated alike.  It is then stated that as
to transfers abroad of legally inherited properties the Yugoslav government
'will grant such transfers within the limits of available foreign exchange
stocks,' and when such stocks are not available the sum in question can be
temporarily deposited in the national bank, in Yugoslav currency, as property of
foreign successors.

   "Without objection, appellant next introduced a Yugoslav decree dated July
16, 1946, relating to the acquisition of real property by foreigners. It
provides that foreigners may acquire real property in Yugoslavia 'either by
legal business among the living or by legacy (in case of death) only by previous
approval of the competent government agency.' A lease to a foreigner for over
five years likewise requires a permit, but neither of these limitations applies
'to acquisitions of real estate by legal inheritance.' Agencies are designated
with permit issuing powers and the right of appeal granted from their decisions.

   "Also without objection a copy of the Nationalization Law was introduced.  In
court counsel for respondent read into the record an amendment to that act
adopted April 28, 1948, more than a year after the death of the decedent here
involved.  By  the amendment, most real estate, as of the effective date of the
amendment, owned by foreigners, was nationalized, except real  estate operated
by peasant farmers or used by the owner as living quarters.  The amendment also
provided that Yugoslav citizens who became foreign citizens lose the right of
ownership of real estate.

   "Also without objection there was introduced another letter from Heltberg,
American Consul in Yugoslavia, addressed to the California State Controller and
dated January 19, 1949.  Most of the material in this letter is cumulative of
material already introduced.  It refers to the decree of March 20, 1948,
limiting the right of foreigners to acquire real estate except 'on the basis of
legal inheritance,' and then points out that such clause has been informally
interpreted by the Yugoslav officials 'to mean that foreign citizens may inherit
property if they, under Yugoslav law, are considered to be the natural heirs of
the deceased.  If property is willed to some other person than the natural heir
that person may not succeed to the property in question.' It is also pointed out
that Americans succeeding to property in Yugoslavia would be faced with various
restrictions and controls.  The letter then discusses the penalties of dual
citizenship, and then continues: 'Since 1945, the Embassy has no record of any
case where American citizens have been heirs in Yugoslav estates.  It is
generally believed that the political affiliations of the American heir would
not affect his right to inherit unless he was a dual national and his property
liable to confiscation for crimes against Yugoslavia.'

   "The only other exhibits introduced by respondent were two booklets of
speeches by Yugoslav leaders which add nothing to the other evidence already
mentioned.

   "On this evidence the trial court found that reciprocity as to both real and
personal property did not exist.  The estate here involved consisted, at the
time of death, of both real and personal property, the real property having been
sold during the course of administration.  There can be no doubt at all that the
weight of the evidence indicates that reciprocity exists.  Certainly that is
true as to the personal property. However, we cannot say, as a matter of law,
that reciprocity exists as to the real property. It is probably true that there
are evidence or inferences therefrom that support the finding of nonreciprocity
as to real property. The evidence of the laws, decrees and interpretations to
the effect that foreigners can succeed to Yugoslav real estate only if they are
heirs at law,  that a Yugoslav who acquires American citizenship forfeits his
rights in real property in Yugoslavia, etc., probably support the finding of
nonreciprocity as to the real property. But even as to this issue the evidence
is not satisfactory because most of these laws, decrees and interpretations were
passed or made after the death of the decedent here involved.  It is the law in
effect at the time of such death in which we are here interested.  It is by no
means clear that such laws, decrees and interpretations are construed to be
retroactive.  That may be cleared up on a new trial.

   "Even though it be assumed that there is some evidence, or inferences
therefrom, that support the finding of nonreciprocity as to the real estate,
there are other factors disclosed by the record that require a reversal and the
granting of a new trial.  The record discloses that the trial court considered
and gave great weight to evidence not relevant to the issue of reciprocity, and
that the finding of nonreciprocity was partially based on this nonrelevant
evidence.  That this is so is conclusively demonstrated by an examination of the
transcript, of the memorandum opinion of the trial court, and of the findings.

   "On numerous occasions during the trial the court expressed great distrust of
the form of government existing in Yugoslavia, and expressed great interest in
what would happen to the bequest here involved when delivered in Yugoslavia.
Great interest was shown in the foreign exchange regulations that would
constitute a restraint on an American citizen transferring Yugoslav funds
inherited there to this country.  For example, the trial court stated at R.T.
page 221: 'We know that Yugoslavia today is dominated by a Communistic
government.  They are in power today.  Now, this Court, the stand that I have
taken is that I would have to have pretty  good evidence before I would
distribute to anyone, or to any government back there that is dominated by the
Communists.  [What became of the presumption that reciprocity exists?] Having
this case in mind, I met people who have been there, lived there, even when I
was on a little vacation in Arizona, and I met a woman who lived there, and they
took all of her property.  They confiscated all of the business of her husband
and herself.' At pages 135, 150, 160, 223 and 243 appear other comments by the
trial judge indicating how strongly he was motivated by the fact that the
government of Yugoslavia was socialistic or communistic.

   "The theory upon which the trial court proceeded is also disclosed in the
memorandum opinion.  It is there stated:  'Furthermore, it has not been
established to the satisfaction of the Court that the said John Arbulich, Jr.
[the Yugoslav heir] would receive the benefit of any distribution to him of the
balance of the estate, consisting of cash in excess of $ 30,000.00.  It was
established at the hearings by the testimony of the Yugoslav Ambassador
Kosanovic that the present government of Yugoslavia is Communistic and that the
property rights of individuals are completely ignored.  Under the circumstances
the Court cannot in good conscience order $ 30,000.00 or more distributed to the
claimant in Yugoslavia or to any representative of that country without any
assurance whatever that the distributee would ever receive any part of such
funds.'

   "Thus the trial judge not only indicated that he would not consider the
presumptions already mentioned in favor of reciprocity, but also indicated that
he had forgotten or would not consider the documentary and oral testimony to the
effect that the Yugoslav heir would be permitted in Yugoslavia to enjoy the full
benefits of the bequest.

   "The weight given by the trial court to these factors is also disclosed in
the formal findings.  Finding X reads as follows: 'That at the time of death of
said decedent the Government of Yugoslavia was Communistic and has been ever
since, and that the property rights of individuals are ignored, and that, under
the circumstances, the Court could not, in good conscience, order distribution
to the claimant in Yugoslavia.  That under the laws and regulations of
Yugoslavia, John Arbulich, Jr., does not have any rights of ownership or control
of his property, and if distribution were ordered to John Arbulich, Jr., it
would, in fact, be distribution to the Communistic Government of Yugoslavia.
Such distribution would be against public policy and contrary to provisions of
Section 27 of the California Probate Code.'

   "There is no evidence at all that the Yugoslav claimant would not be
permitted to enjoy his legacy in Yugoslavia.  The evidence is all the other way.
The solemn declaration of the Ambassador from Yugoslavia that the Yugoslav
claimant would receive the money free of any tax and that he would enjoy 'free
and unabridged use and enjoyment thereof' could not thus lightly be disregarded.
The ambassador is the highest diplomatic official of the country he represents,
and his declarations about the law and practices in his country are entitled to
great weight.

   "The fact that the court disapproved of the form of the  government of
Yugoslavia was not relevant at all on the issue of reciprocity. Yugoslavia is a
sovereign state and is recognized as such by the government of the United
States.  As long as some right of inheritance is recognized in that state, and
the evidence here without conflict discloses that it is, the fact that such
right differs from the right of inheritance in this country, or that as an
individual a judge may disapprove of the form of government, are factors which
are not relevant and should not be considered on the issue of reciprocity. This
was clearly pointed out in the Estate of Kennedy, 106 Cal.App.2d 621 [235 P.2d
837], involving Romania, a country that is not only communistic, but within the
sphere of influence of Russia, which Yugoslavia certainly is not.  Some degree
of socialization and nationalization has taken place in most European countries,
a policy we as individuals may or may not approve, but as judges passing on the
issue of reciprocity, the form of such governments is a false factor,  and a
matter for each sovereign country to determine for itself.

   "The fact that an American claimant of an estate in Yugoslavia would be
subject to foreign exchange controls and could not immediately receive his
legacy in this country is also an irrelevant factor.  Practically every country
in the world has some limitation on the export of wealth from the country.  Such
factor has nothing to do with the issue of reciprocity. It was so held in Estate
of Miller, 104 Cal.App.2d 1 [230 P.2d 667], and Estate of Blak, 65 Cal.App.2d
232 [150 P.2d 567].

   "Much is said in the briefs about the proper interpretation of the treaty of
1881 and about how such treaty should be interpreted in view of the case of
Clark v. Allen, 331 U.S. 503 [67 S.Ct. 1431, 91 L.Ed. 1633, 170 A.L.R. 953]. The
question is not how that treaty should be interpreted as a matter of law, but
how the contracting parties have interpreted it.  The ambassador testified that
it had been interpreted to grant reciprocity to all American nationals.  While
there is no evidence directly contrary to this, there may be inferences that
would support a finding to the contrary.  Any gaps in the evidence on this point
can be supplied on the new trial.

   "Enough has been said to indicate that the finding of lack of reciprocity was
based partially upon inadmissible evidence, upon factors irrelevant to the
issues, and upon laws and regulations and decrees passed after the death of
decedent. This being so, the judgment cannot stand.  A new trial should  be had
at which only admissible evidence and relevant factors are considered.

   "There is one other point that must be considered.  Respondent contends, and
the trial court found, that appellant was not properly represented in the
proceeding.  For that reason, it is urged, this judgment must be affirmed.  It
should be pointed out that, in spite of this finding, the trial court also
disposed of the case on its merits.  Such disposition is, of course,
inconsistent with a finding that the appellant had made no proper appearance in
the action.

   "The contention that appellant was not properly represented is based upon the
fact that the lawyer appearing on behalf of appellant was appointed by the
consul general of Yugoslavia to represent appellant.  The lawyer had no power of
attorney from appellant nor any other direct authority to represent him.
Throughout the trial, counsel for respondent objected on this ground, and the
trial judge, on many occasions, observed that he thought a personal power of
attorney was indispensable.  As already pointed out, an express finding was made
on this issue.

   "The petition of John Arbulich, Jr., alleges that it is filed by the consul
general of Yugoslavia as attorney in fact for John.  It is further averred that
under the power and authority vested in the consul general by the United States
and by the laws and treaties between the United States and Yugoslavia,  he, as
consul general, has the power and authority to act as attorney in fact for his
nationals who inherit American property.  The recognition by the United States
of the consul general with power 'to exercise and enjoy such functions, powers
and privileges as are allowed to the Consul General of the most favoured Nations
in the United States' was duly proved.  The question is, can the consul general
appear in our courts as attorney in fact for his nationals in a probate
proceeding?  Can a consul appoint counsel to represent such nationals?  The
answer is clear that he may.

   "The parties discuss the proper interpretation of an article in the Consular
Convention between the United States and Serbia concluded in 1881,
contemporaneous with the other Serbian treaty already mentioned in this opinion,
and, like it, recognized by both the United States and Yugoslavia as being still
binding.  Article XI provides:

   "'In the case of the death of any citizen of the United States in Serbia, or
of a Serbian subject in the United States without having any known heirs or
testamentary executors by  him appointed, the competent local authorities shall
give information of the circumstances to the Consuls or Consular Agents of the
nation to which the deceased belongs, in order that the necessary information
may be immediately forwarded to the parties interested.

   "'Consuls  General, Consuls, Vice Consuls and Consular Agents shall have the
right to appear personally, or by delegate, in all proceedings on behalf of the
absent or minor heirs or creditors until they are duly represented.'

   "The parties argue over the proper interpretation of this treaty. Appellant
argues that the second paragraph should be read independently of the first so as
to give the consul general the power alleged to exist.  Respondent argues that
the first paragraph limits the operation of the second paragraph to nationals
dying abroad in the other country, and does not include the right to represent
in the other country nationals residing at home.  If the document alone be
considered, either interpretation is reasonable.  But the treaty provision must
be considered together with applicable principles of international law. Without
reference to any treaty provision, it is a well settled principle of
international law that consular representatives are deemed to be international
attorneys in fact for their nations.  One of the earliest cases so holding, and
a leading case on the subject, is The Bello Corrunes, 6 Wheat. (U.S.) 152 [5
L.Ed. 229]. In that case the United States Supreme Court held that a vice consul
of Spain was entitled to make a claim by way of libel on behalf of Spanish
owners of a Spanish ship resident in Spain and whose identities were unknown to
the consul. In that case the following frequently quoted statement appears (p.
168): 'On the first point made by the attorney-general, this court feels no
difficulty in deciding, that a vice-consul, duly recognized by our government,
is a competent party to assert or defend the rights of property of the
individuals of his nation, in any court having jurisdiction of causes affected
by the application of international law. To watch over the rights and interests
of their subjects, wherever the pursuits of commerce may draw them, or the
vicissitudes of human affairs may force them, is the great object for which
consuls are deputed by their sovereigns; and in a country where laws govern, and
justice is sought for in courts only, it would be a mockery, to preclude them
from the only avenue through which their course lies to the end of their
mission.  The long and universal usage of the courts of the United States, has
sanctioned the exercise of this right, and it is impossible,  that any evil or
inconvenience can flow from it.  Whether the powers of the vice-consul shall, in
any instance, extend to the right to receive, in his national character, the
proceeds of property libelled and transferred into the registry of a court, is a
question resting on other principles.  In the absence of specific powers given
him by competent authority, such a right would certainly not be recognized.
Much, in this respect, must ever depend upon the laws of the country from which,
and to which, he is deputed.  And this view of the subject will be found to
reconcile the difficulties supposed to have been presented by the authorities
quoted on this point.'

   "In the case of In re Tartaglio's Estate, 12 Misc. 245 [33 N.Y.Supp. 1121],
it was held, both as a result of an interpretation of a treaty with Italy and by
general international law, that the Italian consul general could properly apply
and receipt for the distributive shares of personal property on behalf of the
Italian heirs.

   "In the case of Buxhoeveden v. Estonian State Bank, 41 N.Y.Supp.2d 752, there
is a good collection of case and text authorities.  There, both by treaty and on
general principles, the Estonian consul general was permitted to appear and set
aside a default judgment, and to defend a suit against the Estonian State Bank,
treated in the opinion as a private person.

   "The case of In re Zalewski's Estate, 292 N.Y. 332 [55 N.E.2d 184, 157 A.L.R.
87], is another good case on the subject, and collects and comments on many
relevant authorities.  There it was held by the New York Court of Appeals that
either by treaty or by general principles of international law, a consular
representative could even exercise on behalf of one of its nationals resident in
the home country the personal right of a widow to elect not to take under a
will.  While three justices dissented in that case, they did so only on the
ground that the power of the consul did not extend to the exercise of such a
personal  right -- they did not disagree with the majority holding that a consul
has the right to appear and to represent his nationals.

   "In interpreting the treaty provision here involved, the following principles
stated in In re Zalewski's Estate, 292 N.Y. 332 [55 N.E.2d 184, 186, 157 A.L.R.
87], amply supported by authority, are applicable: 'In arriving at the meaning
of the treaty we are bound to remember that it is the supreme law of the land .
. ., that its words are to be taken liberally in the light of evident purposes .
. . and that, since the pact is done  in counterparts, one in each language
little use can be made of local technical definitions of words.  . . .  When two
constructions of a treaty are admissible, one restrictive of the rights that may
be claimed under it and the other liberal, the latter is always to be preferred.
. . .  "This court would not readily lean to favor a restricted construction of
language, as applied to the provisions of a treaty, which always combines the
characteristics of a contract, as well as a law." The Bello Corrunes, 6 Wheat.
(U.S.) 152, 171 [5 L.Ed. 229].'

   "With these well settled principles in mind we have no reasonable doubt but
that the treaty here involved should be interpreted so as to confer a treaty
right on the consuls of the contracting countries to appear on behalf of their
nationals not otherwise represented and to represent them in the courts of the
other country.

   "This conclusion would be almost inevitable were it not for the case of
Estate of Clausen, 202 Cal. 267 [259 P. 1094]. There it was held that the Danish
consul did not have the right to receive distribution of and receipt for the
interests of Danish nationals under the then treaty with Denmark.  The treaty
there involved was one entered into in 1826 and related solely to problems of
navigation and commerce existing between the two countries.  It contained a
clause that for the protection of navigation and commerce each country would
agree to receive and admit consuls from the other who should enjoy all the
privileges and powers of consuls conferred by either on the consuls of the most
favored nation.  Nearly a hundred years after this treaty was entered into,
United States entered into a much broader treaty with Germany which expressly
conferred upon consuls of either country the power on behalf of nonresident
nationals to receive and to receipt for distributive shares of estates to which
such nonresident nationals were entitled.  The Supreme Court of California
ruled, purely as a matter of interpretation of the treaty, and without reference
to general principles of international law, that the treaty between Denmark and
the United States related solely to problems of navigation and commerce, and
that the powers conferred by that treaty on consuls related solely and
exclusively to such problems.  Thus the treaty with Germany did not operate
under the most favored nation clause to confer any rights on Danish consuls
except in connection with navigation and commerce.  The court did not discuss
the right of the Danish consul to appear and represent his national residing in
Denmark in the probate proceeding under the general principles  of international
law above discussed.  It simply decided that such consul, under the treaty, had
no power to have distributed to himself and to receipt for the share of the
estate to which the Danish national was entitled.  (See, also, Petersen v.
Lyders, 139 Cal.App. 303 [33 P.2d 1030], and Lyders v. Petersen, 88 F.2d 9.)

   "The present case differs from the Clausen case in several particulars.  The
present case does not involve the right of the Yugoslav consul general to have
distributed to him and to receipt for the property bequeathed to appellant.  The
proceeding on appeal is not for distribution, but to determine heirship.
Several times during the trial counsel appointed by the consul general stated
that he was not contending that the estate should be distributed and receipted
for by the consul general.  He agreed that the court could order the estate
distributed directly to appellant, and, in that event, offered to see that the
estate was distributed to appellant and receipted for by him.  This is
important, not only because  it serves to distinguish the instant case from the
Clausen case, but because it also meets the doubts expressed in the case of the
Bello Corrunes, 6 Wheat. (U.S.) 152 [5 L.Ed. 229]. In the quotation from that
case above set forth the United States Supreme Court expressed doubt that, under
general principles of international law, a consular representative could have
the proceeds of the pending action distributed to himself, but had no doubts
about the power of such representative to appear and to represent his absent
national.

   "In the second place, the Clausen case limited its decision to an
interpretation of the treaty involved.  It did not discuss the power of a
consul, independent of treaty, to appear and to represent his nonresident
nationals in lawsuits in the country to which such consul was accredited.

   "In the third place, the instant case is distinguishable from the Clausen
case because unlike the treaty involved in the Clausen case, the treaty here,
properly interpreted, confers the very power involved.  Moreover, under general
principles of international law, consuls possess the power to appear for and to
represent their nonresident nationals in the courts of the country to which such
consul is accredited."

   I would, therefore, reverse the judgment.


                              86 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          NGAN TANG NGUYEN et al., Plaintiffs and Appellants, v. JOHN
                  L. SCOTT et al., Defendants and Respondents

                                  No. A039292

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                  Division One

            206 Cal. App. 3d 725; 253 Cal. Rptr. 800; 1988 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1174


                               December 16, 1988

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Respondents' petition for review by the Supreme Court
was denied March 1, 1989.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of the City and County of San Francisco, No.
862914, Stuart R. Pollak, Judge.

COUNSEL: John D. Nelson and Jue & Nelson for Plaintiffs and Appellants.

Harry I. Price, Daniel L. Casas and Reynolds, Roux & Price for Defendants and
Respondents.

JUDGES: Opinion by Newsom, Acting P. J., with Holmdahl and Stein, JJ.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: NEWSOM

OPINION

     Ngan Tang Nguyen and Ngoc Tho Thi Vu Nguyen (hereafter appellants) appeal
from a judgment of dismissal entered on an order sustaining a demurrer to their
second amended complaint.  The grievance stated in this amended complaint arose
in the course of the litigation.  The appellants originally filed on August 19,
1986, a complaint against Barclays Bank of California as trustee for California
Dental Guild (hereafter Barclays) praying for partition of certain real
property. Barclays filed a   cross-complaint that similarly prayed for partition
and sale of the property and moved for a judgment on the pleading.  Shortly
thereafter, John L.  Scott, an individual, filed a notice on October 1, 1986,
that he had acquired Barclays' interest in the property with authority to pursue
the cross-complaint in its name.  In response, appellants filed an answer to the
cross-complaint containing "supplemental allegations modifying and partially
rescinding complaint herein" and opposed the motion for judgment on the
pleading.  The court first denied the motion for judgment on the pleading as
untimely since a cross-defendant had not yet filed an answer.  Barclays and John
L. Scott renewed the motion alleging that the cross-defendant had actually
consented to entry of default against it.  The court then granted the motion for
judgment on the pleading subject to appellants' right to amend the complaint
within 30 days.

   On January 20, 1987, appellants filed a first amended complaint stating the
causes of action involved in this appeal.  The complaint named as additional
defendants John L. Scott, J. & P. Scott, Inc., Terry John O'Brien (an officer of
J. & P. Scott, Inc.), Joseph Monck, and Raymond Love (both employees of
Barclays).  The first cause of action claimed $ 127,000 in damages from John L.
Scott.  The second cause of action sought to require John L. Scott and J. & P.
Scott, Inc., as constructive trustees, to convey a one-half interest in the
property to appellants for a purchase price of $ 325,000.  The third cause of
action alleged a conspiracy among all the defendants and prayed for general
damages of $ 127,000 and punitive damages of $ 10 million.  Defendants again
demurred to the complaint, and appellants moved for leave to file further
amendments.  Granting appellants' motion to amend the complaint, the court took
the demurrer off calendar.

   On April 1, 1987, appellants filed the second amended complaint at issue
here.  Later, they dismissed the complaint without prejudice against Barclays,
Joseph Monck, and Raymond Love.  The remaining defendants, John L. Scott, J. &
P. Scott, Inc., and Terry John O'Brien, once again demurred.  On May 21, 1987,
the court sustained the demurrer without leave to amend.

     In reviewing the sufficiency of the complaint against the general demurrer,
"[all]  allegations are taken as true even though their proof appears unlikely .
. . ." ( Stanson v. Brown (1975) 49 Cal.App.3d 812, 814 [122 Cal.Rptr. 862];
Buckaloo v. Johnson (1975) 14 Cal.3d 815, 828 [122 Cal.Rptr. 745, 537 P.2d 865]
.) "'[The] complaint must be liberally construed with a view to attaining
substantial justice among the parties.'" ( Glaire v. La Lanne-Paris Health Spa,
Inc. (1974) 12 Cal.3d 915, 918 [117 Cal.Rptr. 541, 528 P.2d 357].) The court is
"not limited to plaintiffs' theory of recovery in testing the sufficiency of
their complaint against a demurrer, but instead must determine if the factual
allegations of the complaint are  adequate to state a cause of action under any
legal theory." ( Barquis v. Merchants Collection Assn. (1972) 7 Cal.3d 94, 103
[101 Cal.Rptr. 745, 496 P.2d 817].) "Mistaken labels and confusion of legal
theory are not fatal; if appellant's complaint states a cause of action on any
theory, he is entitled to introduce evidence thereon." ( Porten v. University of
San Francisco (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 825, 833 [134 Cal.Rptr. 839].)

   As alleged in the complaint, in 1976 appellant Ngan Tang Nguyen and Phu Loc
Truong (hereafter Truong) each purchased an undivided one-half interest in an
18-unit apartment building located at 1865 Bush Street in San Francisco.  Ngan
Tang Nguyen acted as the managing owner of the apartment.  Before the
commencement of this litigation, he placed his interest in the names of himself
and his wife, Ngoc Tho Thi Vu Nguyen.

   John L. Scott (hereafter Scott) is a licensed real estate broker and the sole
shareholder of J. & P. Scott, Inc., a California corporation (hereafter Scott,
Inc.).  In 1983, Scott, Inc., entered into an agreement, termed a "Service
Contract," with California Canadian Bank as trustee for the California Dental
Guild.  The agreement contemplated that from time to time the bank would request
Scott, Inc., to offer investments in promissory notes secured by a deed of trust
on real property. Scott, Inc., would guarantee payments on the notes but would
earn a potential profit by paying the bank a lower rate of interest than that
which was actually payable on the note.  In 1985, Barclays Bank of California
acquired the California Canadian Bank and assumed the Service Contract.

   During 1985, appellants' cotenant, Truong, encumbered his one-half interest
in the property as security for a loan and then defaulted on loan payments.  To
avert foreclosure, on January 6, 1986, he obtained a $ 285,000 loan from Scott,
Inc., secured by a second deed of trust.  Scott, Inc., sold the note to Barclays
for the loan balance at an interest rate 2.25 percent below that payable by
Truong.  When Truong immediately defaulted on the new loan, Barclays gave Scott
a power of attorney to pursue creditor's remedies against Truong.  Acting under
the power of attorney, Scott filed a complaint for specific performance of the
rents and profits clause of the Truong note and initiated nonjudicial
foreclosure proceedings on the deed of trust.  At a foreclosure sale on August
19, 1986, Barclays acquired Truong's one-half interest in the property for a bid
of $ 320,530.95.

   During the foreclosure proceedings, appellants negotiated with Truong to
acquire his one-half interest in the property, but the period of redemption
expired before they could conclude a deal.  Scott refused to delay foreclosure
or otherwise accommodate them.

    Following the foreclosure, appellants again tried to purchase the property
by negotiating with Scott who represented Barclays under the power of attorney.
The complaint recites that Scott "sought to extort a high price" for the
property.  On September 9, 1986, appellants nevertheless submitted an offer to
Scott's counsel to purchase the property for $ 330,000.  On September 16, 1986,
Scott's attorney refused the offer in writing.  As directed by his power of
attorney, Scott made some efforts to sell the property to a third party, and
purporting to act on behalf of appellants as well as Barclays, he secured at
least one offer to purchase the property.  But the complaint alleges on
information and belief that Scott did not communicate either their offer or the
third party's offer to Barclays.  Instead, he pursued a secret plan to purchase
the property for himself.   "SCOTT'S actions in appearing to seek to arrange a
sale were done for the purpose of lulling [appellants] into a false sense of
security." On September 22, 1986, Scott in fact purchased Barclays' one-half
interest in the property for $ 325,000.  Appellants were not notified of the
sale "until the end of September, 1986."

   Although they originally asked for a partition by sale of the property,
appellants now seek relief as prospective purchasers of their cotenant's
one-half interest in the property.  In this appeal, we need consider only the
sufficiency of the first and second causes of action.  Upon dismissing the
complaint against Barclays, appellants have necessarily abandoned the third
cause of action alleging conspiracy.  Our consideration of the parties may be
similarly narrowed.  As we have noted, Barclays entered into the Service
Contract with Scott, Inc., and granted the power of attorney to Scott
individually.  Since Scott is alleged to be the sole shareholder of Scott, Inc.,
the allegations support the inference that the acts of the one should be imputed
to the other.  ( Wenban Estate, Inc. v. Hewlett (1924) 193 Cal. 675, 695.) But
the first and second causes of action do not mention the remaining respondent,
Terry John O'Brien, who is named only in the third cause of action that
appellant has now abandoned.  Our analysis thus will refer only to Scott and
Scott, Inc.

     While the first cause of action seeks damages and the second seeks to
impose a constructive trust, both are premised on the alleged breach of a duty
owed by a licensed real estate broker to prospective purchasers. We therefore
face the threshold question of whether the complaint alleges facts from which it
may be inferred that Scott acted in the capacity of a real estate broker.

   Scott's role in the transactions eludes easy categorization.  The "Service
Contract," appended as exhibit 1 to the complaint, contained a clause explicitly
describing Scott, Inc., as an independent contractor; other provisions, however,
tended to create an agency relationship. For example, Scott,  Inc., was bound to
comply with all written instructions of the bank relating to the notes and
remained responsible for collecting payments due on the notes and providing the
bank with relevant financial information.  Under these allegations, the
existence of an agency was a question of fact to be resolved at trial.  But can
it be inferred that the agency relationship was that of a real estate broker?
Business and Professions Code section 10131 provides: "A real estate broker
within the meaning of this part is a person who, for a compensation or in
expectation of a compensation, regardless of the form or time of payment, does
or negotiates to do one or more of the following acts for another or others: . .
. (e) Sells or offers to sell, buys or offers to buy, or exchanges or offers to
exchange a real property sales contract, or a promissory note secured directly
or collaterally by a lien on real property or on a business opportunity, and
performs services for the holders thereof." Scott, Inc., dealt with promissory
notes secured by a lien on real property, and it was compensated by receiving
the spread between the interest rate payable to the original holder of the notes
and the reduced interest rate payable to the purchaser of the notes.  The
complaint does not allege, however, that Scott, Inc., acted "for another or
others" in dealing with the promissory notes.  It alleges rather that Scott,
Inc., itself was "in the business of making distress loans at high rates of
interest . . . ." This allegation in itself indicates only that the corporation
acted as a lender engaged in selling loans to other lenders.

   The power of attorney, appended as exhibit 2 to the complaint, unquestionably
created an agency relationship, broadly authorizing Scott to act in the bank's
behalf, but we must again inquire whether Scott acted as a real estate broker.
A power of attorney with respect to real estate may be exercised by a person not
possessing a real estate broker's license.  Business and Professions Code
section 10133 specifically provides: "(a) The acts described in Section 10131
are not acts for which a real estate license is required if performed by: . . .
(2) A person holding a duly executed power of attorney from the owner of the
real property  with respect to which the acts are performed." However, if a
power of attorney actually contemplates real estate brokerage services, the
courts will look to the substance of the agreement.  For example, a person
cannot evade the licensing requirements of the Real Estate Act by the device of
securing powers of attorney from prospective clients.  ( Richardson v. Roberts
(1962) 210 Cal.App.2d 603, 607 [26 Cal.Rptr. 829].)

     Under the power of attorney at issue here, Scott agreed that, if Barclays
should purchase the property on foreclosure, he would "use best efforts to sell
or otherwise dispose of the above-described property with all reasonable speed
upon terms and conditions prevailing in the market at that time, . . ." The
language authorizes Scott to perform acts "for another"  that fall within the
description of real estate brokerage.   Business and Professions Code section
10131, subdivision (a), defines a real estate broker as a person who "[sells] or
offers to sell, buys or offers to buy, solicits prospective sellers or
purchasers of, solicits or obtains listings of, or negotiates the purchase, sale
or exchange of real property or a business opportunity." 1 But did Scott in fact
act as a broker? Though authorized to do so, he may have retained the services
of other real estate brokers rather than acting himself in that capacity.  The
complaint is obscure on this point.  It does allege, however, that Scott
advertised the property by posting a "For Sale" sign with his telephone number.
This allegation supports an inference that he acted in a professional capacity.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   On its
face, the language of the power of attorney appears to come within the
definition of a listing agreement.   Business and Professions Code section
10027, subdivision (c), defines the term "listing" as "[an] agreement by which a
person who is engaged in the business of promoting the sale or lease of business
opportunities or real estate agrees to render to an owner or lessee of such
property any services, to promote the sale or lease of said property."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The allegations concerning the power of attorney also present the question
whether Scott acted "for a compensation or in expectation of a compensation"
within the meaning of Business and Professions Code section 10131.  Under the
power of attorney, he was not entitled to a commission in marketing the
property.  The Service Contract, however, broadly required him to comply with
the Bank's instructions regarding its investments in secured promissory notes.
Since this contract established a remunerative relationship between Scott and
Barclays, it may be inferred that actions taken under it, such as exercising the
bank's power of attorney, were done with the expectation of personal gain and
thus were "for compensation" within the meaning of section 10131.

     A real estate broker has a fiduciary relationship to his principal that
obliges him to act in the principal's best interest.   Attempting to come within
this rule, appellants allege that Scott acted "in the capacity of a dual agent"
on behalf of "dual principals," i.e., appellants and Barclays.  Despite the
dangers of conflict of interest, real estate brokers in California commonly do
act as dual agents of both seller and buyer.  Butthe complaint's allegations of
dual agency are legal conclusions that should be disregarded in considering the
sufficiency of the demurrer. (4 Witkin, Cal.  Procedure (3d ed. 1985) Pleading,
§ 340, p. 393.)  Other allegations rebut any inference that appellants
authorized Scott to represent them or that they acquiesced to or ratified his
activity in soliciting purchase offers from third parties.  The complaint states
that appellants relied on Scott to transmit their offer to Barclays "out of
necessity" since he held Barclays's power of attorney to deal with the property.
They in fact attempted to circumvent him by negotiating directly with Barclays.
The complaint  further alleges that "SCOTT attempted to deal with the property
as if he had authority to do so on behalf of himself and Ngan.  A gratuitous
agency as it were."

   These allegations compel the conclusion that Scott was not appellants' agent
but acted exclusively as an agent for the seller, Barclays.   This conclusion,
however, is not fatal to appellants' case.  In Ward v. Taggart (1959) 51 Cal.2d
736 [336 P.2d 534], the  court upheld a purchaser's cause of action against a
real estate broker in the absence of an agency relationship. The question
becomes whether Ward should apply to the facts alleged in the complaint.

   In that case, the plaintiff, Ward, requested a real estate broker, Thomsen,
to look for attractive investment property in Los Angeles.  Another real estate
broker, Taggart, told Thomsen that he had an exclusive listing for 72 acres of
land owned by Sunset Oil.  Ward directed Thomsen to submit an offer for the land
through Taggart for $ 4,000 per acre. Taggart promised to convey the offer to
Sunset Oil but later informed Thomsen that the company would not accept less
than $ 5,000 per acre. Upon receiving this advice, Ward authorized Thomsen to
make an offer on those terms.  Taggart informed him that Sunset accepted the
offer.  At the closing, however, title to the property appeared in the name of
one of Thomsen's associates.  Taggart offered elaborate explanations for this
surprising circumstance, and Ward was persuaded to buy the property.
Afterwards, Ward learned that Taggart had never held a listing on the property
and had never presented his $ 4,000 offer to Sunset.  "Instead, he presented his
own offer of $ 4,000 per acre, which Sunsetaccepted.  He falsely represented to
[Ward] that the least Sunset would take for the property was $ 5,000 per acre,
because he intended to purchase the property from Sunset himself and resell it
to plaintiffs at a profit of $ 1,000 per acre. All the reasons he gave for the
unusual handling of the sale were fabrications." (51 Cal.2d at p. 740.)

   Ward brought an action against Taggart alleging fraud and received a jury
verdict awarding him approximately $ 72,000 in compensatory damages, the amount
of Taggart's secret profit on the transaction.  On appeal, the court found that
the record would not support recovery either on a theory of fraud or on an
alternative theory of breach of the fiduciary duty owed by an agent to his
principal.  With respect to the fraud theory, the record was devoid of evidence
that Ward had suffered any out-of-pocket loss as required by Civil Code section
3343 since the property was worth at least the $ 5,000 price he paid for it.  To
support the alternative theory, there was "no evidence of an agency or other
fiduciary relationship" between Ward and Taggart.  (51 Cal.2d at p. 741.) Ward
dealt at arms-length with Taggart through his agent, Thomsen.

    In a concise paragraph demanding careful analysis, the court nevertheless
held that the jury verdict could be sustained on equitable grounds: "Even though
Taggart was not plaintiff's agent, the public policy of this state does not
permit one to 'take advantage of his own wrong' ( Civ. Code, § 3517), and the
law provides a quasi-contractual remedy to prevent one from being unjustly
enriched at the expense of another.  [Fn. omitted.] Section 2224 of the Civil
Code provides that one 'who gains a thing by fraud . . . or other wrongful act,
is, unless he has some other and better right thereto, an involuntary trustee of
the thing gained, for the benefit of the person who would otherwise have had
it.'" (51 Cal.2d at p. 741.) As a real estate broker, Taggart had the duty to be
honest and truthful in his dealing.  (See Bus. & Prof. Code, §§ 10150, 10176;
Rattray v. Scudder (1946) 28 Cal.2d 214, 222-223 [169 P.2d 371, 164 A.L.R. 1356]
.) The evidence is clearly sufficient to support a finding that Taggart violated
this duty. "Through fraudulent misrepresentation she received money that
plaintiffs would otherwise have had.  Thus, Taggart is an involuntary trustee
for the benefit of plaintiffs on the secret profit of $ 1,000 per acre that he
made from his dealings with them." ( Ward v. Taggart, supra, 51 Cal.2d at pp.
741-742.)

   Unlike the defendant in Ward, Scott is not charged in the complaint with any
misrepresentation to appellants.  Though Scott evidently talked to appellants
about his efforts to market the property, it is not alleged that he ever
solicited an offer from them for their former cotenants' one-half interest.  The
complaint states only that appellants submitted an offer to Barclays by means of
a letter addressed to Scott's counsel.  But the case cannot be easily
distinguished on this ground.  The Ward  court imposed an involuntary trust
because the defendant's misrepresentations violated a real estate broker's "duty
to be honest and truthful in his dealings" with a prospective purchaser.  (8a)
This duty, found both in California common law and the real estate law, was also
violated under the facts alleged here.

   Following the Ward decision, the principle that a broker owes a duty of
honesty and fairness to all parties to a transaction has been reiterated in
other cases ( Brown v. Gordon (1966) 240 Cal.App.2d 659, 667 [49 Cal.Rptr.  901]
; Hale v. Wolfsen (1969) 276 Cal.App.2d 285, 292 [81 Cal.Rptr. 23]), and
recognized implicitly by decisions concerning the broker's duty of disclosure
toward prospective purchasers. ( Rattray v. Scudder, supra, 28 Cal.2d 214, 223;
Lingsch v. Savage (1963) 213 Cal.App.2d 729 [29 Cal.Rptr. 201, 8 A.L.R.3d 537].)
Thus in Easton v. Strassburger (1984) 152 Cal.App.3d 90, 100 [199 Cal.Rptr. 383,
46 A.L.R.4th 521], the court observed, "[the] real estate broker's relationship
to the buyer is such that the buyer usually expects the broker to protect his
interests." This trust and confidence derives both from "the potential value of
the broker's service" and the broker's superior knowledge of the complexity of
financing.  (Ibid.)  "[Many] buyers in fact justifiably believe the seller's
broker is also protecting their interest in securing and acting upon accurate
information and rely upon him, . . ." ( Id. at p. 101, fn. omitted.)
Accordingly, the court held that brokers have a duty to disclose material facts
"which through reasonable diligence" they should know.  ( Id. at p. 98.) This
analysis of the broker's responsibility would equally support a more general
duty of honesty and fairness.

   The Real Estate Law similarly imposes a "statutory duty of fair and honest
dealing by licensees, . . ." ( Realty Projects, Inc. v. Smith (1973) 32
Cal.App.3d 204, 210 [108 Cal.Rptr. 71].) An early Supreme Court decision
explained that "the single primary purpose of the act is to require of real
estate brokers and salesmen that they be 'honest, truthful and of good
reputation.'" ( Riley v. Chambers (1919) 181 Cal. 589, 593 [185 P. 855, 8 A.L.R.
418].) The statutory provisions authorizing disciplinary action against persons
holding a real estate broker's license refer to "[any] other conduct . . . which
constitutes . . . dishonest dealing." ( Bus. & Prof. Code, §§ 10176, subd. (i)
and 10177, subd. (j).)

   A broker representing a seller may breach his duty of honesty and fair
dealing by failing to convey a prospective purchaser's offer to the seller and
by secretly competing with the purchaser. California Code of Regulations, title
10, section 2785, subdivision (a)(5) defines "dishonest dealing" to include
"[the] willful failure by a listing broker to present or cause to be presented
to the owner of the property any offer to purchase received prior to the closing
of a sale, unless expressly instructed by the owner not to present such an
offer, or unless the offer is patently frivolous." A broker's failure to
disclose that he is himself bidding on property also works an unfairness on
other prospective purchasers. (Cf.  Buckley v. Savage (1960) 184 Cal.App.2d 18
[7 Cal.Rptr. 328], cert. den.  366 U.S. 910 [6 L.Ed.2d 235, 81 S.Ct. 1086];
Whitehead v. Gordon (1969) 2 Cal.App.3d 659 [82 Cal.Rptr. 778].) Not only is the
broker likely to have an advantage over other bidders because of his knowledge
of their offers and the owner's desires, but his contacts with other purchasers
may easily lead them to rely on his assistance and forego their own efforts to
negotiate for the property.  Article 12 of the Code of Ethics of the National
Association of Realtors provides: "The Realtor shall not undertake to provide
professional services concerning a property or its value where he has a present
or contemplated interest unless such interest is specifically disclosed to all
affected parties." (Italics added.) The 1987-1988 Reference Book published by
the California Department of Real Estate cautions, "[a] licensed real estate
broker should be particularly careful in this respect [i.e., acting for his own
account] inasmuch as a broker's contacts with owners and prospective purchasers
of real estate are made largely because of the fact that the broker  advertises
and holds himself or herself out to be a licensed agent.   Office signs, signs
on properties and stationery advertise the fact that the licensee is a licensed
real estate broker. Care must be taken to dispel this agency image if the
licensee chooses to act as a principal in a real property transaction.  It is
particularly dangerous for a broker to start out as an agent in a transaction
and to switch status to that of a principal before the deal is consummated."
(See fn. 2.) (Id. at p. 187-188.) 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   "Pursuant
to Evidence Code section 452, subdivision (h), we may take judicial notice of
relevant criteria promulgated by a private professional association." ( Easton
v. Strassburger, supra, 152 Cal.App.3d at p. 101, fn. 5.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     Thus, while not involving misrepresentation, Scott's alleged conduct falls
within the same category as that of the defendant in Ward v. Taggart: both
involved breach of a real estate broker's duty of honest and fair dealing. But
in Ward v. Taggart the court proceeded to impose a constructive trust on a
theory of unjust enrichment.  "[The] public policy of this state," it held,
"does not permit one to 'take advantage of his own wrong.  '" (51 Cal.2d at p.
741.)   The existence of unjust enrichment presents a distinct question.  Even
if justifying administrative discipline, a broker's breach of his duty of
honesty and fair dealing may not necessarily result in unjust enrichment
requiring imposition of a constructive trust.

   If liberally construed in favor of appellants, the complaint here alleges
that appellants' offer was financially superior to Scott's purchase price. While
it is not certain that the seller would have accepted appellants' offer, proof
of a competitively superior offer is likely to be the strongest evidence
available to a prospective purchaser in this situation.  (See Klotz v. Fauber
(1972) 213 Va. 1 [189 S.E.2d 45].) To require more would effectively deny
relief.  Furthermore, the complaint alleges that Scott entirely eliminated
appellants' offer from the seller's consideration by both competing secretly for
the purchase and failing to transmit their offer to the seller. It is the
conjunction of these two acts that is critical.  If Scott had failed to disclose
his own interest but still had transmitted the offer to the seller or if he had
failed to transmit the offer but plainly disclosed his adverse interest, he
would not clearly bear the onus of having excluded appellants' bid from
consideration.  Though the question is a close one, we believe that these
alleged facts are enough to invoke the principle that Scott should not be
permitted to "take advantage of his wrong" by keeping the cotenant's one-half
interest that he acquired by wrongful conduct.

   Unlike the defendant in Ward, Scott did not resell the property to the
purchaser thus earning a secret profit; rather, he continues to hold it in his
own name.  The principle that one should not be permitted to take advantage of
his own wrong implies that Scott is now obligated to transfer the  property to
appellants upon their tender of the consideration he paid to Barclays and their
assumption of any obligations he may still owe to Barclays.  While such a remedy
is a novel one in California, there is some precedent for it in other
jurisdictions.

   In most states, the law concerning a real estate broker's duty toward
prospective purchasers is sparse, poorly defined, and evolving.  (Comment, Real
Estate Brokers' Duties to Prospective Purchasers, 1976 B.Y.U. L.Rev.  513;
Sinclair, The Duty of the Broker to Purchasers and Prospective Purchasers of
Real  Property in Illinois (1981) 69 Ill.  B.J. 260; 55 A.L.R.2d 342.) Some
states continue to adhere to the traditional rule of caveat emptor: in the
absence of an agency relationship between the purchaser and the broker, the
purchaser has no remedy for the acts and omissions of the broker. ( Secan v.
Dunbar (1983) 139 Ariz. 503 [679 P.2d 526]; Ries v. Rome (1958) 337 Mass. 376
[149 N.E.2d 366].) Others have given prospective purchasers a cause of action
against a broker without evidence of an agency relationship. Among the reported
decisions in these jurisdictions, we have found three cases that have required a
seller's broker to convey the property to a prospective purchaser upon tender of
the purchase price.

    In Bush v. Palermo Realty, Inc. (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1983) 443 So.2d 104,
the defendant Palermo, a real estate broker, held a listing agreement on certain
property.  When plaintiff inquired generally "about any listing of land for
sale," he arranged a meeting between plaintiff and the owner of the property.  (
Id. at p. 105.) Plaintiffmade a verbal offer at the meeting, but Palermo "stated
to those present that there was another interested person who would submit an
offer." (Ibid.) The other person turned out to be Palermo himself who
subsequently purchased the property.  Reversing a summary judgment in favor of
Palermo, the court held that "[when] a real estate broker acts as an
intermediary between a seller and a prospective buyer, he is under a duty to
deal fairly and honestly with the prospective buyer." ( Id. at p. 106.) The
court treated this duty as being fiduciary in nature, justifying the imposition
of a constructive trust in favor of the plaintiff. 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Compare
Quinn v. Phipps (1927) 93 Fla. 805 [113 So. 419], an intellectually impressive
decision holding that under the facts the broker assumed a fiduciary
responsibility toward a prospective purchaser.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In Harper v. Adametz (1955) 142 Conn. 218 [113 A.2d 136], defendant, Adametz,
was a real estate broker representing the owner of an 80-acre farm. The
plaintiff, Harper, offered to buy the farm for $ 7,000.  Instead of conveying
the offer to the owner, Adametz negotiated to buy the farm himself for $ 6,500.
He informed Harper that the owner had rejected his offer but would sell the best
17 acres of the farm for $ 6,000.  Subsequently, Adametz purchased the property
for $ 6,500 and, purporting to act for the  owner, conveyed the 17 acres to
Harper for $ 6,000, collecting a $ 325 commission on the sale.  In this manner,
he acquired the remaining 63 acres at a cost of $ 175.  Although Adametz was not
an agent of Harper, the court held that he had a duty to "deal honestly" with
prospective purchasers and to be faithful to his own principal.  While a
constructive trust most often arises from relationships "which equity clearly
recognizes as fiduciary," the court reasoned that it is appropriate whenever
"there is a justifiable trust confided on one side and a resulting superiority
and influence on the other." (Id.  at p. 139.) Imposing a constructive trust,
the decree ordered Adametz to convey the remainder of the property to Harper
upon payment to the court of $ 1,000, the difference between plaintiff's
original offer for the 80 acres and its purchase price for the 17 acres. (Ibid.)

   In Funk v. Tifft (9th Cir. 1975) 515 F.2d 23, the United States Court of
Appeals for the Ninth Circuit applied Idaho law in a diversity action.  The
defendant, Tifft, was a licensed real estate broker who showed the plaintiffs,
the Funks, certain Idaho property.  The Funks made a written offer that Tifft
mailed to the owner.  Shortly afterwards, Tifft called the owners to advise them
that he was personally making an offer on better terms.  When the owner then
sold the property to Tifft, the Funks sued to impose a constructive trust. After
surveying the case law, the court concluded that "[most] modern cases dealing
with the relationship of a broker and a buyer impose a duty of fairness and
honesty on the broker," and it explicitly characterized this duty as being
fiduciary in nature.  ( Id. at p. 25.) By purchasing the property in breach of
this fiduciary duty, Tifft became a constructive trustee of the property on
behalf of the prospective purchaser. The court ordered that Tifft transfer the
property to the Funks upon their tender of the purchase price Tifft paid to the
owner and their assumption of any obligation which Tifft still owed to the
seller.

   While these cases provide precedent for the remedy appellants request in
their second cause of action, they invoke the concept of fiduciary duty in a
confusing and unnecessary context.  The use of the term "fiduciary" to describe
both the broker's duty to his principal and his duty to a prospective purchaser
suggests that the two duties are in some way comparable.  But the interest of
seller and buyer are adverse.  It should not be inferred that the duties of
loyalty, diligence, and disclosure that the seller's broker owes to his client
are also owing in some limited or attenuated manner to the buyer. 4  The
reference to a "fiduciary" duty, furthermore, is unnecessary because each of the
decisions recognizes the broker's duty of honesty and fair dealing.  In
California, the breach of this duty can itself constitute an adequate basis for
imposition of a constructive trust. Ward v. Taggart, supra, 51 Cal.2d 736,
impliedly holds that a broker's breach of his duty of honesty and fair dealing
amounts to an "other wrongful act" within the meaning of Civil Code section 2224
.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   By
disclosing his position, a broker may undertake the awkward role of representing
both the seller and buyer. But such dual representation, which engenders a host
of practical problems, is undesirable as a matter of policy.  (Kroll, Dual
Agency in Residential Real Estate Brokerage: Conflict of Interest and Interests
in Conflict (1982) 12 Golden Gate L.Rev. 379; 1 Miller and Starr, Current Law of
Cal. Real Estate (1987 Supp.) § 4:18, pp. 45-53.) The courts should refrain from
any interpretation of the broker's duty toward prospective buyers that tends as
a matter of law to place the broker in this position of dual representation.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     Moreover, the precedents we have examined do not address a perplexing
aspect of this case.  The alleged acts giving rise to the constructive trust may
also give Barclays the right to rescind the sale by claiming that Scott breached
his fiduciary duty as its broker by purchasing the property. 5 We see no reason,
however, why Scott should be allowed indirectly to benefit from his wrong
because of a potential remedy of the seller; surely Scott cannot interpose the
seller's possible right of rescission as a defense to appellants' action.  But
Barclays's possible right to rescission poses a practical problem.  Being on
notice of Barclays's possible equitable rights, appellants might purchase the
property subject to a right of rescission.  If this is so, they would make a
risky investment by tendering to Scott the purchase price of $ 325,000.  To
minimize this dilemma, a decree should give appellants a reasonable time to
clear their equitable right to the property either by negotiation with Barclays
or through a declaratory judgment action before tendering the purchase price and
offering to assume any of Scott's outstanding obligations to the seller.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   We do
not, of course, express any opinion as to the validity of Barclays's possible
cause of action.  The actual facts -- and legal issues -- may in reality be very
different from those suggested by a reading of appellants' pleadings.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Alternatively, in their first cause of action appellants apply for damages
measured by the difference between the price Scott paid for the property and its
current market value.  A few cases have held that a real estate broker who
secretly competes with a prospective purchaser may be liable in damages in the
absence of agency relationship with the purchaser. ( Sawyer Realty Group, Inc.
v. Jarvis Corp. (1982) 89 Ill.2d 379 [432 N.E.2d 849, 28 A.L.R.4th 189]; Amato
v. Latter & Blum, Inc. (1955) 27 La. 537 [79 So.2d 873].) But appellant's cause
of action is apparently based on the theory that they were deprived of an
anticipated profit on the property; it assumes that, but for Scott's wrongful
conduct, they would have purchased the property and realized a profit on its
sale.  The scenario is clearly speculative.   "Anticipated profits cannot be
recovered if it is uncertain whether any profit would have been derived at all."
( Block v. Tobin (1975) 45 Cal.App.3d 214, 220 [119 Cal.Rptr. 288].) In any
event, our conclusion that  under the facts alleged Scott would hold the
property subject to a constructive trust precludes recovery of damages.  If
Scott is legally obligated to convey the property to appellants upon tender of
the purchase price, appellants have suffered no detriment; the property is in
fact available to them on the terms they have sought.  ( Civ. Code, § 3333.)

   The judgment is reversed insofar as it relates to the respondents John L.
Scott and J. & P. Scott, Inc., and the second cause of action in the second
amended complaint.  Costs on appeal are awarded to appellants.


                              87 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          B. FRANKLIN MAHONEY, Respondent, v. THE CITY OF SAN DIEGO (a
                       Municipal Corporation), Appellant

                                 L. A. No. 8839

                          Supreme Court of California

                 198 Cal. 388; 245 P. 189; 1926 Cal. LEXIS 375


                                 April 1, 1926

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of San Diego
County.  S. M. Marsh, Judge.

COUNSEL: S. J. Higgins, City Attorney, Arthur F. H. Wright and Frank M. Downer,
Jr., Assistant City Attorneys, for Appellant.

Sloane & Sloane for Respondent.

JUDGES: In Bank. Richards, J.  Lennon, J., Curtis, J., Seawell, J., Waste, C.
J., Shenk, J., and Lawlor, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: RICHARDS

OPINION

     The plaintiff herein sought by his amended complaint herein the recovery
from the defendant, a municipal corporation, the sum of $ 1,663.93, with
interest, which said sum he alleged he had been compelled to pay and did pay to
said municipality under protest as taxes illegally imposed upon his property
within said municipality and by its officials charged under its charter and the
general laws with the levy and collection of taxes in and for said City.  In his
said amended complaint he alleges that during all the times mentioned therein he
was the owner of the particular parcels of real property described therein,
together with the improvements thereon; that the City of San Diego is and during
all of said times was a municipal corporation organized and operating under a
freeholders' charter and having among its officials a city assessor possessing
the powers enumerated in said charter and in the general laws; that the said
property of the plaintiff was assessed for the fiscal year 1923, and that in so
assessing the same the said assessor assessed the several lots or parcels of
land so described separately from the improvements thereon; that the said
several lots or parcels of land were thus assessed at a total valuation of $
84,900, which sum was equal to the full cash value thereof and that the amount
of taxes thereafter levied and charged against said lots and parcels of land was
levied at the regular tax rate of $ 2 upon each $ 100 of said valuation. The
plaintiff then proceeds to allege that said assessment and tax levy were and
each of them was and is unlawful for the reason "that the said city assessor of
said city of San Diego in assessing all the property within said city for city
taxes for the fiscal year of 1923, adopted and pursued a systematic, arbitrary,
wilful and intentional scheme and method for such assessment which was contrary
to law, in that in pursuance of said scheme and method he assessed all land
within the said city at from eighty to one hundred per cent of its full cash
value, and assessed all taxable improvements on land at not to exceed
twenty-five per cent of their cash value, and assessed personal property at not
to exceed sixty per cent of its cash value. That such arbitrary, systematic,
wilful and intentional scheme and method was deliberately adopted and pursued by
the said city assessor with the intent and purpose of discriminating against one
class of property, to wit; land, as distinguished  from the improvements
thereon, and as distinguished from personal property, and in discrimination
against the owners of said land, and that such arbitrary, systematic, wilful and
intentional scheme and method was adopted and pursued by the said city assessor
contrary to the provisions of the constitution of the United States and
constitution and laws of the state of California and of the charter of said city
of San Diego, which require that all property shall be assessed and taxed in
proportion to its value.  That such scheme and method was pursued for the avowed
purpose of carrying into effect the unauthorized policy and belief of said city
assessor that the revenue for the maintenance of the city government should be
derived mainly from an unequal and discriminating tax on land, and that such
method was adopted and followed in fixing said taxes upon the above described
property." The plaintiff further proceeds to allege that the improvements upon
said several lots or parcels of land do not exceed in the aggregate the sum of $
10,350, but the same were assessed by said assessor in said year at a total
valuation of $ 2,570, which was not to exceed twenty-five per cent of their full
cash value; and that not only were the said improvements upon the plaintiff's
said real estate thus assessed at a valuation not in excess of twenty-five per
cent of the full cash value thereof, but that all taxable improvements situate
upon all of the lots and lands throughout the entire City of San Diego were also
assessed at not to exceed twenty-five per cent of their full cash value; and
that in so assessing the same the said assessor acted  in accordance with an
arbitrary, systematic, wilful, and intentional scheme and method and that as a
result thereof the tax fixed and levied upon plaintiff's said lots and lands is
invalid and unjust and imposes upon said plaintiff and upon his said lands the
burden of paying a greater amount of taxation thereon in proportion to its cash
value than was assessed and imposed upon other kinds of property subject to
taxation for municipal purposes within said City.  The plaintiff then proceeds
to allege that after making the assessments of the plaintiff's said properties
as above alleged and in the manner above set forth the said assessor transmitted
the assessment-roll embracing his said assessments to the city clerk for the use
of the board of equalization of said City in the performance of its functions
as prescribed in the charter of said City, and that the said board of
equalization in regular session had and held a hearing thereon whereat the
plaintiff herein appeared before said board and presented to said board all of
the facts in his complaint herein alleged as to the irregularity and invalidity
of said assessment and demanded the correction and equalization of the same, but
that the said board at said hearing denied said plaintiff said relief and that
said action was taken by said board with full knowledge of all of the facts
pleaded herein and was taken arbitrarily and capriciously and without regard to
said facts and in disregard of the evidence then before said board showing said
facts, which evidence was without conflict or contradiction; and that the said
action of said board was taken in ratification and indorsement of the unlawful
scheme and method of assessment adopted and pursued by said assessor. The
plaintiff further and finally alleged the demand made upon him for the payment
of the taxes so illegally assessed and exacted and his payment of the same under
protest as provided in section 3819 of the Political Code; and his demand upon
said defendant thereafter and in due course and form for the repayment of the
same, and of the refusal of the said defendant to comply with said demand.  In
its answer to the plaintiff's amended complaint the defendant municipality
specifically denied that the said assessment or any part or portion thereof was
or is unlawful or invalid or unfair or that its said assessor adopted or pursued
any such systematic or arbitrary or wilful or intentional or unlawful scheme or
method as is set forth in said complaint; and denies that his assessment of the
improvements upon the plaintiff's said lots and parcels of land was at other
than the full cash value thereof; and denies that his assessment of the taxable
improvements upon lots and lands within said City was at a valuation of not to
exceed twenty-five per cent of the full cash value thereof or was at other than
their full cash value; and denies that in their action upon the plaintiff's
demand for an adjustment and equalization of the assessment upon the plaintiff's
said properties or upon the valuations of any and all other of the taxable
properties within said City the board of equalization acted either arbitrarily
or capriciously or without due regard for the facts or the evidence before it,
or that the action of said board was taken in ratification or indorsement of any
unlawful scheme or  method adopted or pursued by said assessor, and denies that
any refund of taxes to said plaintiff should be made.  The cause came on for
hearing, together with certain other causes involving similar actions brought by
other protesting taxpayers and presenting identical pleadings and which it was
stipulated should be heard together.  The evidence of the respective parties
having been presented the several causes were submitted to the court for
decision and the court thereafter made and filed its findings and conclusions
thereon.  In its said findings of fact the trial court found the facts to be
substantially as set forth in the plaintiff's amended complaint and practically
in the identical language thereof, and as its conclusions of law based upon said
findings of fact decided that the assessments in question upon the properties of
the several plaintiffs in said consolidated cases were and each of them was
illegal and void and accordingly ordered and adjudged a repayment of the taxes
as sued for in each of said actions.  Judgment having been so entered the
defendant in each of said actions has taken and now prosecutes its several
appeals.

   The questions presented upon each of these consolidated appeals are of great
importance, involving, as they do, not only the powers and duties of the
assessor and of the board of equalization of this particular appellant, but
involving also the powers and duties generally of the like officials of
municipal corporations and political subdivisions of the state of California in
the matter of the assessment and equalization of taxes upon real estate and the
improvements thereon.  The constitution of the state of California provides in
section 1 of article XIII thereof that "All property in the state, except as
otherwise in the constitution provided, not exempt under the laws of the United
States, shall be taxed in proportion to its value as provided by law or as
hereafter provided." By section 2 of article XIII of the constitution it is
provided that "Land and the improvements thereon shall be separately assessed.
Cultivated and uncultivated land of the same quality and similarly situated
shall be assessed at the same value." Section 3627 of the Political Code
provides that "All taxable property must be assessed at its full cash value.
Land and the improvements thereon shall be separately assessed. Cultivated and
uncultivated land of the same quality and similarly  situated shall  be assessed
at the same value"; while section 3617 of the Political Code, under the subject
of definitions provides that "The terms 'value' and 'full cash value' mean the
amount at which the property would be taken in payment of a just debt from a
solvent debtor." Section 3650 of the same code provides for assessment-books in
which must be listed all taxable property and showing "The improvements to be
assessed against the particular section, tract or lot of land upon which they
are located," and the cash value thereof.  Subject to the foregoing provisions
of the constitution and of the statutes of the state, the general laws thereof,
the charters of the several municipal corporations operating under the same
contain provisions for the assessment, equalization and collection of taxes upon
real and personal property. These are in the main similar and in the case of
chartered cities the provisions of their organic laws relating to the powers and
duties of their officials who are charged with the assessment and collection of
local taxes are usually drawn in harmony with or in subordination to the general
laws.  Such is the case with the City of San Diego by the charter of which City
it is provided in article VI, chapter I, section 3 thereof as follows:

   "Except as in this charter otherwise provided, the assessment of property
taxable in the city for municipal purposes, the equalization and assessment of
taxes, and sale of property for unpaid taxes, and the redemption of property
sold for taxes shall be made in the same manner and with like effect as now or
may be hereafter provided by law for the assessment of property, equalization of
assessments, levy and collection of taxes, and the sale of property for unpaid
taxes for state and county purposes and the redemption thereof; and all
provisions of law applicable to such assessments, equalization, levy, collection
and sale for state and county purposes, are hereby applied to and shall be the
law governing such assessment, equalization, levy, collection and sale for
municipal purposes; and the respective officers of the city shall have, possess
and perform the same powers and duties in all matters concerning revenue and
taxation for municipal purposes as are or may be by law conferred or imposed
upon county officers in matters concerning revenue and taxation for state and
county purposes."

   It is provided in section 6 of the same article of said charter that "The
terms 'real' and 'personal property' as  used in this charter shall have the
same meaning as the same terms used in the revenue laws of this state; and all
property subject to taxation aforesaid shall be assessed at its full cash value
which in the judgment of the assessor it has at 12 o'clock m. on the first day
of January and the lien of the annual city tax levy shall attach at said hour."
By section 8 of the same article in said charter it is provided that "A
committee of the common council selected as in this charter provided, shall
constitute a board of equalization, and shall, after the assessor shall have
completed and handed in his assessment-roll to the city clerk, and after five
days' notice published in the official newspaper of this city, hold meetings to
hear and determine all complaints respecting the valuation of property as fixed
by the assessor in such roll; provided, however, that before raising any
assessment, the board shall notify the person interested by letter deposited in
the post office or express, post paid, and addressed to such person at least
three days before action taken, of the day fixed when the matter will be
investigated.  Any member of said board shall have power to administer oaths,
and affirmations in the matters before said board, and the sessions of said
board shall be held from time to time, as in its notice specified, for the
period of two weeks, and no longer." These various provisions of the
constitution, the statutes and the city charter determine and define the powers,
duties and functions of the city assessor and the board of equalization of the
City of San Diego.   In the exercise of the foregoing powers and functions
assessors, both by the general laws and by the charters of those municipalities
in respect to the properties within which the duties of their officers are to be
performed, are invested with a large measure of discretion in the exercise of
their judgment as to the valuations to be placed for purposes of taxation upon
the several kinds of such property subject to such taxation; and it has been
generally held that when this judgment and discretion of assessing officers has
been exercised, even though erroneously, within the limitations imposed by the
foregoing provisions of the constitution and of the laws under which they
operate, such judgment and discretion will not, as to the results reached by
their exercise be interfered with by the courts in the absence of a showing of
fraud or bad faith.   It is not, however, necessary  that such fraud or bad
faith on the part of the official shall be expressly shown; it may arise by
implication out of the fact that the assessment when taken as a whole and viewed
with respect to the assessable values of the various kinds of taxable properties
within the province of his office discloses such a degree of discrimination
between properties of the same class or properties of different classes as to
clearly evince a wilful and systematic disregard of the requirements of the
constitution and of the provisions of the statute or charter governing and
limiting the exercise of the assessor's discretionary powers.  This court had
occasion to so declare in the case of Los Angeles G. & Elec. Co. v. County of
Los Angeles, 162 Cal. 164-168 [9 A. L. R. 1277, 121 Pac. 384], which was a case
wherein the action of the assessor and of the board of equalization sustaining
the same were upheld as not having been clearly or satisfactorily brought within
the foregoing principles, the application of which would have been essential to
the overthrow of the assessment.  It was likewise so held by this court in the
case of Southern Pacific Land Co. v. San Diego Co., 183 Cal. 543 [191 Pac. 931],
wherein it appeared from the averments of the plaintiff's complaint that a
systematic, wilful and intentional undervaluation of lands of the same class as
those belonging to plaintiff, but belonging to persons other than the plaintiff,
was adopted and carried into effect by both the county assessor and county board
of equalization, while plaintiff's lands of the same class had been, with like
systematic and wilful intent, overvalued.  In upholding the sufficiency of the
plaintiff's complaint this court quoted approvingly its language in the case of
Los Angeles G. & Elec. Co. v. County of Los Angeles, supra, and further
proceeded to hold in conformity with the ruling in that case that while it was
not claimed that there was any actual fraud or corrupt intent on the part of the
officials making and sustaining the assessment in question, there was,
nevertheless, such a violation of plain duty on the part of such officials as to
constitute "fraud" or "something equivalent to fraud," within the meaning of
those terms as used in the decisions relative to the review of the action of
assessing officers, entirely regardless of the motive actuating them in the
matter of such an assessment.  The foregoing principles, while applied in the
case last decided to property of the same class, would be in our opinion equally
applicable to assessable  properties of different classes where the proofs were
plain.   The essential question with respect to the assessment of properties of
the same or different classes to be determined is as to whether the provisions
of the constitution regarding uniformity in valuations and of the laws declaring
how uniformity and equality in the distribution of the burdens of taxation are
to be ascertained and applied have been fairly conformed to or systematically,
and intentionally and grossly disregarded.  The declaration of these principles
brings us to the immediate assessment under review upon these several appeals.
With respect to the several classes of assessable property in the City of San
Diego in its fiscal year of 1923 there is no dispute; nor is there any material
dispute as to the plan or method adopted and put into operation by the assessor
of said City with regard to the respective valuations placed upon these several
classes of property nor as to the actual effect thereof upon the assessment of
property values as a whole.  The assessor was called upon to deal with three
main classes of property in the course of the performance of his official
duties. These were (a) real estate; (b) improvements upon real estate; and (c)
personal property. With respect to the valuations placed by him upon all
assessable real estate within said City considered separately from the
improvements or want of improvements thereon no substantial question is raised
as to the fairness of his assessment thereof; nor is there any sufficiently
tangible objection made to the valuation placed by him upon personal property.
It is with reference to the said assessor's method and basis of valuation of
improvements upon the real estate situate within said City that the main issue
in these cases arises.  Upon that subject the plaintiffs have alleged and the
trial court has found as hereinabove in this opinion fully set forth.  The
question is whether the evidence sustains said findings in accord with the
averments of said complaint.  That evidence is also practically uncontradicted
and is embraced in the testimony of the assessor himself as a witness in his own
behalf before the board of equalization and before the trial court.   The
assessor testified that in entering upon his assessment of improvements upon
real estate for the fiscal year 1923 he found that the constitution (art. XIII,
sec. 2) required that "Land and the improvements thereon shall be separately
assessed"; and that the statute (Pol. Code, sec.  3627) contained practically
the same requirement; and that he obeyed these requirements in making his
valuations of improvements upon real estate. The fundamental error of the
assessor, however, consisted in his misinterpretation of the meaning of these
requirements of the constitution and of the statute.  The foregoing provisions
of the constitution and of the statute do not refer to the valuations to be
placed upon these two classes of taxable property, but merely to the fact that
the valuations thereof fixed by the assessor in conformity with the other
provisions of the constitution and statutes relating to the basis of the
assessment of property values shall be separately stated by him in his
assessment-books.  The context of both the constitutional and the statutory
provisions would seem to make this sufficiently obvious since in immediate
juxtaposition to the above requirement is to be found the requirement that
"cultivated and uncultivated land shall be assessed at the same value."  In
order to make effectual this, as well as the other requirements of law, that
improved and unimproved real estate shall have a uniform basis of valuation, it
was essential that the valuations to be placed upon land and upon the
improvements thereon, whether in the form of buildings or crops or trees, should
be separately set forth in the making of assessments thereon.  But this
assessor, as his evidence conclusively shows, interpreted these provisions of
the constitution and statute to mean that in making his valuations of
improvements upon real estate he was required to treat this form of property as
though its physical separation from the real estate upon which it stood was
contemplated by the framers of the organic law and that the valuation  to be
thus arrived at was to be such as that class of property would be taken at by a
creditor in payment of a solvent debt with the idea of its removal from the real
estate upon which it was affixed.  In a word, the testimony of this assessor
sufficiently shows that the basis adopted by him for his valuation of
improvements upon real estate in the City of San Diego was, when reduced to its
last analysis, its removal or wreckage value.  That this was the assessor's
concept of his duty, for whatever purpose he may have had in view, is
ineluctable when his testimony is read as a whole.  He says: "The methods
employed in the assessment of the improvements was that I found that under the
law I was to separately assess the improvements from the real  estate, and that
I should use the same definition of value that was prescribed by law in fixing a
value of the property; and that I used every method I was able to use to
determine what would be the full cash value of an improvement on real estate,
separated from the real estate. Now, in doing that I ascertained, first, the
production cost of that improvement, or what it would cost to reproduce the
building or improvements; and then, separating it from the real estate on which
it stood, I arrived at what I concluded and determined was a full cash value of
that property.  I used the building permits of the City as a basis, general
basis, for the values or the price or cost of that improvement.  I then took a
value that I felt would be a fair cash -- or full cash value of that improvement
after it was separated from the real estate on which it stood." Again he says:
"I had to assess the building as to its value separated from the real estate,
and as to the elements of value that I considered in determining it to be worth
twenty-five per cent, why, you could put any element of value in there, wreckage
value, or removal value, or value of a man who wanted the property for some
particular purpose, who would buy it for that purpose." And he still further
states: "In arriving at the initial cost or production price of buildings, as
far as percentage was concerned, I assessed old buildings and new buildings the
same.  They were all taken from the building permits of the city and there was,
I believe, no reduction for depreciation.  I arrived as near as I could at the
cost of the building and then took a percentage of that for the value of the
building." Finally, and upon cross-examination, he testified:

   "We assessed it without taking into consideration the real estate upon which
it stood, and while the law says it is a part of the real estate, it is a
peculiar proposition, yet it says we must assess it separately. It is either
that proposition or that buildings must be assessed and put on the books of the
city exactly what it costs to put up, less the depreciation.  There are only two
constructions, and I took the construction which I thought was best for the
entire city of San Diego; the best and most reasonable construction.  My firm
judgment is that improvements should be encouraged in every possible way.

   "Q.  Is there any possible value to be put on improvements to property if not
taken in connection with the land except a value for removal purposes.

    "A. A nominal value.

   "Q. What value would there be except a salvage value?

   "A. Or for leased purposes, or something of that kind.

   "Q. That was what you tried to arrive at, removal value?

   "A. Yes.  To make it a basis of assessment."

   It is true that the assessor also testifies and repeats that he assessed all
of the improvements upon real estate at the full cash value, but in practical
application, as his evidence taken as a whole abundantly shows, he did no such
thing.  Take, for example, his testimony wherein he states that after
ascertaining the original cost of construction of buildings of the three general
classes designated by him as (a) concrete buildings; (b) brick and tile
buildings and (c) frame and stucco buildings, he assessed these several classes
of structures entirely regardless of their age or location or depreciation from
any cause in the following manner, viz.: He placed an arbitrary valuation upon
frame and stucco buildings of fifteen per cent of their cost of construction,
upon brick or tile buildings of twenty per cent of their cost of construction;
and upon concrete buildings of twenty-five per cent of their cost of
construction.  He admits that in each instance this was an entirely arbitrary
percentage of valuation. His entire departure in so doing from the basic
principles laid down in the constitution and statutes as guaranties of
uniformity and equality in the ascertainment and admeasurement of property
values for purposes of assessment is made doubly obvious by the specific
examples to which reference is made in the testimony of the assessor, wherefrom
it appears the elements of age, of state of repair, or availability for
productive uses and of actual productivity were all eliminated from the
assessor's calculation as bases for his estimates of assessment values; and that
the elements of original cost of construction or even of present cost of
replacement were only taken account of as being points of departure in his
arbitrary fixation of valuations at a small percentage of such cost, depending
upon the type of structure assessed.  The assessor insists that he ought not to
take account of the element of location of a building in estimating its
assessment valuation as to do so would amount to double taxation, since the real
estate upon which such building stands had already been assessed at a valuation
depending upon its favorable location.  But even in this the assessor is in
error, since in common knowledge and experience  each of these two classes of
property possesses in itself and independently of the other an actual or
exchangeable  value dependent upon the location; as, for example, a vacant piece
of real estate in a favorable location has an assessable value equal to that of
other like pieces of real estate of like favorable location whether improved or
not.  On the other hand, a building upon leased premises has an assessable value
dependent upon its favorable location, regardless of the ownership of the land.
The fact that the favorable location of such building for business purposes was
taken account of by the assessor in laying a suitable burden of taxation upon
its owner, and that the same element was also considered in taxing the owner of
the land would not in such case constitute double taxation; no more would it do
so if the ownership of the land and of the building were united in the same
person.   We do not say that in assessing improvements upon real estate the
elements of age, state of repair, location, cost of construction or of
replacement are or that any one of them is controlling upon the assessor in the
exercise of his judgment and discretion as to what valuations he shall place
upon assessable improvements upon real estate; but what we do hold is that an
assessment made by an assessor in accordance with a systematic and intentionally
adopted theory for the arrival at valuations to be placed upon that form of
property which omits to take into consideration any of the foregoing elements
which in common experience ordinarily determine values, and in place thereof
substitutes an arbitrary basis for the fixation of values upon the several
classes of such form of property for purposes of assessment upon a percentage
plan, from which the foregoing elements for determining values are expressly
excluded, will not be upheld when it sufficiently appears that actual
discrimination has resulted from an assessment thus arrived at.   When the
determining principles leading to uniformity in distributing the burdens of
taxation have been lost sight of or wilfully abandoned in the making of the
assessment complained of, the asseveration of the assessor that he assessed that
form of property "at its full cash value" will not avail him in the presence of
the actual and admitted facts supplied from his own lips; nor will his
assertion, even though it be admitted to be true, that he acted honestly and in
good faith in making the assessment in question suffice to compel  the upholding
of an assessment when the assessor making it, however honest and
well-intentioned, has wilfully adopted and deliberately pursued a plan of
assessment which is violative of the fundamental principles which should be his
guide in the performance of his official duty; and when such an assessment is
sufficiently shown to be replete with discrimination and lacking in uniformity
in the burdens it imposes upon the owners of assessable property, such
assessment will be invalidated at the instance of those property owners who
shall pursue the proper statutory method to recover the taxes thus improperly
imposed.

   We are satisfied that the record in this case discloses that such
discrimination and lack of uniformity exists upon the face of the assessment in
question.  It is true that the plaintiffs herein are the owners respectively of
real estate holdings of large value upon which there are in each case
improvements of less but yet of considerable value and that it might well be
said that these particular plaintiffs have not been substantially affected or
injured by too low an assessment, however arbitrarily imposed upon the
improvements upon their real estate which latter form of property they admit has
been assessed at its full cash value. But the injury which these plaintiffs have
suffered and of which they have a right to complain with respect to said
assessment is that resulting from a general and systematic undervaluation of all
improvements upon real estate within said City, as a result of which an undue
and unequal burden of taxation has been laid upon all real estate therein.  An
equalization upon a proper basis of the valuations of both real estate and the
improvements thereon would have resulted in relieving the former of the undue
proportion of its burden and to such measure of relief the owners of real estate
whether improved or unimproved, were entitled upon proper application to the
city board of equalization.  It is urged by the appellant herein that the
plaintiffs herein made such application and that they and each of them had a
full and fair hearing thereon; and that upon such hearing their application for
such or any relief was denied; and that the denial of such relief by said board
of equalization is final upon the right of said plaintiffs to such relief, and
that the determination of said board of equalization thereon is not the proper
subject of review by the courts.  Conceding the correctness of the principle
thus invoked as fully supported  by a long and uniform line of decisions, we are
again met with the difficulty of giving it application to the facts of the
present case, since the trial court has found upon what we deem ample and
sufficient evidence that said board of equalization in its action in upholding
the assessor's concept with regard to the assessment complained of was actuated
and controlled by its adherence to the same arbitrary system and plan of
evaluation as that systematically pursued by the assessor, and that the rulings
of said board in the ratification of the assessor's aforesaid plan and method of
assessment had the effect of upholding and perpetuating the same discrimination
and want of uniformity in said assessment of which the plaintiffs herein
complain.  It will suffice to say that there is no other or different immunity
available to boards of equalization than those which are available to assessors
when the acts of the former are found to be arbitrary and when the proven
discriminations  and inequalities of the latter in making assessments are
perpetuated thereby; and that the courts will grant relief in the one case as
readily as in the other when the record before them justifies the granting of
such relief.

   In conclusion it may be stated that we are satisfied that the trial court was
justified by the evidence before it in awarding to these particular plaintiffs
in these several cases the relief to which they had shown themselves to be
entitled by pursuing the remedies against the assessment assailed herein which
the statute has provided; and hence that its judgment in each of said cases will
be and the same is hereby affirmed.


                              88 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             WILLIE KORNMAN, Respondent, v. A. C. NELSON, Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 4428

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SECOND APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION TWO

             83 Cal. App. 616; 257 P. 150; 1927 Cal. App. LEXIS 554


                             June 6, 1927, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:      APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County. Pat R. Parker, Judge Presiding.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Broker's Commissions--Oral Agreement--Statute of Frauds.  --An oral
agreement to pay a tenant a commission for selling a house is void under
subdivision 6 of section 1624 of the Civil Code, requiring an agreement
authorizing or employing an agent or broker to sell real estate for compensation
to be in writing, although the tenant may have performed valuable services at
the owner's request.

(2) Id.--Unlicensed Broker--Absence of Right to Recover Commission--Real Estate
Broker's Act.  --Where a person is not licensed as a real estate broker or real
estate salesman, he cannot recover a commission for the sale of a house under
the Real Estate Broker's Act (Stats. 1919, p. 1252).

COUNSEL: C. C. Mishler, John F. Keogh and Julius V. Patrosso for Appellant.

Ira L. Brunk for Respondent.

JUDGES: MURPHEY, J., pro tem. Works, P. J., and Craig, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: MURPHEY

OPINION

     MURPHEY, J., pro tem. In this action the complaint alleges that the
defendant became indebted to the plaintiff in the sum of $ 350 for services
rendered at the special instance and request of the defendant. This issue was
met by appropriate and sufficient denials on the part of the defendant. In
response to this issue the court found: "That within one year prior to the
filing of the complaint and issuance of summons herein the defendant agreed with
the plaintiff to pay plaintiff as a consideration for assisting in the sale of
certain real estate 5% upon the sale price of a certain parcel of real estate
located in the City of Los Angeles, should he, the defendant, sell said real
estate, and that said defendant sold said real estate for $ 7,000.00"; upon
which finding judgment went for plaintiff for the amount demanded.  The
testimony adduced at the trial stated in the most favorable light to support the
plaintiff's contention is substantially as follows: Respondent rented a house
from the appellant in the city of Los Angeles, which house appellant had for
some time unsuccessfully endeavored  to sell. Upon the occasion of the renting
of the house respondent states that the appellant agreed that if she would show
the property to prospective purchasers while occupying it as a tenant and would
place intended purchasers in touch with appellant, he would pay the respondent a
commission of five per cent of the selling price in the event that a sale of the
property was made to any such person. The testimony further shows that the
respondent did not show the house to a great many persons and did show the house
several times to one Maguire, who became the purchaser thereof; that the
respondent and her husband performed considerable work in rehabilitating and
caring for the lawn on the premises during the time they occupied the house and
prior to the sale thereof.

   Assuming this to be a correct statement of the facts of the employment and
disregarding the strenuous and specific denials of the appellant,  it is the
contention of the appellant, first, that the findings of the court are without
support in the evidence; second, that the alleged oral contract for the payment
of a commission is void under the provisions of subdivision 6, section 1624, of
the Civil Code, and, third, that the alleged contract for the payment of a
commission was illegal and void for the reason that the respondent was not
licensed under the Real Estate Brokers' Act. It is an admitted fact that the
alleged agreement was not evidenced by any writing nor any written memorandum of
any kind or character. It is also admitted that the respondent had no broker's
license.

     The respondent has not favored this court with any brief in support of the
conclusions of the trial court. Whether this was because his investigations were
fruitless in that behalf or because he considered the conclusions so manifestly
impregnable that to supply authorities would be a work of supererogation and an
insult to the intelligence of this court, is not disclosed. Whatever may have
been his disposition in the matter, we have been unable to find any authorities
to support this judgment. It is apparent that respondent's compensation was
contingent upon the sale of the property and the amount thereof dependent upon
the sale price. We are unable to distinguish this case either as to the facts or
the law applicable thereto from the situation developed by the case of Dolan v.
O'Toole, 129 Cal. 488  [62 P. 92]. At page 489 it is said: "Defendant was the
owner of a certain mine, and had contracted with a third party for the sale of
it upon certain terms -- in substance, that the purchaser should be put in
possession for a specified time for the purpose of examination and development,
and, if found satisfactory, to pay therefor a specified price. Plaintiff was an
experienced miner and expert, and was well acquainted with the location of the
mine and the work done in it, and while the conditional purchasers were in
possession under their contract and prospecting for ore, defendant made a
contract with the plaintiff  for his services 'to be rendered in aiding him
(defendant) to consummate the sale under the contract,' and for which, if the
sale was made, he was to receive ten per cent of the purchase price. It
appearing that the said contract for plaintiff's services was oral, objection
was made and sustained to the evidence. It was then offered by the plaintiff to
be shown that at the request of the purchasers plaintiff gave them directions
where to work to develop ore, that his directions were followed successfully and
resulted in such development of ore as induced the purchase under said contract.
The court sustained the objection to the offered evidence and rendered judgment
for the defendant, and plaintiff appeals.  Section 1624 of the Civil Code
provides: 'The following contracts are invalid unless the same, or some note or
memorandum thereof, be in writing and subscribed by the party to be charged, or
by his agent; . . . 6. An agreement authorizing or employing an agent or broker
to sell real estate for compensation or commission.' In Shanklin v. Hall, 100
Cal. 26 [34 P. 636], the court below made the following findings of fact: 'That
on the seventeenth day of April, 1890, the plaintiff and defendant entered into
an oral agreement, whereby it was agreed between them that plaintiff should use
his knowledge and influence on behalf of, and render his services to, defendant
to enable him to sell or exchange the lands mentioned in the complaint herein,
for which plaintiff was to be paid by the defendant the sum of four hundred and
fifty dollars as soon as the sale or exchange was effected through his, the
plaintiff's, knowledge, influence, or services rendered to him, the defendant,'
and that the plaintiff rendered the services as agreed, and that a transfer of
the land was made by virtue of such services  of plaintiff; and the court below
concluded that plaintiff was entitled to recover. Upon appeal this court came to
the opposite conclusion, holding that the contract was void under the provisions
of the code above cited. Counsel for appellant attempts to distinguish Shanklin
v. Hall, supra, from the case at bar, and for this purpose refers to the
testimony in that case, showing that Shanklin was engaged in the real estate
business, and that he made new terms with the proposed purchaser which were
accepted by Hall. But this statute is not confined to those who make a business
of buying and selling real estate for others, but includes every person who in
any case comes within its provisions." In this connection it may be noted that
this court in the case of Patterson v. Torrey, 18 Cal. App. 346 [123 P. 224],
stated that the fact that plaintiff performed valuable services at defendant's
request constitutes no ground for recovering compensation therefor, in the
absence of some note or memorandum subscribed by the defendant whereby plaintiff
was employed or authorized to negotiate the sale. To the same effect is Hicks v.
Post, 154 Cal. 22 [96 P. 878], where the supreme court said: "The fact that,
acting under an invalid agreement, he made efforts to find purchasers, cannot,
of course, operate to prevent the other party from asserting the invalidity of
the contract. To hold the contrary would be to abrogate the statute of frauds."
(Quoting Shanklin v. Hall, 100 Cal. 26 [34 P. 636]; Dolan v. O'Toole, supra.)
There are numerous cases cited in each of the foregoing cases and a long line of
authorities independent of these and to the same effect which are in our
judgment conclusive as to this phase of the case.

     Furthermore, we are satisfied that the respondent's case comes squarely
within the inhibition of the Real Estate Brokers' Act (Stats. 1919, p. 1252),
the material portions of which, having a bearing on this controversy, are as
follows: "A real estate broker within the meaning of this act is a person,
copartnership or corporation who, for a compensation, sells, or offers for sale,
buys, or offers to buy, or negotiates the purchase or sale or exchange of real
estate . . . . One act, for a compensation, of buying or selling real estate of
or for another, or offering for another to buy or sell or exchange real estate .
. . shall constitute the person, copartnership or corporation making such offer,
sale  or purchase, exchange or lease, . . . a real estate broker within the
meaning of this act." Section 20 bars a recovery of a commission by a person not
licensed as therein provided, and reads as follows: "No person, copartnership or
corporation engaged in the business or acting in the capacity of a real estate
broker or a real estate salesman within this state shall bring or maintain any
action in the courts of this state for the collection of compensation for the
performance of any of the acts mentioned in section two hereof without alleging
and proving that such person, copartnership or corporation was a duly licensed
real estate broker or real estate salesman at the time the alleged cause of
action arose." The contract sued upon is clearly comprehended within the terms
of this statute, and is, therefore, illegal and void, and cannot support a
judgment in favor of the respondent, who was not licensed in the manner therein
provided.

   The judgment is reversed.

   Works, P. J., and Craig, J., concurred.


                              89 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            MARGARETHA HOAR, Plaintiff and Respondent, v. DONALD L.
                    TULEY et al., Defendants and Appellants

                                 Civ. No. 35790

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Five

          12 Cal. App. 3d 344; 90 Cal. Rptr. 559; 1970 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      1630


                                October 26, 1970

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of San Luis Obispo County, Timothy I.
O'Reilly, Judge.

COUNSEL: Madden & Hart and James A. Madden for Defendants and Appellants.

W. W. Eschwig for Plaintiff and Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Stephens, J., with Kaus, P. J., and Aiso, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: STEPHENS

OPINION

     This appeal is from a judgment for plaintiff (Margaretha Hoar) and against
defendants (Donald L. Tuley and others) for the amount of a nonnegotiable
promissory note dated January 19, 1965.   The principal defense is that the
promissory note was given for services which required a real estate broker's
license and the plaintiff's assignor was not so licensed, and therefore the note
was not supported by legal consideration.

   The facts are the plaintiff was the divorced wife of one French.  French
received the note in question as part payment for services rendered in obtaining
the termination of an option to purchase certain real property owned by
defendants.  The option was held by one Shannon, and it gave him the right to
purchase some 878 acres in the Paso Robles area for $ 325 per acre.  The
termination date of the option was February 15, 1965.  French  had been involved
in the transaction in which the option had been obtained, and was known to be on
good terms with Shannon.  The defendants came to the conclusion that the
property could be sold at a higher figure and therefore desired that the option
not be exercised.  To obtain a termination of the option, defendants agreed to
return $ 5,000 which had been paid by Shannon for the option.  French was to be
paid $ 5,000 for his service if he could talk Shannon into relinquishment of the
option.  French performed the services and was paid some cash and the remainder
by the January 19, 1965 note in question, payable upon a subsequent sale of the
land. 1 The land was ultimately sold to a person other than Shannon.  Plaintiff
paid French $ 2,000 for an assignment of the note, and upon its becoming due and
payable, sought its satisfaction, only to be met with the stated defense on
refusal to satisfy it. 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   "An
Agreement

   Jan. 19, 1965

   "It is hereby agreed between Phillip B. French and Donald Tuley, representing
the Coastal Land and Cattle Company.  That for services rendered by said Phillip
B. French (not a commission for the sale of real estate) the above mentioned
Coastal Land and Cattle Company do on this date hand Phillip B. French $
2,000.00 as partial payment for the above mentioned services and also do hereby
agree to pay Phillip B. French an additional $ 3,000.00 When either of the
portions of property optioned by William Shannon from said company clear
escrow." [Punctuation, sic.]
2   The testimony of plaintiff clearly establishes that she was fully aware of
the defenses prior to the assignment of the note to her.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Is the instrument used upon illegal or void in any way?  Was French in
violation of any pertinent laws relating to real estate salesmen? The trial
court specifically found in the negative as to both of these questions.

   The services requested of and rendered by French are succinctly testified to
by him.  He responded to the question, "Now, what services did you render
pursuant to this agreement?" by saying "The services I rendered were exactly --
Mr. Tuley said, 'We will pay you $ 5,000 if you can talk Mr. Shannon into giving
up the option.'" "That was the only service that I was required to render." It
is conceded that French was not and never had been a real  estate broker. 3 He
was at all times pertinent here a real estate salesman. 4 The crux of the
defense involves portions of Business and  Professions Code sections 10130 and
10136, which were in effect at the time:

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Business
and Professions Code, section 10131: "A real estate broker within the meaning of
this part is a person who, for a compensation or in expectation of a
compensation, does or negotiates to do one or more of the following acts for
another or others:

   "(a) Sells or offers to sell, buys or offers to buy, solicits prospective
sellers or purchasers of, solicits or obtains listings of, or negotiates the
purchase, sale or exchange of real property.

   ". . . .
4   Business and Professions Code, section 10132: "A real estate salesman within
the meaning of this part is a natural person who, for a compensation or in
expectation of a compensation, is employed by a licensed real estate broker to
do one or more of the acts set forth in Sections 10131, 10131.1 and 10131.2."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   "Section 10130.  It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business, act
in the capacity of, advertise or assume to act as a real estate broker or a real
estate salesman within this State without first obtaining a real estate license
from the division."

   "Section 10136.  No person engaged in the business of acting in the capacity
of a real estate broker or a real estate salesman within this State shall bring
or maintain any action in the courts of this State for the collection of
compensation for the performance of any of the acts mentioned in this article
without alleging and proving that he was a duly licensed real estate broker or
real estate salesman at the time the alleged cause of action arose."

   The issue raised here was pinpointed by the trial court when it stated: "Now,
regardless of what Mr. French said or wrote, or what Mr. Tuley said or wrote, if
this is in fact a real estate transaction, then he's [French is] covered
obviously by the real estate laws." The judge determined the issue against
defendants by his finding that "The court specifically finds that the instrument
sued upon is not and was not illegal or void in any way.  The court specifically
finds that the plaintiff's assignor, Phillip B. French, at no time was in
violation of any pertinent law of the State of California relating to real
estate salesmen, or in violation of any other law."

   It cannot be argued but that if the services rendered were of such a nature
as to require the involvement of a licensed real estate broker, no such broker
was here in evidence so far as this transaction is concerned. 5 We therefore
reach the question of whether the services were of the nature requiring
involvement of a licensed broker. We conclude that they were and that the
promissory note fails for lack of legal consideration. 6

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   The
testimony of French was sufficient to establish that he was a licensed salesman,
but this would not suffice unless he was working under a broker in that
instance.  ( Gipson v. Davis Realty Co., 215 Cal.App.2d 190 [30 Cal.Rptr. 253];
Grand v. Griesinger, 160 Cal.App.2d 397 [325 P.2d 475].)
6   The complaint also must necessarily be declared insufficient to allege a
cause of action on this claim, for it did not (and under the facts, could not)
allege the necessary licensing to comply with Business and Professions Code
section 10136.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The services which were rendered by French classified him as a person who
"negotiates the purchase, sale, or exchange of real estate." In the case of Pac.
etc. Dev. Corp. v. Western Pac. R.R. Co., 47 Cal.2d 62 [301 P.2d 825], the court
had occasion to consider the definition of an option in a case involving the
statute of frauds.  The court there (at p. 68) concluded that "a contract
employing a broker to obtain an option for the  purchase of real property, like
a contract employing a broker to purchase or sell real property ( Steiner v.
Rowley, 35 Cal.2d 713, 717 [221 P.2d 9]; Marks v. Walter G. McCarty Corp., supra
[33 Cal.2d 814 (205 P.2d 1025)]), comes within the statute and must be in
writing."  The court there defined the nature of the services which would bring
an employment contract within the statute, stating (at pp. 67-68): "[The] phrase
'to sell or purchase' includes 'to aid or assist in the purchase or sale' of
real estate. ( Hooper v. Mayfield, 114 Cal.App.2d 802, 806 [251 P.2d 330];
Duckworth v. Schumacher, 135 Cal.App. 661, 666 [27 P.2d 919].) Such broad
construction of the term conforms with one of the primary purposes of the
statute, the protection of real estate owners from the assertion of false claims
by brokers and agents.  ( Toomy v. Dunphy, 86 Cal. 639, 642 [25 P. 130]; also
Gorham v. Heiman, 90 Cal. 346, 358 [27 P. 289]; Hooper v. Mayfield, supra, 114
Cal.App.2d 802, 807.) Likewise, the procurement of an option agreement for the
purchase of real property is a contract that aids or assists in the purchase or
sale of real property and properly comes within the provisions of the statute.
. . .  To hold otherwise would open the door to the assertion of unfounded
claims by brokers and others on the pretense of oral employment in real estate
transactions relative to options, and so frustrate the purpose of the statute."
Therefore, an agent, who for a fee to be paid by the owner of the property,
effectuates the resale of the option by its holder to the owner of the property,
is bound by the regulatory provisions of Business and Professions Code section
10131, subdivision (a). 7  "An agreement employing a person to act as a real
estate broker who is not licensed as such is illegal, void and unenforceable.
[Citations.] "( Estate of Prieto, 243 Cal.App.2d 79, 85 [52 Cal.Rptr. 80].)  A
real estate salesman may perform such services only on behalf of the real estate
broker by whom he is then employed, not in his individual capacity, even though
he be licensed under a broker.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   For
suggested forms of contract to protect brokers as to commission where an option
is involved, see California Real Estate Sales Transactions (Cont.Ed.Bar 1967),
sections 5.33-5.37, 5.75-5.89, 7.39.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The judgment is reversed.


                              90 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          WILLIAM E. DORLAND, as Administrator With the Will Annexed,
                  etc., Respondent, v. INEZ DORLAND, Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 24055

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

          178 Cal. App. 2d 664; 3 Cal. Rptr. 262; 1960 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      2641


                                 March 7, 1960

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A Petition for a Rehearing was Denied March 31, 1960,
and Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court was Denied May 4,
1960.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County and from orders amending judgment nunc pro tunc.  Charles T. Smith, Judge
pro tem.  *

*   Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

   Action for an accounting and for other relief.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1a) (1b) Decedents' Estates-- "Estate" as Entity.  --In a strict and technical
sense the "estate" of a deceased person is not a legal entity, though in common
legal parlance, in textbooks and in decisions the word is frequently so used as
to indicate that it imports the concept of an entity.

(2) Id. --Title to Property.  --An estate, as such, may not take title to real
property. When a person dies, the title to his real property vests, not in his
estate, but in his heirs and devisees, subject to administration.

(3) Judgments -- Correction -- Clerical Errors.  --A court has inherent power,
on motion of a party or on its own motion, to correct clerical errors in a
judgment at any time.

(4) Id. --Correction--Clerical Errors.  --Ordinarily, although originally and in
its literal significance a clerical error is one that has been made by a clerk
or some subordinate agent, the meaning has been broadened and extended so that
it now may include an error that may have been made by the judge or court.

(5) Id. --Correction--As to Parties: When Made.  --Corrections in a judgment so
as to require defendant to convey real property to plaintiff "as administrator"
rather than to the "estate" of decedent stand on essentially the same footing as
amendments to correct a misnomer. Such mistake may be corrected at any time on
motion.

(6) Id. --Correction--Clerical Errors.  --Where the amendment of a judgment does
not affect substantial rights of defendant, but consists in rectifying a
clerical mistake appearing on the face of the record, courts have consistently
displayed liberality in permitting amendment.

(7) Trial--Findings--Reference to Pleadings.  --A general finding that "all
material allegations of the complaint and the answer inconsistent herewith are
not true" should be condemned, but where all the facts necessary to support the
judgment are fully and specifically set forth in other detailed findings, the
general finding will be disregarded.

COUNSEL: George W. Trammell for Appellant.

Albert Vieri for Respondent.

JUDGES: Herndon, J.  Fox, P. J., and Ashburn, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: HERNDON

OPINION

     This case presents a classic example of the unnecessary complications,
trouble and expense which all too often result from the careless mistakes of
prevailing counsel  in the preparation of findings of fact, conclusions of law
and judgment.  Rather obvious mistakes of this nature were made in the present
case, necessitating amendments to the judgment which were ordered nunc pro tunc.
Appellant's major contention on this appeal challenges the power of the trial
court so to amend its judgment in the circumstances presented.

   Respondent William E. Dorland,  in his capacity as administrator c.t.a. of
the estate of Henrietta E. Dorland, deceased, brought this action against his
sister, the appellant Inez Dorland.  The complaint is entitled: "For accounting
and to impress trust on the real and personal property and for conversion." The
gist of the complaint is that the deceased, prior to her death and at a time
when she was advanced in age, mentally ill and incompetent, and under
appellant's undue influence, conveyed and delivered to appellant, her daugther,
certain described real and personal property. In paragraph XVI it is alleged:
"That your plaintiff charges that said defendant, Inez Dorland, holds in trust
the real property above-described for the estate; . . .  That she holds in trust
personal property, the description of which is well known to the defendant, but
only generally known to the plaintiff and which includes, silverware, rings,
brooches and the like; . . .  That she holds in trust 365 shares of stock and
additional property belonging to the decedent, the existence, extent and nature
of which can only be determined by an accounting." (Emphasis added.)

   By the prayer of his complaint, respondent administrator sought a judgment
(1)  requiring appellant "to account for all of the properties, monies and
assets which she received from the decedent or which she received on behalf of
the decedent. (2) That the estate have and recover judgment against the
defendants for such sums as the accounting may show to be due.  (3) That the
court make its order declaring the defendant, Inez Dorland, trustee for the
benefit of the estate of the [described] real estate . . .  (4) That the court
make its order declaring the defendant, Inez Dorland, trustee of the rings,
brooches, silverware and other personal property obtained from the said decedent
by the defendant.  (5) That the court make its order ordering the said
defendant, Inez Dorland, to recover to the estate of the decedent the properties
so held in trust, or (6) That the estate have and recover judgment against the
defendant, Inez Dorland, in the sum of $ 15,000 . . ." (Emphasis added.)

   After a nonjury trial, judgment was ordered in favor of respondent
administrator. The findings of fact, although in  many respects quite
inartificial in form, contain direct, express and sufficient findings to the
effect that the execution of the deed conveying the real property in question to
decedent and appellant as joint tenants was induced by appellant's undue
influence, and that the deed was executed at a time when decedent was mentally
incompetent.

   It was also found, among other things, that appellant had in her possession
certain described items of personal property and that she held the same "in
trust for the estate of the decedent herein," and, further, that appellant held
"in trust for the estate of the decedent certain [real] property which now
stands in the name of the defendant which is described as follows:
[description]."

   In the conclusions of law, the trial court declared as follows, among other
things; that during the year 1949 appellant became a trustee for the benefit of
the decedent of various items of personal property; that in the year 1953
appellant became a trustee for the benefit of the decedent of the described real
property, which in that year was transferred to appellant and decedent as joint
tenants; that appellant "now holds in trust the said real property"; and that
"the plaintiff as administrator of the estate of the decedent is entitled to
have the following property conveyed and delivered to him by the defendant: . .
. [description] . . ."

   The judgment, as originally entered on July 17, 1958, read in material part
as follows: "I. That the defendant Inez Dorland holds as trustee for the estate
of Henrietta E. Dorland, deceased, the following personal property: [There
follows a description of certain personal property and the real property in
question.] II. That the defendant Inez Dorland shall convey the said real
property to the estate of Henrietta E. Dorland, deceased, and shall transfer to
said estate 36 shares of National Steel and Shipbuilding Co. stock and deliver
the same to its administrator after they have been transferred and said
defendant shall deliver to the estate of Henrietta E. Dorland, deceased, the
said two rings and deliver the same to the Administrator of the said estate."

   It appears that on October 28, 1958, appellant executed, and through her
attorney delivered to counsel for respondent, a quitclaim deed conveying the
real estate in question to "the estate of Henrietta E. Dorland, deceased."
Promptly thereafter respondent caused this deed to be recorded.

   Apparently a report from a title insurance company brought to respondent's
counsel a realization of the fact  that the deed naming "the estate" of the
decedent as grantee was invalid and ineffective.  On December 19, 1958,
respondent served and filed his "Motion to correct judgment and points and
authorities and affidavit." This motion sought an order amending the judgment so
that it would require appellant to convey the real property to respondent as
administrator rather than to the estate of the decedent. In support of his
motion, respondent among other things stated: "That the title company has
refused to issue insurance  on the said deed of Inez Dorland based on the case
of Tanner v. Best's Estate, et al., 104 P.2d 1084, 40 CA2d 442, which reads as
follows: '"The 'estate' of a decedent is not an entity known to the law, and is
neither a natural nor an artificial person, but is merely a name to indicate the
sum total of assets and liabilities of a decedent, or of an incompetent, or a
bankrupt."'"

   After a hearing on respondent's motion, the court, on January 6, 1959,
entered a minute order directing that the findings of fact, conclusions of law
and judgment be amended in certain specified particulars.  On January 15, 1959,
the court signed and filed a formal written order reciting that "through
inadvertence and a clerical error, it [sic] was omitted from the records of said
judgment reference to the fact that the person in favor of whom a trust was
found to exist and the person in whose favor judgment was obtained was the
plaintiff." The order further directed that the two paragraphs of the judgment
above quoted be amended nunc pro tunc so that the same would read as follows:
"I. That the defendant holds the following personal property in trust for the
plaintiff herein and the following real property in trust for the heirs and/or
devisees of Henrietta E. Dorland, deceased, subject to administration by the
Plaintiff herein: [There follows a description of certain personal property and
the real property in question.] II. That the defendant Inez Dorland shall convey
said real property to the heirs and/or devisees of Henrietta E. Dorland,
deceased, subject to administration by William E. Dorland, administrator
with-the-will-annexed of the Estate of Henrietta E. Dorland, deceased. Defendant
is further ordered to transfer and deliver to William E. Dorland, as
administrator-with-the-will-annexed of the Estate of Henrietta E. Dorland,
deceased, the 36 shares of stock of the National Steel and Shipbuilding Company,
and shall also deliver the one carat ring to plaintiff as
administrator-with-the-will-annexed of the said estate."

    Appellant has appealed from: (1) the minute order of January 6, 1959,
directing that the judgment, findings of fact and conclusions of law be amended
nunc pro tunc; (2) the formal written order of January 15, 1959; and (3) the
judgment as amended.  Appellant's first and major contention is that there was
no clerical error in the rendition or entry of the original judgment, and that,
accordingly, the trial court was without power to amend or correct the judgment
nunc pro tunc.

   Our conclusions with respect to the determinative question are these: (1)
that the judgment, as corrected by the order of January 15, 1959, in every
material and substantial sense is in complete conformity with the intent of the
trial court's decision as evidenced (a) by the minute order of May 27, 1958,
which constituted the first informal indication of the decision, and wherein
judgment was ordered for plaintiff "declaring the defendant to be trustee for
the benefit of plaintiff" as to the property in controversy, (b) by the findings
that decedent was mentally incompetent when she conveyed the property in
controversy to defendant, and that decedent had been induced to part with said
property by undue influence exerted by defendant, and (c) by the declaration in
the conclusions of law that plaintiff as administrator was entitled to have the
property in question conveyed and delivered to him by the defendant; and (2)
that the amendments of the judgment, which were accomplished by the nunc pro
tunc order, effected no change in the substantial provisions of the judgment,
but served only to correct mistakes which were purely formal in nature.

     It is unquestionably true, as appellant argues, that in a strict and
technical sense the estate of a deceased person is not a legal entity.  Thus, it
is well-known that an estate, as such, may not take title to real property. When
a person dies, the title to his real property vests, not in his estate, but in
his heirs or devisees, subject to administration.  It follows that there was an
obvious formal mistake in the language of the  original judgment which ordered
the defendant to convey the real property in question to the decedent's estate.

     On the other hand, in common legal parlance, in the textbooks, and even in
the decisions, the word "estate" is frequently so used as to indicate that it
imports the concept of an entity. In any event, the true purpose, purport and
effect of the original judgment were clear and unmistakable.   Obviously it was
designed and intended to divest the defendant of title to, and of possession of,
property which the decedent would have been entitled to recover on her own
account had she survived.  Manifestly, the action was brought by plaintiff in
his representative capacity to vindicate and enforce the rights of those whom
the law authorizes him to represent, to wit: creditors and heirs or devisees and
legatees, as the case may be.  The amended judgment divested defendant of
nothing that was not taken from her by the original judgment.

     It is well settled that a court has inherent power, on motion of a party or
on its own motion, to correct clerical errors in a judgment or order at any
time.  ( Bastajian v. Brown, 19 Cal.2d 209, 214 [120 P.2d 9]; Estate of Goldberg
, 10 Cal.2d 709, 717 [76 P.2d 508]; LaMar v. Superior Court, 87 Cal.App.2d 126,
129-130 [196 P.2d 98]. See also 29 California Jurisprudence 2d 13, Judgments,
section 99, and cases cited.) The distinction between a clerical error or
misprision, which is amendable, and a judicial error, which is not, has been
developed in a number of cases.   "Ordinarily, although originally and in its
literal significance, a clerical error is one that has been made by a clerk or
some subordinate agent, latterly the meaning has been broadened and extended so
that it now may include an error that may have been made by the judge or by the
court." ( Estate of Goldberg, supra, at 715.)

     The corrections in the judgment here made by subsequent amendment stand on
essentially the same footing as amendments to correct a misnomer.  It long has
been recognized that such mistakes may be corrected at any time on motion.  (
Mirabito v. San Francisco Dairy Co., 8 Cal.App.2d 54, 57-58 [47 P.2d 530];
Thomson v. L. C. Roney & Co., 112 Cal.App.2d 420, 425-426, 427 [246 P.2d 1017].
See also Thompson v. Southern Pac. Co., 180 Cal. 730, 734 [183 P. 153]; Smith v.
Pickwick Stages System, 113 Cal.App. 118, 122 [297 P. 940] et seq.; Walsh v.
Decoto, 49 Cal.App. 737 [194 P. 298], passim; Leviston v. Swan, 33 Cal. 480, 484
; Boust v. Superior Court, 162 Cal. 343, 345 [122 P. 956]; City & County of San
Francisco v. Brown, 153 Cal. 644 [96 P. 281], passim.)   Where, as in the
instant case, "the amendment does not affect substantial rights of the
defendant, but consists in the rectifying of a clerical mistake appearing on the
face of the record," courts have consistently displayed liberality in permitting
amendment.  ( Boust v. Superior Court, supra, 162 Cal. 343, 345.)  It would be a
reproach to the efficiency of our legal system if it did not sensibly provide a
summary method by which to correct obvious and formal mistakes of the character
here involved.

     Appellant has challenged the sufficiency of certain of the findings,
including the "catch-all" or "omnibus" finding "That all material allegations of
the complaint and the answer inconsistent herewith are not true." We agree that
findings of this character deserve unqualified condemnation.  ( Williams v. Wren
, 88 Cal.App. 607, 608 [263 P. 1038]; Holt Mfg. Co. v. Collins , 154 Cal. 265,
276 [97 P. 516]; Gordon v. Beck, 196 Cal. 768, 775 [239 P. 309].) However, it is
not necessary to rest the judgment in the present case upon the quoted omnibus
finding.  As we have previously observed, all the facts necessary to support the
judgment are fully and specifically set forth in other detailed findings.  While
there is justification for some of the criticism which appellant has leveled at
certain of the findings, we conclude, that when read in their entirety, they are
sufficient.  Where, as in this case, the trial court has made specific findings
which are in themselves entirely sufficient to sustain the judgment, general
findings of the type here criticized will be disregarded.  ( Turner v. Turner,
187 Cal. 632, 635-636 [203 P. 109].)

   The orders and the judgment appealed from are affirmed.


                              91 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          BERNASCONI COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE, Plaintiff and Appellant,
              v. OMNI HEALTH PLAN, INC., Defendant and Respondent.

                                  No. C018765.

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, THIRD APPELLATE DISTRICT

           35 Cal. App. 4th 1644; 42 Cal. Rptr. 2d 96; 1995 Cal. App.
          LEXIS 576; 95 Cal. Daily Op. Service 4900; 95 Daily Journal
                                    DAR 8326


                             May 23, 1995, Decided

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     The Publication Status of this Document has been Changed
by the Court from Unpublished to Published June 23, 1995.
   Review Denied August 31, 1995 and the Reporter of Decisions directed not to
publish this opn. in the Official Reports (Cal. Const., art. VI, § 14; rule 976,
Cal. Rules of Ct.), Reported at: 1995 Cal. LEXIS 5368.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of San Joaquin County, No. 253104, K. Peter
Saiers, Judge.

COUNSEL: Sack and Associates and Anthony Bentivegna for Plaintiff and Appellant.


Neumiller & Beardslee and Paul N. Balestracci for Defendant and Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Morrison, J., with Sims, Acting P. J., and Scotland, J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: MORRISON, J.

OPINION

     In this case we are called upon to decide whether a real estate broker may
bring an action for breach of contract, prior to his performance of the
contract, when he was unlicensed when the contract was executed, but licensed at
the time the alleged breach occurred. The trial court accepted the argument of
defendant Omni Health Plan, Inc., that the contract was void and unenforceable
and granted its motion for summary judgment. The broker, plaintiff Bernasconi
Commercial Real Estate, appeals from the subsequent judgment in favor of
defendant. We find the contract was not void and reverse the judgment.

   FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

   Plaintiff brought suit against CB Commercial and defendant for interference
with contract and breach of contract. The complaint alleged plaintiff and
defendant entered into a written agreement, the exclusive authorization to
locate space. The agreement ran from March 1, 1991, through November 30, 1991,
and gave plaintiff the exclusive right to locate commercial office space for
defendant in Stockton. The first two causes of action were against CB Commercial
and Doe defendants for interference with contract. The third cause of action
alleged defendant breached this agreement by refusing to  enable plaintiff to
perform. The fourth cause of action alleged that by refusing to enable plaintiff
to perform, defendant breached the implied covenant of good faith and fair
dealing.

   In an amended answer, defendant asserted as an affirmative defense that the
contract was illegal, void, and unenforceable because plaintiff was not a
licensed real estate broker at the time of contracting.

   Defendant then moved for summary judgment or summary adjudication. In its
separate statement of undisputed facts, defendant set forth that the agreement
was entered into before March 11, 1991; a broker's license was not issued to
plaintiff until April 24, 1991; defendant leased space at Paragon Plaza in
September of 1992; this property was not presented to defendant until after
January of 1992; and plaintiff did not propose the Paragon Plaza space and never
submitted any offer to lease. Defendant argued that since plaintiff was not
licensed as a real estate broker upon entering into the contract, the contract
was void. There was no contract to breach nor any contract to which a covenant
of good faith and fair dealing attached.

   Plaintiff did not dispute any of defendant's undisputed facts. Plaintiff did
offer additional facts, claiming defendant repudiated the agreement on June 3,
1991, and again on October 22, 1991, before the expiration of its term. In a
declaration, Ronald Bernasconi explained he passed his examination for a
broker's license on May 16, 1990. He completed an application and a fingerprint
card and sent in the fee. On March 26, 1991, the Department of Real Estate wrote
him, indicating a fictitious business name statement was required. After he
prepared and filed this statement, a license was issued on April 24, 1991.
Plaintiff argued the contract was not void if the cause of action for breach of
contract arose after the license was obtained. Plaintiff asserted there was a
factual issue on this point.

   The trial court found plaintiff was not licensed when the contract was
entered into so the contract was illegal, void, and unenforceable. It granted
the motion for summary judgment and judgment was entered for defendant.

   DISCUSSION

   "The motion for summary judgment shall be granted if all the papers submitted
show that there is no triable issue as to any material fact and that the moving
party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." ( Code Civ. Proc., § 437c,
subd. (c).) Defendant's motion for summary judgment was based on  undisputed
facts; it raised the issue of the legal effect of these undisputed facts.

     Business and Professions Code section 10130 provides, "It is unlawful for
any person to engage in the business, act in the capacity of, advertise or
assume to act as a real estate broker or a real estate salesman within this
state without first obtaining a real estate license from the department." The
agreement between plaintiff and defendant gave plaintiff the exclusive right to
locate commercial office space and to negotiate terms acceptable to defendant.
This activity requires a real estate broker's license. ( Bus. & Prof. Code, §
10131, subd. (b).) Anyone who acts as a real estate broker without a license may
be punished by a fine of up to $ 1,000 and/or six months in jail, or a fine of
up to $ 10,000 if the offender is a corporation. ( Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10139.)

    It is undisputed that at the time plaintiff entered into the agreement,
plaintiff did not have a real estate broker's license. Thus, plaintiff acted
unlawfully in entering into the contract for real estate broker services at that
time. We must determine the effect on the contract of that initial illegal act.

    As a general rule, contracts made in violation of regulatory statutes are
void. ( Asdourian v. Araj (1985) 38 Cal.3d 276, 291 [211 Cal.Rptr. 703, 696 P.2d
95]; Davenport & Co. v. Spieker (1988) 197 Cal.App.3d 566, 569 [242 Cal.Rptr.
911].) Defendant seizes upon this general rule and cites several cases which
state that a contract entered into by an unlicensed real estate broker is void
and unenforceable.  ( Estate of Prieto (1966) 243 Cal.App.2d 79, 85 [52
Cal.Rptr. 80]; Richardson v. Roberts (1962) 210 Cal.App.2d 603, 606 [26
Cal.Rptr. 829]; Abrams v. Guston (1952) 110 Cal.App.2d 556, 557 [243 P.2d 109];
Wise v. Radis (1925) 74 Cal.App. 765, 771 [242 P. 90]; see also Hoar v. Tuley
(1970) 12 Cal.App.3d 344, 348 [90 Cal.Rptr. 559]; Weber v. Tonini (1957) 151
Cal.App.2d 168, 171 [311 P.2d 132].) In all of these cases the broker was never
licensed.

   There are, however, exceptions to the rule that a contract entered into in
violation of a regulatory statute is void. The rule will not be enforced when
the penalties imposed by the Legislature for violation of the statute exclude by
implication the additional penalty of holding the contract void. ( Asdourian v.
Araj, supra, 38 Cal.3d at p. 291; Davenport & Co. v. Spieker, supra, 197
Cal.App.3d at p. 569.) Further, in certain circumstances the contract will be
enforced to avoid unjust enrichment to the defendant at the plaintiff's expense.
(Ibid.)

    Here, plaintiff did not perform the contract. The complaint alleges
defendant breached the contract by preventing plaintiff's performance.  Since
there has not been full performance, plaintiff cannot claim defendant was
unjustly enriched at his expense. Therefore, we must determine whether the
statutory scheme for licensing real estate brokers excludes, expressly or by
implication, the additional penalty of finding plaintiff's contract void.

    In the context of licensing statutes, when the statute provides penalties
for noncompliance, courts will not impose additional penalties. ( R. M. Sherman
Co. v. W. R. Thomason, Inc. (1987) 191 Cal.App.3d 559, 565 [236 Cal.Rptr. 577].)
"The courts will not impose penalties for noncompliance with statutory
provisions in addition to those that are provided expressly or by necessary
implication. [Citations.]" ( City Lincoln-Mercury Co. v. Lindsey (1959) 52
Cal.2d 267, 276 [339 P.2d 851, 73 A.L.R.2d 1420].) Before declaring a contract
made in violation of a statute void, we must examine the statute as a whole to
determine whether the Legislature intended that a contract in contravention of
it should be void. ( Vitek, Inc. v. Alvarado Ice Palace, Inc. (1973) 34
Cal.App.3d 586, 591-592 [110 Cal.Rptr. 86].)

   In Vitek, Inc. v. Alvarado Ice Palace, Inc. , supra, 34 Cal.App.3d 586, a
contractor executed a contract to serve as general contractor in the
construction of an ice rink. The contractor signed the contract on Friday; its
license was renewed the following Monday when the contractor began work. Since
the contractor had a license "at all times during performance" of the contract,
he could bring a suit to recover his compensation under Business  and
Professions Code section 7031. That section 7031 had been satisfied did not
resolve whether the contractor could recover under the contract. The court
considered the additional question of whether the contract was illegal and void,
and therefore unenforceable, because it was executed by an unlicensed
contractor. (34 Cal.App.3d at p. 590.) The court noted many cases, in dicta, and
a least one text writer stated a contract executed by an unlicensed contractor
in violation of the law was void. The court rejected that view: "We are
convinced, however, that sort of broad statement is improper where the
Legislature itself has defined the sanctions." ( Id. at p. 591.) In finding the
contract valid, the court noted the prohibited act was malum prohibitum, not
malum in se. It reasoned the contract would be void only if the Legislature
intended such result to deter the prohibited act. ( Id. at p. 593.) The court
concluded finding the contract void was not necessary to further the policy of
the licensing laws. Protection of the public would not be frustrated by allowing
recovery under a contract by a qualified and experienced contractor whose only
disability was signing the contract the day before it renewed its license. ( Id.
at p. 594.)

   The exception to declaring an illegal contract void when another penalty is
provided is predicated on the maxim expressio unius exclusio alterius est (to
express one thing is to exclude another). ( R. M. Sherman Co. v. W. R. Thomason,
Inc., supra, 191 Cal.App.3d at p. 565; Vitek, Inc. v. Alvarado Ice Palace, Inc.,
supra, 34 Cal.App.3d at p. 593.) There are both criminal and administrative
penalties for violation of the real estate broker licensing requirements. ( Bus.
& Prof. Code, § 10139 & 10177.) While the presence of these penalties does not
mandate the conclusion that the contract cannot ever be void, we find statutory
evidence the Legislature did not intend a contract entered into by an unlicensed
broker to be necessarily void. Instead, as with contractors, the Legislature has
placed a condition upon recovery. Absent compliance with this condition, as the
cases cited by defendant indicate, a contract of an unlicensed broker is void.

   The condition is set forth in section 10136 of the Business and Professions
Code, which provides: "No person engaged in the business or acting in the
capacity of a real estate broker or a real estate salesman within this State
shall bring or maintain any action in the courts of this State for the
collection of compensation for the performance of any of the acts mentioned in
this article without alleging and proving that he was a duly licensed real
estate broker or real estate salesman at the time the alleged cause of action
arose." (Italics added.)

   The predecessor to this statute has been described as "an act of grace"
permitting recovery when the broker had no license when he entered into the
contract but became licensed by the time his cause of action, i.e., his
commission was earned, arose. ( Wise v. Radis, supra, 74 Cal.App. at p. 772.)
The predecessor statute was found to limit or modify the rule that would declare
the contract void. ( Houston v. Williams (1921) 53 Cal.App. 267, 271 [200 P. 55]
.) "Manifestly the legislature herein undertook to prescribe an essential
condition of recovery but limited its operation to the time when the cause of
action arose. By implication any earlier period was excluded. It is a reasonable
construction of the act to hold that it is unlawful for anyone to engage in the
business of a real estate broker without having secured a license, but he is not
precluded from recovering compensation for his services if he had such license
at the time his cause of action arose, although his contract may have been
executed prior to that time when he had no license." (Ibid.) The legislative
"act of grace" revives an otherwise illegal contract from the time the license
is obtained. Recognizing this revival, a court held a listing contract was not
void although the broker had no license at execution, because he had a license
when he procured a purchaser. ( Radich v. Cernokus (1924) 65 Cal.App. 452, 454
[224 P. 124].)

   Under the new version of the statute, a broker has been allowed to recover
commissions when he had a license, although he failed to obtain a license for
the office from  which services were rendered and for the fictitious name used
in rendering such services. ( Schantz v. Ellsworth (1971) 19 Cal.App.3d 289,
292-293 [96 Cal.Rptr. 783].) A broker was also permitted to recover when he was
licensed but the contract was entered into by his unlicensed alter ego. (Estate
of Baldwin (1973) 34 Cal.App.3d 596, 605 [110 Cal.Rptr. 189].) In Cline v.
Yamaga (1979) 97 Cal.App.3d 239 [158 Cal.Rptr. 598], the broker had a license
from 1963 to 1965 when the services were rendered, but the license expired
before the commission was payable in 1972 and 1973. The court recognized a
literal application of Business and Professions Code section 10136 would bar the
broker's action for his commission.  (97 Cal.App.3d at p. 245.) However, the
court declined to apply the statute literally as it "would transform the statute
into an unwarranted shield for the avoidance of a just obligation." (Ibid.) Most
recently, a court held a broker entitled to recover his commission because his
broker's license, although lapsed at the time he procured the buyer, had been
renewed before the sale was consummated and the commission payable. ( Estate of
Lopez (1992) 8 Cal.App.4th 317, 321 [10 Cal.Rptr.2d 67].)

   In rejecting a rigid, literal application of Business and Professions Code
section 10136, the courts look to the purpose of the licensing statutes. "The
purpose of the licensing requirement is to protect the public from the perils
incident to dealing with incompetent or untrustworthy real estate
practitioners." ( Schantz v. Ellsworth, supra, 19 Cal.App.3d at pp. 292-293.)
This purpose is deemed satisfied if the broker obtains a license before he
renders services. ( Id. at p. 293; Estate of Baldwin, supra, 34 Cal.App.3d at p.
605; Cline v. Yamaga, supra, 97 Cal.App.3d at p. 246.)

   The statutory scheme for licensing real estate brokers indicates that a
contract entered into by an unlicensed broker is not necessarily void and
unenforceable, but it is void if the broker never obtains a license. The
remaining question is whether the contract is revived only if the broker both
obtains a license and performs, or if revival occurs once the license is
obtained. Performance presents a stronger case for revival since it implicates
concerns of unjust enrichment. Nonetheless, enforcing a contract after the
license has been obtained, even in the absence of performance, still serves to
carry out the policy of the licensing laws.

    Business and Professions Code section 10136 permits a real estate broker to
bring an action "for the collection of compensation for the performance of any
of the acts mentioned in this article" if he was licensed when the alleged cause
of action arose. Defendant reads this statute to permit an action only if the
contract has been performed and compensation is due, while plaintiff reads it to
permit any action arising after the license was obtained.

    Similar language is used in  Business and Professions Code section 7031
subdivision (a), which provides in part: "[N]o person engaged in the business or
acting in the capacity of a contractor, may bring or maintain any action ... for
the collection of compensation for the performance of any act or contract for
which a license is required by this chapter without alleging that he or she was
a duly licensed contractor at all times during the performance of that act or
contract, ..." Generally, the term "compensation" denotes sums agreed on for
performance. ( Grant v. Weatherholt (1954) 123 Cal.App.2d 34, 42-43 [266 P.2d
185].) This section, however, has been held to include actions for breach of
contract, including those for nonperformance. ( Proffitt & Durnell Plumbing,
Inc. v. David H. Baer Co. (1966) 247 Cal.App.2d 518, 520 [55 Cal.Rptr. 764];
Currie v. Stolowitz (1959) 169 Cal.App.2d 810, 813 [338 P.2d 208].) Indeed, more
recently, a court has construed the term "compensation" in this context to
include all damages suffered for breach of a contractual obligation. ( General
Ins. Co. of America v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co. (1974) 38 Cal.App.3d 760,
762, fn. 1. [113 Cal.Rptr. 613])

    We see no reason not to employ this broader definition in construing
Business and Professions Code section 10136. Such an interpretation will promote
the purpose of the licensing laws. Only licensed brokers will be able to sue for
breach  of contract and only for those breaches that occurred after the license
was obtained. This interpretation excuses noncompliance only where compliance is
accomplished before the broker undertakes those acts for which a license is
required. Recovery is denied for any acts performed without the requisite
license. This limitation protects the public from the perils of dealing with an
incompetent or untrustworthy real estate broker. 1 ( Schantz v. Ellsworth, supra
, 19 Cal.App.3d at pp. 292-293.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   In Holm
v. Bramwell (1937) 20 Cal.App.2d 332, 336 [67 P.2d 114], which was decided when
the language of Business and Professions Code section 7031 provided a contractor
could not bring an action without alleging and proving he had a license at the
time " 'the alleged cause of action arose,' " the court found a contract
executed by an unlicensed contractor was void, without considering whether it
was revived by subsequent licensing. Although this case addresses statutory
language identical to that in Business and Professions Code section 10136, we
question its continued validity in light of the more liberal approach to illegal
contracts now used in licensing cases. (See 1 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (9th
ed. 1987) Contracts, § 452, p. 402.) The court in Vitek suggested that in cases
under the old version of the contractor's licensing statute there might be
reason to conclude the contract itself was void because the cause of action
could arise upon execution, at least in the proper case of an anticipatory
breach. ( Vitek, Inc. v. Alvarado Ice Palace, Inc., supra, 34 Cal.App.3d at p.
591, fn. 5.) In tracing the language of Business and Professions Code section
7031, the court stated the earlier version requiring a license " 'at the time
the cause of action arose' " might mean the time of execution in certain cases.
(34 Cal.App.3d at p. 594.) We simply note this is not such a case since
plaintiff alleges the breach occurred and thus the cause of action arose after
the license was issued.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Plaintiff's failure to hold a broker's license upon execution of the
contract does not render it necessarily void. Since plaintiff asserts defendant
breached  the contract after the license was obtained, there is a factual issue
whether the contract was then void. Defendant is not entitled to judgment as a
matter of law; it was error to grant the motion for summary judgment.

   The judgment is reversed. Plaintiff shall recover costs on appeal.

   Sims, Acting P. J., and Scotland, J., concurred.


                              92 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           CHARLES A. DUGGAN, Plaintiff and Respondent, v. JOHN HASSO
                       et al., Defendants and Appellants.

                                  No. A019074.

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FIRST APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION FOUR

           185 Cal. App. 3d 1184; 230 Cal. Rptr. 315; 1986 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2071


                               September 29, 1986

NOTICE:    NOT CITABLE - ORDERED NOT PUBLISHED

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Review den. Dec. 31, 1986 and Reporter of Decisions
directed not to publish this opn. in the Official Reports (Cal. Const., art. VI,
§ 14; rule 976, Cal. Rules of Ct.)

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Napa County, No. 39856, Philip A. Champlin,
Judge.

COUNSEL: Graham & James, Jared E. Peterson and Martin H. Dodd for Defendants and
Appellants.

 Dexter R. Jacobson for Plaintiff and Respondent.

OPINION BY: SABRAW

OPINION

    SABRAW, J.

   In this case we hold that the provisions of section 10136 of the Business and
Professions Code, which require any person to be licensed in order to collect
compensation for real estate sales services, was designed to protect the public
from the unskilled or unscrupulous real estate agent but not to shield a real
estate investor from liability for false promises of future partnership profits
resulting from joint purchases and sales of certain real estate.

   Defendants John Hasso, Elissa, N.V., Pacific Midlands N.V., and Rumba N.V.
appeal from a $1,642,908.75 judgment entered on a jury verdict against them.
Although we conclude that liability was properly established, we reverse because
of error involving accrual and computation of plaintiff Charles Duggan's
damages.

 I. THE FACTS AND PROCEDURE

   Prior to emigrating from Argentina where he was born, plaintiff Duggan
practiced law there. In 1969, Duggan became an instructor at Pacific Union
College in Napa County. A number of years later, Duggan met Jennifer Hasso who
was a student at the college and the daughter of John and Hebe Hasso. At about
the same time, defendant John Hasso moved his family to the Napa Valley from the
Middle East where he had been a distributor for a number of major American
companies. Duggan and the Hassos became social friends after Jennifer introduced
him to her parents.

   In the spring of 1977, Hasso and Duggan discussed their mutual interests in
real estate investment. Duggan told Hasso that he was familiar with the real
estate market in Napa County and knew how to subdivide and develop property.
Hasso, in turn, told Duggan that he hoped to avoid paying a 10 percent broker's
commission at the time of purchasing real estate and wanted to work with
somebody who would "ride with him."

   As a result of their conversation, Duggan took Hasso to view two potential
purchases, the Noonan Winery and the Plateau Ranch. They discussed working
together in a partnership arrangement with Hasso providing funds to purchase,
maintain and develop properties and Duggan assuming responsibility for locating,
evaluating and negotiating the purchase and sale of the properties. They agreed
that Hasso would receive an 85 percent interest and Duggan a 15 percent interest
in the capital of the partnership and in the partnership profits. They did not
agree at that time on further details of the arrangement, such as the meaning of
"capital." However, by promising to loan Duggan $50,000 for living expenses
(after Duggan indicated that his partnership responsibilities would require him
to take a leave of absence from his  teaching duties), Hasso demonstrated his
own belief that they had formed a working relationship.

   Shortly thereafter, Hasso left on a trip to the Middle East. While he was
away, Hasso maintained communications with Duggan regarding the progress of
Duggan's activities. Based on those communications, Duggan negotiated the
purchase of the Noonan Winery and Plateau Ranch properties. Despite the fact
that the properties were being acquired as part of the joint undertaking, the
purchase contracts Duggan executed indicated that title was to be taken in his
name, rather than in the name of both men. However, when escrow closed, title to
the winery property was taken in the name of Hebe Hasso and the ranch title was
taken in the name of Kim Susan Hasso, one of the Hassos' daughters.

   During his overseas trip, John Hasso obtained tax advice from an English
attorney who suggested that he form a corporation in the Netherlands Antilles, a
tax haven, and take title to the properties being purchased in the name of that
entity. Based on that advice, Hasso incorporated an entity he named Elissa,
N.V., and later had title to the Plateau Ranch transferred to it from his
daughter. When Elissa was liquidated in 1979, the assets held in its name were
transferred to Pacific Midland N.V. and Rumba, N.V., two other Netherlands
Antilles corporations that were nominally owned by John Hasso's mother-in-law,
but which were actually managed and controlled by Hasso.

   While Hasso was still outside the United States, Duggan located several more
properties for possible acquisition, the Watts property, the Valley View
property and two Lake Tahoe condominiums. When Hasso returned, he agreed that
Duggan should ask Attorney George Humphreys to prepare a formal partnership
agreement. Although Duggan had never been admitted to practice law in
California, he and Humphreys had previously formed a partnership in which Duggan
purported to be authorized to render international legal advice. 1 Hasso and
Duggan later met in Humphrey's law office and executed a memorandum of
understanding concerning their joint undertaking. 2 Humphreys, who  was
supposedly representing Hasso's interests, told Hasso that the memorandum was a
temporary, incomplete, document because it did not identify the property
involved. Duggan mentioned that future acquisitions would require separate joint
venture agreements and expressed his concern that the memorandum did not
reference Hebe Hasso or Elissa, N.V. He was also concerned that the meaning of
partnership "capital" was not defined.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1    Duggan
later enrolled in Boalt Hall School of Law at the University of California,
Berkeley, and received a Master of Laws degree in December, 1981.
2    The memorandum of understanding stated:

   "THIS MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING is entered into on September 30, 1977, at
[illegible], California.

   "1. The parties to this agreement are JOHN HASSO and CHARLES A. DUGGAN.

   "2. The parties have been conducting business as an oral partnership and
contemplate in the future entering into a more formal written partnership
agreement.

   "3. The purpose of the partnership is to engage in the business of investment
in real property and other assets as agreed upon from time to time.

   "4. CHARLES A. DUGGAN has been and will continue to act as the agent of JOHN
HASSO and advise JOHN HASSO on international legal matters. JOHN HASSO
acknowledges that CHARLES A. DUGGAN is not licensed to practice law in the State
of California nor to render real estate nor investment advice. CHARLES A. DUGGAN
shall not be required to render full- time services, but shall render such
services as may be necessary or advisable to accomplish the purposes of the
partnership.

   "5. JOHN HASSO shall provide all capital, whether by way of capital
investment or by loans, required by the partnership from time to time, subject
to the continuing agreement of JOHN HASSO. JOHN HASSO shall have the right to
withdraw such capital at any time without notice.

   "Profits of the partnership shall, after reimbursement of expenses, be
divided in the ratio of Eighty-Five Percent (85%) (JOHN HASSO) and Fifteen
Percent (15%) (CHARLES A. DUGGAN).

   "6. The participation of the partners shall be on a non-exclusive basis and
either partner shall have the right to deal with others and to deal among
themselves on a different basis as specified from time to time by them. In the
absence of express written agreement to the contrary, the provisions of this
memorandum shall control.

   "7. The partnership shall retain a qualified accountant who shall maintain
partnership books and written statements of account shall be submitted to both
partners from time to time for the approval of each.

   "8. Except as provided herein, neither partner shall be liable for further
assessments.

   "9. Neither party shall assign his interest herein of any portion thereof."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    In the months which followed execution of the memorandum of understanding,
the previously identified properties (Watts, Valley View, Lake Tahoe) were
purchased. Two other properties, Trancas Avenue and Main Street, were also
acquired. Title to the Lake Tahoe condominiums was taken in Hebe Hasso's name,
while all the other properties were purchased in the name of Elissa, N.V. Hasso
and Duggan agreed that Duggan was to receive a 15 percent interest in the five
properties which he had located and negotiated to purchase. In the case of the
Trancas Avenue and Main Street properties, they agreed that Duggan would receive
lesser interests (5 and 10 percent, respectively) because they were located by
Hasso. The total amount paid for all of the properties was $1,649,355.08.

   About five months after the memorandum of understanding was executed, Duggan
presented Hasso with a draft joint venture agreement that had been prepared by
Attorney Humphreys. In addition to Duggan and Hasso, Elissa, N.V. was named as a
party to the agreement. It provided that no party had the right to withdraw
capital from the venture without the written consent of the other parties.
Blanks were left in the draft agreement so that the properties it covered could
be identified and other blanks were left for the percentage interests in capital
and income held by each party. Hasso told Duggan that he found the agreement too
complicated and declined to sign it. However, he agreed to put Duggan's name "in
title for 15 percent on the property." Several weeks after Duggan and Hasso
discussed the draft agreement, Hasso wrote to Duggan, describing their past
arrangement as one of "business partners." In the letter, Hasso informed Duggan
that he saw no need to come to a proposed meeting to discuss the partnership
agreement because he, Hasso, was terminating their relationship.

   Duggan later filed a complaint naming John Hasso, Hebe Hasso, Kim Susan
Hasso, and Elissa, N.V. as defendants. He requested general and punitive damages
based on a fraud claim and sought dissolution and an accounting of the
partnership alleged to have been formed by oral agreement.  Prior to trial,
Duggan amended his pleading in order to name Pacific Midland, N.V. and Rumba
N.V. as additional defendants. He also added a quantum meruit claim for the
reasonable value of his services. The claims against the Hassos' daughter were
dismissed prior to trial.

   At trial, Duggan presented evidence from which the jury could infer that
defendant Hasso's net worth was in excess of $10 million. The legal claim
(fraud) was tried to a jury while the equitable claims were simultaneously tried
by the court. Duggan prevailed on both his fraud theory and on his quantum
meruit theory.

   By its unanimous general verdict, the jury found that Hasso and the three
Netherlands Antilles corporations had committed intentional fraud. It awarded
Duggan $541,359 in general and $1,101,549.75 in punitive damages. The jury also
found against Hasso on his claim against Duggan.

   With regard to Duggan's partnership dissolution and accounting requests, the
court found that despite Duggan's and Hasso's intentions to form a partnership
or joint venture, no such relationship had ever arisen because, among other
things, they had failed to agree upon the percentage of profits and losses
assigned to each. However, it found that the parties had both acted in reliance
on Hasso's promise of partnership profits. It also found that the memorandum of
understanding (1) had been tainted by Humphrey's conflict of interest in
purporting to represent Hasso   while representing the interests of Duggan, (2)
constituted an agreement to agree, and (3) was executed by Hasso (a) without a
clear understanding of its consequences and (b) based on his belief that a
complete agreement would be executed later. It ruled, therefore, that there was
nothing to dissolve or subject to an accounting.

   Finding that it would be unjust and inequitable for Hasso to retain the
benefit of Duggan's efforts, the court awarded Duggan $156,435 on his quantum
meruit claim. It reached its determination of the reasonable value of Duggan's
services by taking judicial notice of the fact that 10 percent of the sale price
was a commonly used brokerage commission for sales of unimproved property. (With
respect to the Trancas Avenue property, the court used a 5 percent factor.) In
response to defendants' contention that Duggan could not recover on his quantum
meruit theory because he was not licensed as a real estate broker, the court
found that plaintiff had acted with the intention of becoming a partner or joint
venturer with defendant Hasso.  It also found that the parties intended to form
a partnership and had taken steps to do so. Based on those findings, the court
ruled that Duggan had not engaged in activities falling within the real estate
licensure requirements and was entitled to recover based on the exception to
those requirements discussed in Claudine v. West (1952) 109 Cal.App.2d 726 [241
P.2d 580]. Finally, the court also found that Elissa, N.V., Pacific Midlands
N.V. and Rumba N.V. were John Hasso's alter egos.

   Duggan elected to have judgment entered on the jury's fraud verdict. Based on
defendants' request for a statement of decision, the court directed Duggan's
counsel to prepare a proposed statement addressing those claims and issues the
court had decided. Entry of judgment was deferred until the final statement of
decision was entered. After judgment was entered, defendants brought motions for
a new trial and to vacate the judgment. Although the court expressed its
personal disagreement with the fraud verdict returned by the jury, it ruled that
there was sufficient evidence to support the verdict and concluded that there
was no necessary conflict between its statement of decision and the jury's
verdict. Accordingly, it denied defendants' motions. Defendants filed a timely
notice of appeal from the judgment.

   II. ANALYSIS A.  Plaintiff's Fraud Claim Was Not Barred by His Lack of a Real
Estate Broker License.

   Defendants contend that the judgment must be reversed because Duggan, an
individual not licensed as a real estate broker, was improperly permitted to
recover on what amounts to a claim for real estate broker services. We disagree.
Although the argument might have some plausibility in the context of the trial
court's quantum meruit award, it makes no sense with regard to plaintiff's fraud
claim.

   It is the general rule that individuals who engage in acts defined in the
Real Estate Act may not maintain or recover on claims for services rendered
unless they are properly licensed. 3 However, there are several well-settled
exceptions to the licensing requirements. A person who acts solely as a finder
is exempt. ( Tyrone v. Kelley (1973) 9 Cal.3d 1, 8 [106 Cal.Rptr. 761, 507 P.2d
65]; see also Tenzer v. Superscope (1985) 39 Cal.3d 18, 31 [216 Cal.Rptr. 130,
702 P.2d 212].) More importantly, a person acting as a principal, rather than as
agent for another, is also exempt. ( Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10131; 4 ( Jolton v.
Minster Graf &  Co. (1942) 53 Cal.App.2d 516, 520 [128 P.2d 101] [real estate
transactions]; cf.  Tufts v. Mann (1931) 116 Cal.App. 170 [2 P.2d 500] [real
estate transaction]; Epstein v. Stahl (1959) 176 Cal.App.2d 53 [1 Cal.Rptr. 143]
[unlicensed contractor defense where plaintiff had been acting as a principal].)
"The purpose of the Real Estate Act is not to raise revenue, but to protect the
public [citation], and therefore it does not by its specific terms require a
person to be licensed in order to act with regard to his own property or
affairs." ( Williams v. Kinsey (1946) 74 Cal.App.2d 583, 592 [169 P.2d 487].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3    Business
and Professions Code section 10136 provides: "No person engaged in the business
or acting in the capacity of a real estate broker or a real estate salesman
within the State shall bring or maintain any action in the courts of this State
for the collection of compensation for the performance of any of the acts
mentioned in this article without alleging and proving that he was a duly
licensed real estate broker or real estate salesman at the time the alleged
cause of action arose."
4    We note that when Business and Professions Code, section 10133 was
rewritten in 1985 (Stats. 1985, ch. 476, p. --) the amendment eliminated certain
language which had explicitly stated the acting-as-a-principal exception to the
licensing requirement. Former section 10133, subdivision (a) provided: "The
definitions of a real estate broker and a real estate salesman as set forth in
sections 10131 and 10132, do not include the following: (a) Anyone who directly
performs any of the acts within the scope of this chapter with reference to his
own property or, in the case of a corporation which through its regular officers
receiving no special compensation therefor, performs any of the acts with
reference to the corporation's own property." (Italics added.)

   By contrast, as revised, section 10133, subdivision (a)(1) now provides:

   "(a) The acts described in section 10131 are not acts for which a real estate
license is required if performed by: (1) A regular officer of a corporation or a
general partner of a partnership with respect to real property owned or leased
by the corporation or partnership, respectively, or in connection with the
proposed purchase or leasing of real property by the corporation or partnership,
respectively, if the acts are not performed by the officer or partner in
expectation of special compensation.

   It is the general rule that the omission of language from a statute by
amendment will be viewed as evidence of legislative intent to repeal the rule or
procedure encompassed within the omitted language. ( Froid v. Fox (1982) 132
Cal.App.3d 832, 837 [183 Cal.Rptr. 461].) However, we do not interpret the
omission of the reference to dealing with one's own property in the 1985
amendment as evidence of legislative intent to repeal the acting-as-a- principal
exception to the real estate licensing law for two reasons. First, after section
10133 was rewritten, section 10131 of the Business and Professions Code still
defined a real estate broker (within the meaning of the real estate licensing
law) as one who performs the specified acts "for another or others." By
implication, a person dealing with his own affairs still falls outside section
10131. Second, the Legislative Counsel's digest which accompanied Senate Bill
No. 1105 (which amended § 10133) provided: "Under existing law, it is unlawful
for any person to act as a real estate broker or salesperson without obtaining a
real estate license. Existing law also provides specific exceptions from those
provisions regarding [acts] relating to a person's own property. [P] This bill
would add an exemption for a general partner of a partnership dealing with
partnership property, as specified."

   Thus, in our view, the 1985 amendment was simply an effort to make it clear
that a general partner of a partnership dealing with partnership property falls
within the acting-as-a-principal exception. The omission of the "own property"
language appears to have been nothing more than a drafting oversight and was not
an effort to change existing law.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    As we have already noted, here, the trial court found that plaintiff did not
engage in activities requiring licensure, relying upon Claudine v. West, supra,
109 Cal.App.2d 726. Although the judgment which was entered was not based on
that finding because plaintiff elected fraud damages as his remedy, the trial
court was the only trier of fact to consider that issue.

   Defendants' efforts to distinguish Claudine v. West, supra, 109 Cal.App.2d
726 are unpersuasive. In that case, Claudine was the owner of two residential
buildings that rented for $26 per month. He orally agreed that West would
attempt to procure the sale or lease of the property to a federal agency. They
agreed that if the rentals on the property were increased through West's
actions, they would be divided between the two. West's efforts resulted in the
agency reconstructing the buildings and leasing them for $165 per month. In
order to comply with a lease provision prohibiting the lessor from having
secured the lease by promising to pay a brokerage fee or commission, Claudine
represented that West was his partner.

   For the first three years, West received 40 percent and Claudine received 60
percent of the rents pursuant to their oral agreement. They then executed a
written agreement to the same effect which also granted West a right of first
refusal if the  property was sold and a percentage interest in the sales price
if he elected not to exercise the right of first refusal. After six years,
Claudine filed an action to cancel the contract, to recover the funds that he
had paid to West under the oral and written agreements and for a declaration
that West had no interest in the property. Among other things, Claudine argued
that West had acted as an unlicensed real estate broker, thereby barring any
compensation for his efforts.

   The Court of Appeal concluded that West was not barred from receiving
compensation because the relationship between the parties was either a joint
venture or a partnership, there was no fraud or unjust enrichment on West's
part, Claudine received all that he had bargained for, the percentage paid to
West was not typical of a broker's normal commission and the increased rentals
would not have been received in the absence of Claudine's representation that
West was his partner. It held, therefore, that West had not violated the real
estate licensing law.

   In the present case, the jury found defendant Hasso committed intentional
fraud. To permit him to ignore his promise to pay plaintiff 15 percent of the
profits of the proposed partnership would unquestionably result in Hasso's
unjust enrichment. Here, as in Claudine, the percentage of profit to be paid to
plaintiff was not typical of a broker's compensation. By its general fraud
verdict, the jury implicitly found that Duggan acted in reliance on Hasso's
promise of a partnership interest. Just as in Claudine, where Claudine
represented that West was his partner, here Hasso wrote to plaintiff Duggan and
characterized their relationship as "business partners," long after all seven
properties were acquired. 5 When fairly analyzed, the present case is very close
to the facts of Claudine and not dissimilar as defendants suggest. These parties
each acted as principals and intended to realize profits from their joint
activities, not from the one-time purchase or sale of a property as is
frequently the case in an owner-broker relationship.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5
Defendants argue that before the Claudine theory of recovery may apply, it is
necessary for a plaintiff to prove that a partnership or joint venture actually
was formed. Although we have found no previous case identical to this one, we do
not believe the existence of a fully formed partnership or joint venture is
necessary in a fraud case as contrasted with a breach of contract claim. Here,
through its finding of intentional fraud, the jury implicitly found that Hasso
never intended to form a joint venture or partnership despite his representation
to Duggan. In such circumstances, requiring a plaintiff to show the existence of
a partnership or joint venture would permit the unscrupulous investor to totally
shield himself from liability for his intentional fraud.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    This case is also distinguishable from Weber v. Tonini (1957) 151 Cal.App.2d
168 [311 P.2d 132], where the parties explicitly provided that defendant Tonini
was the agent of plaintiff Weber for purposes of sale, exchange or rental of the
subject property. Here, the parties intended to create a partnership, not merely
an agency, and defendant himself described the relationship as one of "business
partners." In addition, in this case, Duggan executed many of the operative
documents in his own name. This was not a mere owner-broker relationship.

   We are sensitive to the possibility that creative attorneys and parties may
seek to overcome the bar of section 10136 by routinely alleging fraud. However,
of equal concern is the need to preclude those familiar with the real estate
licensing law from seeking out unlicensed individuals and inducing them to
expend time and effort in locating properties under a promise of a future
percentage of partnership profits from the acquired properties, all the while
intending to be able to lawfully refuse to compensate the individuals who
performed such service based on promises of partnership. Clearly, section 10136
was never intended to bar an action to recover damages for this type of
obviously fraudulent scheme.

   Here, plaintiff was acting as a principal as to several of the properties
where he signed contracts and/or escrow instructions and/or closing documents in
his own  name (the Noonan Winery, the Plateau Ranch, and the two Lake Tahoe
condominiums). In the case of the four remaining properties (Watts, Main Street,
Valley View and Trancas Avenue), plaintiff executed the purchase contracts,
escrow instructions and/or closing documents under a valid power of attorney
from Elissa, N.V., defendant Hasso's alter ego. That power of attorney granted
plaintiff broad and sweeping authority to act on behalf of Elissa, N.V., Hasso's
alter ego, unlike the limited agency powers usually delegated to a real estate
broker.

   Contrary to the customary situation in which a real estate broker is
compensated by a percentage commission at the time of the initial acquisition or
sale based upon the sale price of the real property in question, here plaintiff
was not to be compensated for his various activities until after the acquired
properties were sold and then only if the properties were sold for a profit.
Further, the percentage of profits promised to plaintiff in order to induce his
activities was larger than real estate commission percentages which are
customary in the brokerage business for such properties. Unlike the typical real
estate broker who is paid his or her commission whether profits are generated or
not, here plaintiff was intended to share in the risk that there would be no
profits at all. Finally, the loan of substantial funds by Hasso to Duggan for
living expenses was atypical of a normal broker- client relationship. In sum,
with regard to his fraud claim, plaintiff was not seeking a real estate broker
commission based on broker activities--he was seeking damages arising out of a
fraudulent promise on which he relied to his detriment in acting as a principal.

    B. There Was No Necessary Conflict Between the Jury Verdict and the Court's
Statement of Decision.

   Defendants argue that the trial court should have granted their post- trial
motions based on the purported conflict between the jury's fraud verdict and the
trial court's statement of decision. The contention is without merit.

   The jury clearly determined that defendant Hasso knowingly and falsely
promised plaintiff Duggan a partnership interest to induce his actions. That
conclusion is not inconsistent with the court's additional determination that
the parties did not take sufficient steps to actually create the promised
partnership. We find no error in this regard.

    C. Plaintiff's Compensatory Damages Were Improperly Computed.

   We summarily reject defendants' assertion that plaintiff's damages were
limited to a percentage of the value of the properties in question at the time
defendant Hasso terminated his relationship with plaintiff.  Weber v. Tonini,
supra, 151 Cal.App.2d 168, and Spielberg v. Granz (1960) 185 Cal.App.2d 283 [8
Cal.Rptr. 190], cited by defendants, each involved contract claims based on
claimed breaches of alleged joint venture or partnership agreements. Thus, they
are inapposite to the unique facts and fraud theory of this case. If the law
were as defendants suggest, a party intending to commit fraud under facts
similar to these could minimize or eliminate a plaintiff's damages resulting
from the fraud simply by giving notice as soon as the real estate purchases were
complete. Such a party could thereafter hold the subject property for several
more years before selling it and achieving a significant net profit, thus
further successfully benefiting from their fraudulent conduct. This is not the
law.

   While we conclude that plaintiff was entitled to recover fraud damages based
on the injuries he suffered as a result of defendants' deception, we hold that
the judgment must be reversed because certain of the damages evidence was
improperly admitted over defendants' valid objections. Plaintiff Duggan
repeatedly maintained that he was entitled to 15 percent of the net profits from
the sales of each of the properties he located and a lesser percentage of the
profits for the remaining properties. Nevertheless, Duggan  was permitted to
introduce evidence regarding the value of the Noonan Winery property at the time
of trial, a date several years after that property had actually been sold. The
value of that property after it was sold was clearly irrelevant to the amount of
damages suffered by Duggan when defendant Hasso refused to pay him the promised
15 percent of the net sale profits. Similarly, although one-half of the Trancas
Avenue property had been sold before trial, Duggan was improperly allowed to
introduce evidence regarding the value of the entire property at the time of
trial. For this reason, we must reverse the judgment and remand for a retrial of
the damages issues.

   We further conclude that the question of the amount of compensatory damages
related to the properties that had not yet been sold was also erroneously
determined because of the unique facts of this case. The measure of damages in a
fraud action is the difference between what the defrauded party has received and
that which he would have received and had a right to expect, but for the fraud.
( Civ. Code, §§ 1709, 3333.) 6 This was not a case of anticipatory breach of
contract in which Duggan could seek future damages at trial for sales that had
not yet occurred. Even under Duggan's theory of the case, defendant Hasso was
free to hold the subject properties for as long as he desired without being
required to sell them in order to determine whether a profit would be earned.
(This was particularly emphasized by Hasso's refusal to execute the proposed
written partnership agreement which would have granted plaintiff rights in this
regard.) Only upon the sale of the properties did Duggan expect to receive a
percentage of the net profits from those sales. In short,  the only fraud
damages incurred by the time of trial were those which arose from Hasso's
refusal to pay the promised portion of the net profits resulting from the sale
of the Noonan Winery and Trancas Avenue properties. Damages resulting from the
anticipated refusal of Hasso to pay Duggan the promised portion of the expected
net profits resulting from the sale of the other properties will not accrue
until those properties are, in fact, sold for a profit, if ever. (See Block v.
Tobin (1975) 45 Cal.App.3d 214, 220 [119 Cal.Rptr. 288] ["Anticipated profits
cannot be recovered if it is uncertain whether any profit would have been
derived at all."].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6    Contrary
to defendants' suggestion, the fraud damages in this case were not limited by
the "out-of-pocket" measure of Civil Code section 3343 dealing with the
purchase, sale, or exchange of property. Although property sales were involved
in this case, defendants' fraud was not due to misrepresentations which induced
plaintiff to buy property; the fraud encompassed a much broader set of
circumstances. Thus, the "benefit of the bargain" measure of damages ( Civ.
Code, §§ 1709, 3333), recognized by defendants as being "closely akin to that
which the wronged party would have received had they simply sued for breach of
contract," was the appropriate measure of damages.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Finally, we determine that it is not necessary for us to directly address
defendants' assertion that the punitive damages awarded by the jury were
excessive. Punitive damages should bear a reasonable relationship to the amount
of compensatory damages. ( Devlin v. Kearny Mesa AMC/Jeep/ Renault, Inc. (1984)
155 Cal.App.3d 381, 390 [202 Cal.Rptr. 204].) Because we hold that the amount of
compensatory damages was erroneously determined, we conclude that the award of
punitive damages should also be reversed. The jury awarded substantial
compensatory damages based, at least partially, on a premature, anticipated,
damages theory. The award of punitive damages might have been significantly less
if the jury had based its assessment solely on the amount of compensatory
damages resulting from the sales of the Noonan Winery and Trancas Avenue
Properties. We conclude that the interests of justice will be best served if a
redetermination of all the damages is made on remand. 7

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7    Of
course, in setting the amount of an appropriate punitive damages award on
retrial, a jury will be free to consider the value of all the properties still
owned by Hasso for purposes of assessing his net worth.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     The judgment is reversed with directions to retry all of the damages issues
consistent with the matters set forth herein.

   Anderson, P. J., concurred.

DISSENT BY: POCHE

DISSENT

   POCHE, J.

   I respectfully dissent.

   The message in my colleagues' opinion is that to circumvent section 10136 of
the Business and Professions Code, one need not be a partner or a principal, one
need only act like one.

   The purpose of Business and Professions Code section 10136 is to protect the
public from the perils incident to dealing with incompetent or untrustworthy
real estate practitioners. ( Cline v. Yamaga (1979) 97 Cal.App.3d 239, 246 [158
Cal.Rptr. 598]; Schantz v. Ellsworth (1971) 19 Cal.App.3d 289, 292-293 [96
Cal.Rptr. 783].) Thus, pursuant to this section and with the limited exceptions
noted by the majority opinion, any agreement employing an unlicensed person to
act as a real estate broker is illegal, void and unenforceable; ( Fellom v.
Adams (1969) 274 Cal.App.2d 855, 862 [79 Cal.Rptr. 633]; Estate of Prieto (1966)
243 Cal.App.2d 79, 85 [52 Cal.Rptr. 80]) until today.

   In contrast to the majority, I find the facts in Weber v. Tonini (1957) 151
Cal.App.2d 168 [311 P.2d 132], rather than those in Claudine v. West (1952) 109
Cal.App.2d 726 [241 P.2d 580], closer to the circumstances in the present case.
Of more significance, however, is Tenzer v. Superscope, Inc. (1985) 39 Cal.3d 18
[216 Cal.Rptr. 130, 702 P.2d 212], wherein our Supreme Court held that despite
the statute of frauds ( Civ. Code, § 1624, subd. 5), a finder may maintain a
cause of action for fraud against one who makes an oral promise to pay a
finder's fee without intending to do so. It is significant that Tenzer failed to
extend this cause of action to cover those circumstances where the plaintiff is
acting as a real estate broker without a license.

   This may be because of the strong public policy to protect the public from
unscrupulous real estate dealers. For instance, Charles Duggan testified that
John Hasso did not want to pay a brokerage fee "up front." Yet Duggan later
admitted that he knew the customary practice was for the seller of real estate
to pay the brokerage commissions. Thus, Duggan was aware that Hasso would not
have to pay a broker's commission when purchasing the properties. In addition,
Duggan apparently entered into similar business relationships with other parties
and, when these parties failed to pay the percentage of capital and profits to
which Duggan claimed he was entitled, he filed similar lawsuits to the present
case. I think it is precisely this type of activity that the California
Legislature was seeking to avoid when it mandated licensing for individuals
rendering real estate services.

   The majority opinion expresses its concern about "the need to preclude those
familiar with the real estate licensing law from seeking out unlicensed
individuals and inducing them to expend time and effort in locating properties
under a promise of a future percentage of partnership profits from the acquired
properties, all the while intending to be able to lawfully refuse to compensate
the individuals who performed such service based on promise of partnership."
(Majority opn., ante, p. 1195.) However, there is scant evidence that Hasso was
familiar with licensing law, sought out Duggan or had any such intention.
Although Duggan in some transactions negotiated as a principal, he was not a
principal and no final deeds reflect his having obtained such capacity. Reliance
on the fact that Elissa, N.V.  granted Duggan broad powers of attorney is
equally meaningless, since such an instrument merely gives authority to act as
an agent. (1 Witkin, Summary of Cal.  Law (8th ed. 1973) Agency and Employment,
§ 120, p. 730.)

   While it is true that a partnership may be based on one partner furnishing
capital and the other partner furnishing services (see Epstein v. Stahl (1959)
176 Cal.App.2d 53, 57 [1 Cal.Rptr. 143]), where, as here, the  trier of fact
found that no partnership or joint venture existed because of the failure of the
parties to agree on essential terms, the unlicensed person performing brokerage
services should not be able to recover damages by claiming the defendant
promised to make him a partner.

   For these reasons I would reverse the judgment.


                              93 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           JOSEPH F. CLARK, Appellant, v. J. LEROY PATTERSON et al.,
            Defendants; NEW YORK INDEMNITY COMPANY (a Corporation),
                                   Respondent

                                L. A. No. 12739

                          Supreme Court of California

          213 Cal. 4; 300 P. 967; 1931 Cal. LEXIS 475; 75 A.L.R. 1124


                                 June 22, 1931

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.  Walter S. Gates, Judge.

COUNSEL: Paul C. Hill, for Appellant.

Culver & Nourse and Paul Nourse, for Respondent.

JUDGES: In Bank.  Curtis, J.  Shenk, J., Richards, J., Seawell, J., Langdon, J.,
and Preston, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: CURTIS

OPINION

     The facts in this case were correctly stated by the District Court of
Appeal, when this action was before that court.  As therein stated, they are as
follows:

   "The appeal in this case is from the judgment and order of the superior court
reversing the judgment of the municipal court in favor of appellant as to the
respondent New York Indemnity Company, a corporation.

   "The case was tried upon a stipulated statements of facts which, in so far as
material, are that the respondent New York Indemnity Company issued to one J.
LeRoy Patterson its broker's bond in the sum of $ 2,000 pursuant to the
provisions of the Real Estate Brokers' Act (Stats. 1919, p. 1252, and acts
amendatory thereof); that while said bond was in force, to-wit: on the 3d day of
February, 1926, said Patterson, acting as a real estate broker, through his
agent E. F. Gleason, undertook to sell to appellant a certain parcel of land
whereby the said Patterson undertook to endeavor to secure from the Pacific
Development Company a contract for the sale and conveyance of said real estate;
the said Patterson made and delivered to appellant a purchaser's preliminary
sales contract covering the property, at which time appellant paid to Gleason
the sum of $ 855, which was in turn paid to and received by Patterson, excepting
the amount due Gleason on account of his commission; that Patterson deposited
the amount received by him in his own account, which was thereafter levied upon
under attachment in  another action brought against Patterson; Patterson never
at any time paid the $ 855 or any part thereof to the Pacific Development
Company or anyone else; that Patterson appropriated the same to his own use and
purpose.  Appellant, being unable to obtain the repayment of his money,
consulted an attorney, which attorney obtained from Patterson a promissory note
dated August 10, 1926, without the knowledge of the surety, New York Indemnity
Company, which note provided for the repayment of the sum to appellant with
interest at the rate of 8 per cent per annum, in monthly instalments of $ 100
each, the first payment to be made on the date of the note, the said note also
providing in the event of default the whole amount of principal and interest
should become immediately due and payable and for the payment of attorney's fees
in the event suit or other proceedings were taken to enforce the payment of the
note.  The note also contained the following provision:

   "'This note shall not be, and is not a waiver by the said Joseph F. Clark of
any rights, nor a release of myself, E. F. Gleason, or the Pacific Development
Company from any liability upon or arising out of that certain preliminary sales
contract, executed by the said Joseph F. Clark under date of February 3, 1926,
until this note has been fully paid and satisfied.  J. L. Patterson.'

   "Upon the execution of the note Patterson paid the sum of $ 100 and
thereafter an additional sum of $ 100.  This action was commenced for the
purpose of collecting the unpaid balance.  Subsequent to the filing of the
action in the municipal court the further sum of $ 100 was paid, leaving at time
of trial a balance of principal unpaid to plaintiff in the sum of $ 550."

   The validity of the judgment rendered herein against the plaintiff and in
favor of the New York Indemnity Company hinges upon the answers to be given to
the two questions:

   1. Did the bond given under the Real Estate Brokers' Act cover the
misappropriations of the money paid to Patterson, the real estate broker in the
transaction set forth above?

   2. Did the execution and delivery of the promissory note by Patterson to the
plaintiff for the money misappropriated by him release the surety on said bond?

    We will consider these two questions in the order named.

   By section 9a of the Real Estate Brokers' Act it is provided that all
applicants for broker's license "shall . . . file with the said real estate
commissioner a satisfactory bond to the people of the State of California . . .
in the amount of $ 2,000 conditioned for the faithful performance by such broker
of any undertaking as a licensed real estate broker under this act.  Any person
injured by the failure of a real estate broker to perform his duties, or comply
with the provisions of this act, shall have the right in his own name to
commence such an action against said real estate broker and his sureties for the
recovery of any damage sustained by the failure or omission of said real estate
broker to perform his duties or either of them, or to comply with the provisions
of this act or any of them." The bond given by Patterson with the New York
Indemnity Company as surety and filed with the commission followed and complied
with all the terms of this section of the act.  In fact, the condition of the
bond is in substantially the precise words contained in said section 9a and
quoted above.

   There is no question but that under the foregoing statement of facts the
plaintiff would have a good cause of action against Patterson for the money
misappropriated by the latter.  Respondent concedes this.  It takes the
position, however, that this liability on the part of Patterson was not one
which was covered by the bond for the reason that it was no part of the duty of
a real estate broker to receive or accept money on a sale of property brought
about through his efforts.

   It relies in support of its position upon  certain decisions of this and
other courts which deal with the duties and powers of real estate agents.  Among
the authorities relied upon by respondent are: Stemler  v. Bass, 153 Cal. 791
[96 Pac. 809], Ropes v. Rosenfeld, 145 Cal. 671 [79 Pac. 354], Zeimer v.
Antisell, 75 Cal. 509 [17 Pac. 642], Gold v. Phelan, 58 Cal. App. 471, 476 [208
Pac. 1001], Sibbald v. Bethlehem Iron Co., 83 N. Y. 378 [38 Am. Rep. 441], and
Halsell v. Renfrow and Edwards, 14 Okl. 674 [2 Ann. Cas. 286, 78 Pac. 118].
These cases hold in effect that the authority of a real estate agent deputed to
sell real estate is simply to find a  purchaser and he has no power to bind his
principal by a contract of sale unless such additional power is expressly
conferred upon him.  In Gold v. Phelan, supra, it is stated that "such a broker
has no authority to execute any agreement binding either of the parties to the
transaction, nor has he the right to accept money offered by the purchaser to
conclude the sale.  And when the purchaser pays money into the hands of a broker
in such a case, the broker holds it as the agent of the purchaser and not the
seller, and any misappropriation thereof would necessarily be at the loss of the
former and not the latter".  We may concede that these authorities contain a
correct statement of the law in reference to the powers and authority of a real
estate agent or real estate broker. He has no authority to bind either party by
any agreement, and if he accepts money from the purchaser the seller is not
bound by such acceptance.  However, if he does accept money and misappropriates
it he is liable to the person from whom he accepts it.  Respondent contends
therefore that, as it is without his power or authority to accept money from the
purchaser and thereby bind his principal, when he does so he is not acting as a
real estate broker but in his private capacity and while he may be personally
liable for the repayment of said money, his surety is not liable for his
misappropriation thereof.

   This question has never been directly passed upon by this court.  It was,
however, before this court on a petition for transfer in the case of Nittler v.
Continental Casualty Co., 94 Cal. App. 498 [271 Pac. 555, 272 Pac. 309]. In that
case the money was paid by the purchaser to the broker, who upon the
consummation of the sale refused to pay it to the seller, his principal.  The
latter brought action against the surety upon the broker's bond, and recovered
judgment for the full amount of money paid the broker and which he had withheld
from his principal.  On appeal the District Court of Appeal affirmed the
judgment, and we denied a petition for a transfer thereof to this court.  We
quote from this case, page 504, as follows:

   "Finally it is argued that the breach for which recovery was had does not
come within the terms of the bond.  Section 9a of the Real Estate Brokers' Act,
as amended in 1923 (Stats. 1923, p. 93), calls for a bond conditioned for the
faithful performance by the broker of any undertaking  as a licensed real estate
broker under the act.  The same section provides that any person injured by the
failure of the broker 'to perform his duties, or comply with the provisions of
the act' has a right of action against the broker and the surety for the
recovery of damages sustained by the failure of the broker to perform his duties
or to comply with the provisions of the act.   The bond which was given pursuant
to the terms of the act is in the same language.  It will be noted that the
breach for which recovery may be had may arise either from a failure of the
broker to perform his duties as such or from his failure to comply with any of
the provisions of the act.  In this respect the act differs from the Corporate
Securities Act, prior to its amendment in 1925, which required a bond
conditioned for the 'compliance with the provisions of law'.  This language was
held, in Blumenthal v. Larson, 79 Cal. App. 726, 730 [248 Pac. 681, 251 Pac.
241], to relate to a compliance with the terms of the Corporate Securities Act
alone.  The same ruling was made in Mitchell v. Smith, 204 Cal. 197 [267 Pac.
540], where the court commented upon the amendment to the Securities Act in
1925, which extended the liability of the surety under bonds given pursuant to
the act.  The language of the Real Estate Brokers' Act, like this amendment of
1925, is so much broader than the language of the original Securities Act that
the cases cited are not applicable to the case presented here.  If the act
intended to limit the application of the bond to a failure to perform duties
specified in the act itself there would have been no need of adding the
alternative -- the failure on the part of the broker to perform his duties as a
licensed broker. It cannot be doubted that when a licensed broker has obtained
the proceeds of a sale of property belonging to his principal and refuses to
turn over such proceeds to his principal he has failed to perform the duty
incumbent upon him as such broker or agent irrespective of any provisions of the
act requiring him to do so."

   We are satisfied of the correctness of this decision.  It expressly holds
that it is a violation of the duty of a real estate broker who has received the
proceeds of a sale to refuse to turn over and pay the money received to his
principal.  We can see no reason why the same rule should not apply when the
broker receives money from the purchaser,  and refuses to repay it to the
purchaser, when for any reason, not due to the fault of the purchaser, the sale
is never consummated.  He owes the same duty to the purchaser in such a case as
he would to the seller after the completion of the sale.  In each case the duty
is one which he has incurred while acting as a real estate broker, and for his
failure to  perform such duty his surety is liable to the person damaged.

     The second question involved in this appeal as noted above is whether the
acceptance of the note of Patterson by the plaintiff released the surety.

   The answer to this question in our opinion must be governed to a large extent
by our decision in the case of Hammond Lumber Co. v. Richardson Bldg. etc. Co.,
209 Cal. 82 [285 Pac. 851]. That was an action against a surety on a
contractor's bond, given in pursuance of section 1183 of the Code of Civil
Procedure. As required by this section of the code the bond there sued upon
provided that "the same is hereby expressly made to inure to the benefit of any
and all persons who perform labor upon or furnish materials to be used in the
work described in the said contract, or in any modification thereof; and any and
all such persons shall have and are given a right of action to recover upon this
bond against the said principal and sureties, or either of them in any suit
brought to foreclose mechanics' liens which may be filed by such persons, or any
of them . . ., or in a separate suit . . .".  The plaintiff in that action
furnished materials to the said contractor which were actually used in the
construction of the building which was the subject of said contract.  These
materials were furnished some time prior to the twenty-eighth day of September,
1923, and the indebtedness therefor appeared on the books of the plaintiff as an
ordinary book account, and the court found that it "was and had been payable on
or before the 28th day of September, 1923".  Thereafter and on the twenty-sixth
day of December, 1923, the contractor gave to plaintiff its promissory note
payable ninety days from date thereof.  This note covered various sums of money
due plaintiff by the contractor including the indebtedness incurred for the
materials furnished the contractor under the contract for the performance of
which the bond sued upon in said action was given.  This note was accepted by
the plaintiff  in said action, and the court found that the same was given
"without the knowledge or consent of the defendant sureties, or either of them".
Upon these facts we held that the giving by the contractor and the acceptance by
the materialman of the promissory note did not release the sureties on the bond
of the contractor, in the absence of an agreement that said promissory note was
given and accepted as payment of the debt due from the maker of the note.  The
principal authority relied upon by the court in support of such ruling was the
case of United States Fidelity & Guaranty Co.  v. United States, 191 U.S. 416
[48 L. Ed. 242, 24 Sup Ct. Rep. 142], which action was also brought against
sureties of a contractor to recover for materials furnished the contractor. The
company furnishing the materials had taken two promissory notes by the
contractor for the amount of its account, due thirty and sixty days respectively
from date.  The question presented for decision was whether the acceptance of
these notes by the company discharged the surety. In answering the question in
the negative the court said:

   "In an ordinary guaranty the guarantor understands perfectly the nature and
extent of his obligation.  . . .  In such cases he contracts in reliance upon
the exact terms of his principal's undertaking, and has a right to suppose that
no change will be made without his consent; and the courts have gone so far as
to hold that any change will exonerate him, though it really redound to his
benefit.

   "This covenant, however, is inserted for an entirely different purpose from
that of securing to the government the performance of the contract for the
construction of the building.  . . .  The guarantor is ignorant of the parties
with whom his principal may contract,  the amount, the nature, and the value of
the materials required as well as the time when payment for them will become
due.  These particulars it would probably be impossible even for the principal
to furnish, and it is to be assumed that the surety contracts with knowledge of
this fact.  Not knowing when or by whom these materials will be supplied, or
when the bills for them will mature, it can make no difference to him whether
they were originally purchased on a credit of sixty days, or whether, after the
materials are furnished, the time for payment is extended sixty days, and a note
given for the amount  maturing at that time.  If a person deliberately contracts
for an uncertain liability, he ought not to complain when that uncertainty
becomes certain.  . . .  The rule of strictissimi juris is a stringent one, and
is liable at times to work a practical injustice.  It is one which ought not to
be extended to contracts not within the reason of the rule, . . ."

   The legal principles established by these authorities are similar to those
involved in the present action. The bond in each of the cited cases, as well as
that in the case before us, was given for the express purpose of covering not
some particular known and specified obligation, but an uncertain liability which
might arise in the future by reason of some dereliction of duty on the part of
the principal.  The case of Hammond Lumber Co. v. Richardson Bldg. etc. Co.,
supra, is particularly in point.  In that case a promissory note was taken by
the plaintiff for money due for materials furnished, payable on or before ninety
days from date.  In the present action the note was payable in monthly
installments of $ 100 each, and in default of payment of any installment when
due the whole amount of the note should become immediately due.  In neither case
prior to  the execution of the note therein was there any definite agreement as
to the time of payment. The materials were purchased without any time agreed
upon for their payment.  The money was paid to Patterson with no time fixed for
its repayment. In each case the time of payment was subsequently fixed by the
promissory note given by the debtor.  We held in the Hammond Lumber Company case
that the surety was not released.  The same ruling in our opinion must apply in
the present action.

   Judgment of the superior court is reversed and the judgment of the municipal
court is affirmed.


                              94 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             BEATRICE SIMONINI, as Conservator, etc., Plaintiff, v.
          THOMAS R.  PASSALACQUA, as Executor, etc., Defendant; ROMAN
            CATHOLIC BISHOP OF SANTA ROSA, Intervener and Appellant;
              KEYLAND PROPERTIES, INC., Real Party in Interest and
                                   Respondent

                                  No. A018716

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

            180 Cal. App. 3d 400; 225 Cal. Rptr. 588; 1986 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1516


                                 April 28, 1986

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Sonoma County, No. 111732, Kenneth M.
Eymann, Judge.

COUNSEL: John A. Klein and Margaret K. Butler for Intervener and Appellant.

Mikel D. Bryan for Real Party in Interest and Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Rouse, J., with Kline, P. J., and Smith, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: ROUSE

OPINION

     Intervener Roman Catholic Bishop of Santa Rosa appeals from the trial
court's order awarding a commission on the estate sale of certain real property
to real party in interest, Keyland Properties, Inc.  (Keyland).  Intervener
contends that the Probate Code 1 does not authorize such a commission.  We agree
and reverse.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Unless
otherwise noted all subsequent statutory references are to the Probate Code.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The present controversy evolves out of a partition action involving the
estates of two individuals who held a joint tenancy interest in a parcel of real
property. Intervener was allowed to intervene in the action because, as sole
distributee of defendant estate, he had an expectant two-thirds interest in the
property.

   On February 2, 1982, the trial court entered a stipulated interlocutory
judgment ordering a sale of the real property. The court appointed a referee to
appraise and sell the property either in a public sale or by private sale
conducted as "private sales of real property of estates of deceased persons as
required by law."

   The referee did not list the property with a real estate broker or agent.  On
February 5, 1982, he reported to the trial court that he had accepted an offer
to purchase the property from John Andersen, who was represented by the real
estate brokers Keyland, real party in interest on appeal.

   A hearing on the motion to confirm the sale to Andersen was held on April 1,
1982.  At the hearing intervener submitted an increased bid consisting of a
written offer to purchase for $ 271,400 over three years or $ 222,000 in cash.
The trial court confirmed the sale on terms to intervener. Intervener was not
represented by a broker, but appeared through his attorney.  Although sale to
intervener was confirmed at the hearing, an award of a commission on the sale
was taken under submission.

   On June 1, 1982, the referee wrote the court recommending payment of a
commission to Keyland.  Intervener petitioned the court to protest the referee's
ex parte request, and requested an evidentiary hearing on the matter.  No
evidentiary hearing was held, and on June 2, 1982, the trial court issued an
order granting payment of a real estate commission of $ 10,000 to Keyland.

I.



    Intervener contends that the trial court's order awarding a commission to
Keyland was erroneous because the Probate Code does not authorize  such a
commission.  According to Code of Civil Procedure section 873.745, an agent's
commission "shall be fixed . . . in the manner provided for private sales of
real property in decedents' estates." The right to receive a commission on a
probate sale is regulated by statute.  ( Estate of Cattalini (1979) 97
Cal.App.3d 366, 374 [158 Cal.Rptr. 640]; Estate of Toy (1977) 72 Cal.App.3d 392,
396 [140 Cal.Rptr. 183].) Sections 760, 761 and 785 govern the award of real
estate commissions on the sale of real property in decedents' estates.

   On appeal,  the main controversy surrounds the interpretation of sections 760
and 761.  Sections 760 establishes the procedure by which an estate can enter
into listing and sales agreement with brokers.  At the time of the trial court's
order, section 760 provided that "[the] executor or administrator may enter into
a written contract with any bona fide agent or broker, or multiple group of
agents or brokers, to secure a purchaser for any real . . . property of the
estate, which contract may provide for the payment of a commission out of the
proceeds of the sale."

   Section 761 describes the process of calculating the broker's commission when
the sale is made on an increased bid submitted at the confirmation hearing. "In
case of sale on an increased bid made at the time of confirmation to a purchaser
not procured by the agent holding the contract, the court shall allow a
commission on the full amount . . ., one-half of said commission on the original
bid to be paid to the agent whose bid was returned to the court for confirmation
and the balance of the commission on the purchase price to the agent, if any,
who procured the purchaser to whom the sale is confirmed. If the successful
bidder is not produced by a bona fide agent, then the agent holding the contract
shall be allowed a full commission on the amount of the original bid returned by
him."

   Intervener argues that to comprehend the statutory scheme for payment of
commissions under section 761, the language "agent holding the contract" must be
understood as the agent holding a listing contract as specified in section 760.
Section 761 establishes that an "agent holding the contract" is entitled to a
partial commission although the purchaser he had secured was outbid at the
confirmation hearing, and in certain cases is entitled to a full commission when
the successful bidder is not represented by an agent.  Intervener contends that
the purpose behind section 761 is to provide compensation for listing brokers
who do not secure the successful bidder, but do help produce the final sale by
displaying the property for the estate.  "The code provides for payment of
commissions to both listing brokers and selling brokers in cases in which an
increased bid is made at the confirmation hearing. These provisions contemplate
compensation for services provided." ( Estate of Cattalini, supra, 97 Cal.App.3d
366, 374-375.)

    Intervener points out that the term "contract" in sections 761 and 785
refers to the listing contract described in section 760.  He contends that the
connection between the term "contract" and the listing contract described in
section 760 is made explicit in the last paragraph of section 785.  In this
paragraph the right to a commission "to which an agent may be entitled by virtue
of a contract with the executor or administrator" is distinguished from a
"condition of the bid that a certain amount thereof be paid to an agent by
executor or administrator . . . ." Thus, intervener claims that only a listing
broker is an "agent holding the contract" within the meaning of section 761 and
only that listing agent can be awarded a commission for services rendered an
estate where he does not secure the successful bidder.

   Keyland argues that the term "agent holding the contract," as set forth in
section 761, applies to both the listing broker and the broker acting on behalf
of a prospective purchaser who submits an offer which is accepted by an estate
and returned to the court as the original bid for the confirmation hearing. The
rationale for this reading of the statutory scheme is that "[both] types of
brokers are rendering services to the estate under contract and are entitled to
a commission under . . . Sections 760 and 761."

   Keyland maintains that, as the agent of the original bidder, Andersen, it
entered into a contract with the court-appointed referee for the purchase of the
estate property.  This contract was a purchase agreement and deposit receipt
setting out the terms of Andersen's offer to buy the property and including
provision of a six percent commission payable to Keyland.  According to Keyland,
this contract rendered a service to the estate.  "By securing the original bid
for the subsequent confirmation hearing, an agent serves the interests of the
estate by helping to realize the highest  possible price for the property being
sold." Thus, the argument runs that, in granting a commission under section 761,
the court was following the underlying statutory policy to pay compensation for
services rendered to the estate.

II.



    It is a cardinal rule of statutory construction that statutes relating to
the same subject matter are to be read together and reconciled whenever possible
to avoid nullification of one statute by another.  ( Kalina v. San Mateo
Community College Dist. (1982) 132 Cal.App.3d 48, 53 [183 Cal.Rptr. 12].)

 In order to reconcile sections 760 and 761, we conclude that the language
"agent holding the contract" (§ 761) refers specifically to the agent under a
listing contract as described in section 760.

   Section 761 provides for two alternative ways of awarding commissions where
there is an overbid at the time of confirmation. If the purchaser is  "not
procured by the agent holding the contract" (the agent with whom an estate may
enter into a listing agreement under § 760), then the section permits a division
of the commission between the listing agent and the agent representing the
successful bidder. Alternatively, where the successful bidder has no agent then
the "agent holding the contract shall be allowed a full commission on the amount
of the original bid returned by him." (§ 761.)

   The underlying rationale for these provisions is to compensate agents for the
services they render to the estate.  ( Estate of Cattalini, supra, 97 Cal.App.3d
366, 375.) Where one agent has contracted to list the property and market it he
has rendered services to the estate.  The value of his commission will be
reduced if the offer he produces is overbid at confirmation by a purchaser
represented by a second agent.

   In the case before us Keyland rendered no services to the estate.  It
represented Andersen in presenting his offer to the referee. The only
contractual agreement between Keyland and the estate was a provision for a
commission contained in Andersen's offer, which offer was accepted by the
referee, but rejected by the court.

   Keyland relies on Estate of Baldwin (1973) 34 Cal.App.3d 596 [110 Cal.Rptr.
189], for the proposition that there was a contract between Keyland and the
estate based upon the purchase agreement and deposit receipt signed by the
referee which provided for a six percent commission to Keyland.  The challenge
to the commission in Baldwin was made precisely on the grounds that a written
bid and an acceptance signed by the agent (who was also the unsuccessful bidder)
and by the coexecutrices was insufficient to satisfy the requirement of a
written contract under section 760.  The court concluded that the bid and
acceptance was adequate and proceeded to approve an allocation of the commission
under section 761 between the agent and the agent of the successful overbidder.
Baldwin, however, has been criticized on other grounds by another division of
this district.  ( Estate of Toy, supra, 72 Cal.App.3d 392, 395 [criticizing the
Baldwin court's decision to permit an unsuccessful bidder who was acting as his
own agent to collect a commission in his capacity as real estate broker].)

   Keyland claims that it was sufficient service to the estate for them to
provide Andersen's offer which, in effect, established a minimum sale price for
the property.  Whatever incidental benefit this may have conferred on the
estate, we cannot conclude that it was a benefit envisioned by the Legislature
when it authorized payment of a full commission to the agent who returns the
original bid. (§ 761.) Such a commission would only be justified where the agent
who obtained the original bid was the listing agent. To read the  section as
Keyland proposes would be to reward an agent who produces the low offer with his
full commission at the expense of the estate.

   The order directing payment of real estate commission is reversed and the
matter  remanded to the trial court for further proceedings consistent with this
opinion.


                              95 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              HENRY J. GRANT, Plaintiff and Appellant, v. LARRY R.
                       MARINELL, Defendant and Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 58390

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Five

            112 Cal. App. 3d 617; 169 Cal. Rptr. 414; 1980 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2488


                               November 25, 1980

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Los Angeles County, No. C 214082, Robert
Fainer, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1) Frauds, Statute of § 6 -- Agreements for Lease or Sale of Real Property --
Finder's Fee Agreement.  -- An agreement between plaintiff, who was neither a
purchaser or seller of real estate, and a licensed real estate broker providing
that plaintiff was to receive a finder's fee of 10 percent of any income
defendant received as a result of plaintiff's introduction to the broker of
persons interested in securing the services of a real estate broker, was not
barred by Civ. Code, § 1624, subd. 5, providing that an oral agreement to
procure, introduce, or find a purchaser or sellers of real estate is invalid.
The statute does not bar oral contracts between brokers or between brokers and
salesmen to cooperate in procuring a sale or purchase of property and to share
any commission earned as a result, but was intended to protect purchasers or
sellers of real estate. The agreement between plaintiff and the broker was
analogous to a contract between brokers and was not the type of agreement which
the statute of frauds was intended to cover.

COUNSEL: Rodney T. Lewin and Max Fink for Plaintiff and Appellant.

Alan M. Levenstein for Defendant and Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Kaus, P. J., with Stephens and Ashby, JJ., concurring.

OPINION BY: KAUS

OPINION

     Plaintiff appeals from an order dismissing his action after a demurrer to
his first amended complaint was sustained without leave to amend.  He contends
that the trial court erred in holding that his complaint for breach of an oral
contract was barred by the statute of frauds.

   The facts alleged are these: In July, 1975, plaintiff entered into an oral
agreement with defendant, a licensed real estate broker, under the terms of
which plaintiff was to introduce defendant to parties interested in securing the
services of a real  estate broker. It was agreed that if defendant's employment
as a broker should result from any such introductions, defendant would pay
plaintiff, as a finder's fee, 10 percent of  any income defendant received.
Plaintiff introduced defendant to two prospects and claimed that the
introductions resulted in income to defendant totaling $ 63,800.  When defendant
refused to pay the promised finder's fee, plaintiff sued to enforce the alleged
oral agreement. Defendant demurred on the ground that plaintiff's complaint was
barred by the statute of frauds ( Civ. Code, § 1624, subd. 5.) 1 After affording
plaintiff a chance to redraft his complaint, the trial court sustained
defendant's demurrer without leave to amend.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Civil
Code section 1624, subdivision 5, reads as follows: "The following contracts are
invalid, unless the same, or some note or memorandum thereof, is in writing and
subscribed by the party to be charged or his agent: . . . 5. An agreement
authorizing or employing an agent, broker, or any other person to purchase or
sell real estate, or to lease real estate for a longer period than one year, or
to procure, introduce, or find a purchaser or seller of real estate or a lessee
or lessor of real estate where such lease is for a longer period than one year,
for compensation or a commission; . . ."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    On this appeal plaintiff contends that Civil Code section 1624 subdivision 5
does not apply to a simple finder's fee agreement such as was alleged in this
case.  Plaintiff asserts that the section only covers oral contracts for
services within the ambit of a licensed real estate broker's regular duties.  As
plaintiff points out, one need not be a licensed real estate broker to act as a
finder. (See Tyrone v. Kelly (1973) 9 Cal. 3d 1, 8 [106 Cal.Rptr. 761, 507 P.2d
65].)

    We agree with plaintiff that the judgment must be reversed, but base our
decision on reasoning slightly different than his: we have concluded that the
agreement as alleged did not fall within the purview of Civil Code section 1624,
subdivision 5, because no principal, that is to say, no seller or buyer of real
estate, was a party thereto.

   The law is well settled that section 1624, subdivision 5 does not bar oral
contracts between brokers or between brokers and salesmen to cooperate in
procuring a sale or purchase of property and to share any commission earned as a
result.  ( Wilson v. Anderson (1962) 208 Cal.App.2d 62, 64 [25 Cal.Rptr. 105];
Iusi v. Chase (1959) 169 Cal.App.2d 83, 86 [337 P.2d 79]; Holland v. Morgan &
Peacock Properties (1959) 168 Cal.App.2d 206, 210 [335 P.2d 769].) None of the
recent changes to the subdivision have changed this basic rule.

   Subdivision 5 -- then subdivision 6 -- of section 1624 originally barred an
oral "agreement authorizing or employing an agent or broker to purchase or sell
real estate for compensation or a commission." (Stats. 1937, ch. 316, § 2, pp.
695-696.) The purpose of the section was to protect  buyers and sellers of
property from unfounded claims by brokers. See Gorham v. Heiman (1891) 90 Cal.
346, 358 [27 P. 289]; Goossen v. Adair (1960) 185 Cal.App.2d 810, 819 [8
Cal.Rptr. 855]: "There is no doubt that real estate brokers may make valid and
enforceable oral contracts for the division of commissions between themselves
and that the provisions of Civil Code, section 1624, subdivisions 4 and 5, and
Code of Civil Procedure, section 1973, subdivision 5, requiring agreements
authorizing or employing an agent or broker to sell real estate to be reduced to
writing, are for the protection of real estate owners against unfounded claims
of brokers; and were never intended to be applied to contracts between brokers
agreeing to share commissions . . . ."

   Before 1963, the so-called oral "finder's agreement," that is an agreement
merely to introduce a seller of real estate to a prospective purchaser or a
purchaser to a prospective buyer, was held not to be within the statute of
frauds, whether such contract was made by a real estate broker or agent or by an
unlicensed person.  (See Heyn v. Philips (1869) 37 Cal. 529, 531; Palmer v.
Wahler (1955) 133 Cal.App.2d 705, 710 [285 P.2d 8].)

   In 1963, however, the Legislature amended subdivision 5 to add, inter alia,
the italicized language: "An agreement authorizing  or employing an agent or
broker to purchase or sell real estate, . . . or to procure, introduce, or find
a purchaser or seller of real estate or a lessee or lessor of real estate where
such lease is for a longer period than one year, for compensation or a
commission." (Stats. 1963, ch. 814, § 1 p. 1843.)

   If by this amendment the Legislature intended all finder's fee agreements to
come within the ambit of the statute of frauds, it failed, as was predicted in
the State Bar Journal's review of 1963 legislation (38 State Bar J. 604, 649). 2
The section, as amended, was interpreted to bar only oral finder's agreements
between licensed brokers or agents and sellers or purchasers of property.
Subdivision 5, as revised, was still held to be inapplicable to such oral
agreements by unlicensed individuals.  (See Hasekian v. Krotz (1968) 268
Cal.App.2d 311, 317 [74 Cal.Rptr. 410]; Porter v. Cirod, Inc. (1966) 242
Cal.App.2d 761, 766 [51 Cal.Rptr. 784].) This anomaly resulted in the 1967
amendment (Stats. 1967, ch 52, § 1 p. 953,) which added the following italicized
language:  "An agreement authorizing or employing an agent, broker, or any other
person to purchase or sell real estate . . . or to procure, introduce or find a
purchaser or seller . . . ."

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   "If the
Legislature intended to make this section of the statute of frauds apply to
unlicensed 'finders' as well as to licensed brokers acting as 'finders,' its
attempt may have failed, since the courts so far have refused to interpret
'broker' and 'agent' to include unlicensed 'finders.'" (38 State Bar J. 649.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    While the 1967 amendment at last appears to put finders on a par with
licensed brokers, nothing in either the 1963 or the 1967 amendments indicates a
legislative intent to expand the protection of this part of the statute of
frauds to any class other than the class originally intended to be benefitted --
that is, purchasers or sellers of real property -- or a specific intent to
change the rule that oral contracts between brokers or between brokers and
salesmen to share commissions are valid.  An agreement by a person who is
neither a buyer nor a seller, to find prospective customers for a broker in
return for a finder's fee is analogous to a contract governed by the latter
rule.  It is not the type of agreement which Civil Code section 1624,
subdivision 5 was intended to cover.

   The order of dismissal is reversed.


                              96 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           Estate of SPIRO D. GIACOMELOS, Deceased.  ANN GIACOMELOS,
            Appellant, v. BANK OF AMERICA NATIONAL TRUST AND SAVINGS
            ASSOCIATION (a National Banking Association), Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 19532

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                  Division One

            192 Cal. App. 2d 244; 13 Cal. Rptr. 245; 1961 Cal. App.
                          LEXIS 1934; 91 A.L.R.2d 956


                                  May 18, 1961

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEALS from a judgment of the Superior Court of Alameda
County apportioning moneys received from a forced sale to the state of real
property in which a widow held a life estate, and from orders denying a new
trial and refusing to vacate the judgment.  A. J. Woolsey, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Partition--Sale--Application of Proceeds.  --Where a life estate in certain
real property was left by will to decedent's wife and such real property was
subsequently sold by involuntary sale to the state under its power of eminent
domain, the court should have appointed a trustee to invest the proceeds of such
sale and pay the income therefrom to the decedent's wife for life, instead of
giving her merely the present value of her life estate in cash, since it was the
testator's intent that his wife have the income from the real property for life
and the investment of the proceeds of the forced sale and the payment of the
income to the wife would be carrying out the testator's wishes more nearly than
the cash payment would.

(2) Pleading--Manner and Form--Alternative Statements.  --The fact that a party
requested the court in the alternative to appoint a trustee to invest the
proceeds of a forced sale of real property in which such party had a life estate
or to determine the value of her life estate and the value of the interest of
the remainderman was not a waiver of any right to object to the court's action
in awarding her the value of her life estate from the net proceeds of the sale,
particularly where counsel, at the hearing, did not present the request in the
alternative but only the party's request for appointment of a trustee.

COUNSEL: Dodge, Evans, Reyes, Brorby & Driscoll and Robert P. Brorby for
Appellant.

Thomas G. Michaels and J. D. Cooper for Respondent.

JUDGES: Bray, P. J.  Tobriner, J., and Duniway, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: BRAY

OPINION

     Appellant appeals from a judgment apportioning moneys received from a
forced sale to the State of California of real property in which appellant held
a life estate. 1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   She also
purports to appeal from orders denying her motions for new trial and to vacate
the judgment.  As both an order denying a new trial and an order refusing to
vacate a judgment, where, as here, the grounds on which the motion to vacate was
made existed prior to the entry of judgment (see First Nat. Bank v. Turnbull
(1950), 99 Cal.App.2d 764, 766 [222 P.2d 494]) are not appealable, said
purported appeals will have to be dismissed.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Questions Presented

   1. Should the court have granted appellant's motion to appoint a trustee to
reinvest the moneys received from the sale?

   2. Did appellant waive her right to object to the court's action?

   3. Was the apportionment fair?

   Record

   Spiro D. Giacomelos died testate, leaving surviving his wife, Ann
(appellant), and two children by a prior marriage, John and Penelope.  Pursuant
to his will, the decree of distribution in his estate distributed to Ann a life
estate in certain real property, and to the Bank of America (respondent), as
trustee for the use and benefit of the surviving children of decedent, the
remainder interest.

   The state asserted its power of eminent domain, and the property was sold by
involuntary sale to the state for $ 42,500.  Respondent bank, as testamentary
trustee of the remainder interest, petitioned the probate court wherein the
trust was pending to determine the value of appellant's life estate and to
partition the proceeds of the sale between the life tenant and the remaindermen.
Appellant filed an untitled document in which, after setting forth that she was
the life tenant in the property involuntary sold, she requested the court to
appoint a trustee to invest the proceeds of the sale in "like improved real
property and to invest and reinvest the proceeds of said sale to the extent that
. . . [appellant] shall continue to receive the income from her life estate . .
.  That in the event the Court elects not to appoint a Trustee as heretofore set
forth . . . [appellant] requests that this Court determine the value of her life
estate and the value of the interest of the remainderman in and to said real
property and the improvements thereon." The prayer of the document likewise
requested the same alternative relief.  The court awarded appellant from the net
proceeds of the sale (the property was encumbered in the sum of $ 4,419.12) $
12,129.27 as the value of her life estate, and to respondent bank as
testamentary trustee $ 25,951.61.

   1. Should the court have appointed a trustee to invest the sale proceeds

     There does not seem to be any statute in California dealing with the
partition of moneys, as distinguished from real property, and particularly with
moneys that come from property in which there is a life estate. Of course, there
can be no life estate in moneys, so that when the property subject to the life
estate is sold, the life estate, in effect, terminates.  However, the holder of
the life estate does not lose his interest in the moneys.  The moneys are then
held in trust until, at least, the interest of the former life tenant therein is
determined.  In the case of sale in partition of real property, there are three
code sections dealing with the life tenant's interest.

     Section 778, Code of Civil Procedure, provides that "The person entitled to
a tenancy for life, or years, whose estate has been sold, is entitled to receive
such sum as may  be deemed a reasonable satisfaction for such estate, and which
the person so entitled may consent to accept instead thereof . . ." (Emphasis
added.)

   Section 779 provides: "If such consent be not given, filed, and entered as
provided in the last section . . . the court must ascertain and determine what
proportion of the proceeds of the sale, after deducting expenses, will be a just
and reasonable sum to be allowed on account of such estate, and must order the
same to be paid to such party . . ."

   Thus, under sections 778 and 779, had this been a sale of real property in
partition, the life tenant would receive a reasonable portion of the proceeds,
the amount to be determined under section 778 with his consent, or under section
779 without his consent.

   However, section 781, which appears to be in conflict with sections 778 and
779, 2 provides: ". . . where property is subject to a life estate with
remainder over, the court may direct the entire proceeds of the sale of such
interests to be paid to a trustee to be appointed by the court . . . to be
invested and reinvested, the income thereof to be paid to the  life tenant and
the corpus of the trust estate, upon the termination of the life estate, to be
delivered or paid to the remaindermen . . ."

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   We are
still considering partition sales of real property.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Sections 778, 779 and 781 were enacted in 1872.  Until its amendment in 1927,
section 781 provided: "In all cases of sales, when it appears that any person
has a vested or contingent future right or estate in any of the property sold,
the court must ascertain and settle the proportional value of such contingent or
vested right or estate, and must direct such proportion of the sale to be
invested, secured, or paid over, in such manner as to protect the rights and
interests of the parties." (Emphasis added.) In 1927, section 781 was amended by
adding the before quoted portion concerning life estates.  Thus, prior to 1927,
it seemed to be the legislative intent in all three sections that as to life
estates and other interests, in the event of a sale of real property under
partition, the proceeds should be divided in accordance with the proportional
interests.

   But the later exposition of the intent of the Legislature is that set forth
in section 781 as amended, namely, that in the case of a life estate, the entire
proceeds of the sale should be invested by a trustee, so that the life tenant
would receive the income thereof, just as, prior to sale, the income of the
property went to him.

   In our case, although admittedly the above-mentioned code sections apply only
to sales of real property in partition, appellant contends that the court should
have followed a procedure similar to that in section 781 while respondent
contends it should have followed a procedure similar to that set forth in
sections 778 and 779.

   This proceeding was brought in the probate court, a court with broad equity
powers.  We see no reason why, in such a court, the life tenant in a compulsory
sale should not be entitled to the same rights as in a partition sale.  In fact,
she should be entitled to greater consideration, for a partition of property in
which there is a life estate cannot be had without the consent of the life
tenant, thus giving the life tenant the control of whether there can be a
partition sale, whereas in a compulsory sale she has no control whatever.  It is
obvious from the will of the decedent that he desired his wife to have the
income from the real property for life.  The property was an income-producing
apartment house which netted appellant a monthly return far in excess of any
return she can expect from an investment of the moneys partitioned to her in
this  proceeding.  The investment by a trustee of the entire proceeds of the
sale and the payment of the income therefrom to appellant for life would be
carrying out the desire of the testator more nearly than giving her merely the
present value of her life estate in cash.

    In the probate court respondent contended that if the method set forth in
section 781 were adopted, the income from the investment made by the trustee
would have to be divided between the life tenant and the trustee, because
respondent then read that section as if it said "the income thereof to be paid
to the life tenant and [to] the corpus of the estate." But the section does not
read that way.  It reads "the income thereof to be paid to the life tenant and
the corpus of the estate, upon the termination of the life estate, to be
delivered or paid to the remaindermen . . ." (Emphasis added.) At oral argument
of this appeal, respondent withdrew this contention, admitting that if a trustee
were appointed under the section the income from the proceeds of the sale would
go to the life tenant solely.

   A reading of the record shows that the court was misled by this contention.
It apparently considered that if a trustee were appointed and the income had to
be apportioned between the life tenant and the trustee, there was no reason for
not apportioning the entire proceeds at this time.

   While respondent was purporting to proceed in partition under sections 778
and 779, which apply only to sales in partition of real property,  appellant's
petition requested the appointment of a trustee "in accordance with the
provisions of Section 781 . . ." Her petition was actually a petition addressed
to the equity powers of the court, and should have been so regarded.  (See
Holman v. Holman (1938), 25 Cal.App.2d 445 [77 P.2d 515], hereafter discussed,
where the life tenant and the remainderman were seeking determination in an
action for declaratory relief of their rights in the proceeds of a sale.) The
court here should not have applied, as it apparently did, section 779.  Under
the court's powers a trustee to invest the moneys should have been appointed
unless the court found that the interest of the remaindermen in the corpus of
the trust thus established would have been endangered.  The court made no such
finding, and on the record could not have made such finding.  While the court
has a broad discretion in this matter, it is clear from the record that the
court made no effort to exercise its discretion.

   In any event, it would be an abuse of discretion in this  matter to deny the
widow that which the testator clearly intended she should have for life, namely,
the income from the real property.  When, because of circumstances over which
she had no control, money was substituted for the real property, it became
necessary to substitute the earning power of the money for the earning power of
the real property. Although appellant's petition asked that the moneys be
invested in "like improved real property," something which probably would be
impossible to do, that request would not preclude and should not have precluded
investment in other forms of property.  Even deposit in a savings bank would
return the widow more than any investment she could make of the small portion of
the proceeds set apart to her in the order.

   Both parties rely on Holman v. Holman, supra, 25 Cal.App.2d 445. There the
husband left a will in which he bequeathed the residue of his estate to his wife
for life with power to sell, remainder to his son.  The residue of his estate
consisted principally of the real property involved in the litigation.  The
decree of distribution in his estate distributed one-half thereof to the widow
as her own undivided one-half of the property, and a life estate in the other
half with power of sale. Thereafter the widow and the son sold the real property
to one Holman,  who, as consideration therefor, paid the widow a certain amount
in cash and deeded to her certain real property. Thereafter the widow
transferred the net cash proceeds of the sale and the property deeded to her to
a bank in trust, the income and such portion of the principal as the trustee
deemed necessary to go to her for life, the remainder one-third to her son and
two-thirds to his children.

   An action in declaratory relief was brought by the son to have the trust
declared invalid and to have the court apportion his  and the widow's share in
the proceeds of the sale.  The son contended that upon the sale of the original
property by the joint voluntary act of the widow and himself, the respective
interests which they had in the undivided one-half of the property which was
subject to the life estate, 3 terminated and thereafter as to the proceeds of
the sale of said half the widow was under the duty to account to him as
remainderman, and that she therefore held a portion of such consideration in
trust for him.  As to this contention the court said: "It is conceded that the
suggestion thus advanced is novel,  that there is no authority directly
supporting it,  and that whatever authority there is upon the general question
is contrary to the contention.  Attention is called to the statement of the rule
as given in Rulling Case Law and Corpus Juris.  In the former the rule is thus
stated: 'As a general rule, in case of a sale of the entire property, the tenant
for life and the remainderman take the same interests in the proceeds,
respectively, as they had in the property, the income going to the life tenant
and the principal at his death to the remainderman.' (17 R.C.L., p. 646, § 38.)
In the latter it is declared: 'Where the entire estate is sold there must be an
apportionment of the proceeds between the life tenant and remainderman which
must be based upon the value of their respective interests at the time of the
sale.' (21 C.J., p. 962, § 99.)" (Pp. 455-456.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3
(Admittedly the widow could retain for herself all proceeds of the sale of the
other undivided half which had been decreed to her as her share of the community
property.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The court stated that the entire proceeds of the sale had, with the son's
consent, been turned over to the widow, but that such fact was not indicative of
an abandonment of the son's rights as a remainderman. "There is, moreover, no
occasion for attempting to work out a trust relationship between the life tenant
and the remainderman in such proceeds." (P. 457.) The court then pointed out
that the will expressly provided that the life tenant was given power of sale
and that obviously it was the testator's intent that the life tenant should have
the right to consume the entire estate if necessity should arise and the decree
of distribution by its terms recognized the wide power granted the widow.
Therefore "It was entirely reasonable that when the land was sold the proceeds
of the sale should be held and retained by the life tenant who had the undoubted
right to use any part or all of such proceeds for her proper maintenance during
her life.  As to one-half of such proceeds she could make whatever disposition
thereof she wished since by the decree of distribution such an interest had been
distributed to her absolutely.  As to the remaining one-half she continued to
have exactly what the decree of distribution gave her which was a life estate
with the power heretofore mentioned.  Having the dominion and control of the
entire proceeds she could unquestionably transfer to a third party all thereof
but as to one-half of the proceeds such transfer would be effective only as to
the interest which she held therein which was a life estate and the transferee
would take only what she could lawfully convey which was a life estate. ( Civ.
Code, § 1108; Hall v. Wright, 17 Cal.App. 502 [120 P. 429]; 16 Cal.Jur., p. 373,
§ 10, p. 375, § 12.) The trial  court correctly determined that upon the death
of Emma Holman the respondent as remainderman was immediately entitled to have
one-half of the proceeds derived from the sale . . ." (P. 457.) While the rule
quoted from 21 Corpus Juris to the effect that on a sale there must be an
apportionment of the proceeds between the life tenant and the remainderman, is
in direct conflict with the rule quoted from 17 Ruling Case Law to the effect
that on a sale the income from the proceeds goes to the life tenant and on his
death the principal to the remainderman, 4  it is clear that the court followed
the latter rule.  This is the more sensible rule, for the reason that it carries
into effect the manifest intention and desire of the testator.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   However,
in 21 Corpus Juris, immediately following the quoted language appears the
following: "The usual mode of disposing of the proceeds of a sale is to award
the life tenant the interest on the fund for his life, and the principal after
his death to the remainderman; the life tenant not being entitled to have the
value of his life estate paid to him in gross instead of the annual interest on
the fund, unless the parties in interest agree to it, but the court may in its
discretion divide the proceeds between the parties according to the value of
their respective interests . . ." (P. 963.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In Riley v. Turpin (1956), 47 Cal.2d 152 [301 P.2d 834], a remainderman
brought an action for partition of real property between himself and the life
tenant. The property was sold at partition sale.  In apportioning the proceeds
of the sale between the parties the court followed sections 778 and 779.
However,  the case is of no value here for the reason that no request was made
that the court follow section 781 nor was that section mentioned, the parties
obviously agreeing to the court acting under the other sections.

   2. Waiver.

     Respondent contends that appellant's request to the court was in the
alternative and therefore she waived any right to insist on a ruling by the
court of her request for the appointment of a trustee.  It is true that her
request is phrased in the alternative.  However, that fact does not constitute a
waiver of her right to have the court rule upon the first of the alternatives.
Particularly is this so, when the record discloses that at the hearing her
counsel did not present her request in the alternative but only her request for
the appointment of the trustee.  The widow was entitled to some protection from
the court of equity, at least to the extent of the court's determining, which
the court did not do, whether there was  some good reason or reasons for the
court not granting her first alternative.

   As both appellant and the remaindermen had the same interests in the proceeds
of sale that they had in the real property which was sold, appellant,  unless
some good reason not apparent from the record exists to the contrary, is
entitled to the earning power of the proceeds of the sale, in lieu of the income
she received from the rentals of the real property.

   3. The Apportionment.

   In view of our decision that appellant is entitled to the earnings of the
proceeds of the sale, and is not required to accept the apportionment made by
the court, it becomes unnecessary to consider or discuss the apportionment.

   The purported appeals from the orders are dismissed.  The judgment is
reversed.


                              97 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          JOHN C. GRANT et al., Plaintiffs and Appellants, v. JAMES G.
                      HALVERSON, Defendant and Respondent.

                                  No. E007008.

           Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District,
                                 Division Two.

            228 Cal. App. 3d 618; 278 Cal. Rptr. 880; 1991 Cal. App.
          LEXIS 278; 91 Cal. Daily Op. Service 1929; 91 Daily Journal
                                    DAR 3126


                                March 15, 1991.

NOTICE:    NOT CITABLE - ORDERED NOT PUBLISHED

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:    July 25, 1991 Reporter of Decisions directed not to
publish this opn. in the Official Reports (Cal. Const., art. VI, § 14; rule 976,
Cal. Rules of Ct.), Reported at 1991 Cal. LEXIS 3451.

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of San Barnardino County, No. RCV 47457,
Kenneth G. Ziebarth, Jr., Judge.

COUNSEL: Ed Klein, Jr., for Plaintiffs and Appellants.

Reid & Hellyer, William J. Ward and Michael A. Markel for Defendant and
Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Hollenhorst, Acting P.J., with Dabney, and Timlin, JJ,
concurring.

OPINION BY: HOLLENHORST

OPINION

      HOLLENHORST, J.

   In this case we consider whether licensed real estate brokers can maintain a
commission action when they allege that a property owner orally promised to pay
them a commission for finding joint venture partners to develop the property.

   Defendant's demurrer to the brokers' first amended complaint was upheld on
grounds that the action was barred by the statute of frauds. Plaintiff brokers
appeal, contending that the demurrer was improperly sustained because their
commission claim is not barred by the statute of frauds.

   THE ALLEGED FIRST CAUSE OF ACTION FOR BREACH OF CONTRACT

   The first amended complaint uses judicial council forms to attempt to allege
seven causes of action. The first cause of action is by plaintiff Grant  for
breach of contract. Its charging allegations are as follows: "Defendant
Halverson agreed to pay plaintiff GRANT a commission of ten percent (10%) of the
price of defendant's 97.4 acres . . . if a joint venture could be arranged for
development of the land; the parties increased the asking price to cover the
commission, and defendant Halverson asked plaintiff GRANT to arrange a meeting
with defendants OLESON and MAGDYCH which was done.[1 ] Plaintiff GRANT alleges
on information and belief that at the meeting arranged by plaintiffs GRANT and
LEWIS between defendants HALVERSON, OLESON and MAGDYCH on 2/20/86, defendant
HALVERSON agreed to pay plaintiffs GRANT and LEWIS a 10% commission. . . . [P]
Defendant HALVERSON sold and transferred the subject property to a joint venture
with defendants MAGDYCH and OLESON, but refused to pay and continues to refuse
to pay plaintiffs  their commission. Plaintiffs are informed and believe that
the value of the land contributed to the joint venture was $2,503,000, and that
defendants breached the agreement by not paying plaintiffs the agreed upon 10
percent commission." Plaintiffs also alleged that they were licensed real estate
brokers.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Although
the complaint alleges that a commission is due for merely arranging a meeting,
plaintiff Grant claims on appeal that he did more by actually procuring the
joint venture partners and arranging the joint venture development of the
property itself. We will give plaintiff Grant the benefit of the doubt by
construing the complaint as if it contained a specific allegation that he
procured prospective joint venture partners.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The trial court sustained the demurrer without leave to amend because it
thought that plaintiffs could not amend to avoid the statute of frauds. It
apparently decided that the action was an action by real estate brokers for a
commission within the meaning of Civil Code section 1624, subdivision (d).

   THE STATUTE OF FRAUDS

    Civil Code section 1624, subdivision (d) requires the following contracts to
be in writing to be enforceable: "An agreement authorizing or employing an
agent, broker, or any other person to purchase or sell real estate, or to lease
real estate for a longer period than one year, or to procure, introduce, or find
a purchaser or seller of real estate or a lessee or lessor of real estate where
the lease is for a longer period than one year, for compensation or a
commission."

   Plaintiff Grant contends that the section does not apply because he did not
find a purchaser or seller of real estate. Instead, he argues that he procured
two persons to act as joint venturers with his client, defendant Halverson, to
develop Halverson's real property. He therefore argues that the formation of a
joint venture is not a purchase or sale of real estate but rather the formation
of a partnership for a limited purpose. Since the statute  of frauds does not
require agreements to form joint ventures to be in writing, he argues that the
commission agreement of the licensed broker, as agent of a property owner who is
one of the joint venturers, should not have to be in writing to be enforceable.
2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2
Plaintiffs also argue that the arrangement was more like a contract by which
Halverson agreed to transfer a share of the profits from his real estate
development to his partners. Such arrangements are not a transfer of an interest
in real property but rather a transfer of personal property in the form of a
chose in action. ( Bank of California v. Connolly  (1973) 36 Cal.App.3d 350, 374
[111 Cal.Rptr. 468].) The argument is defeated by the allegation in the
complaint that "Defendant HALVERSON sold and transferred the subject property to
a joint venture . . . ."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The first half of plaintiff Grant's argument rests on cases arising under
Civil Code section 1624,  subdivision (c). That section provides that the
statute of frauds applies to: "An agreement for the leasing for a longer period
than one year, or for the sale of real property, or of an interest therein; such
an agreement, if made by an agent of the party sought to be charged, is invalid,
unless the authority of the agent is in writing, subscribed by the party sought
to be charged."

   Cases under this subdivision hold that it does not apply to agreements to
form a joint venture. (See, generally, 1 Miller & Starr, Cal. Real Estate 2d
(1989) § 1:59, pp. 165-168.) Under those cases, an oral agreement to form a
joint venture does not violate the statute of frauds, even though one of the
joint venture partners contributes his real property to the joint venture. (
Gross v. Raeburn  (1963) 219 Cal.App.2d 792 [33 Cal.Rptr. 432].) The statute of
frauds has also been held inapplicable to the situation where a licensed real
estate broker alleges that she became a joint venturer. ( James v. Herbert
(1957) 149 Cal.App.2d 741 [309 P.2d 91]; Fitzgerald v. Provines  (1951) 102
Cal.App.2d 529 [227 P.2d 860].)

   Since the formation of joint ventures is essentially controlled by the rules
regarding formation of partnerships (see, e.g., Jaffe v. Heffner  (1959) 173
Cal.App.2d 512, 516 [343 P.2d 374]), we do not find those rules helpful in
interpreting the term "procure, introduce, or find a purchaser or seller of real
estate" in Civil Code section 1624, subdivision (d). Subdivision (d) applies to
persons, including licensed brokers, who seek to recover compensation for their
services.

   "The purpose of this provision of the Statute of Frauds is to protect buyers,
sellers, lessors, and lessees of real property from unfounded claims by brokers
and finders who have not been duly authorized to act as an agent for the
principal. However, it is equally the policy of the law to protect a broker who
has been employed properly and has performed services for the principal in good
faith." (1 Miller & Starr, op. cit. supra , § 1:61, p. 172.)

     In discussing the specific terms "purchase, sale or lease," Miller and
Starr says: "The Statute of Frauds . . . includes any transaction that
accomplishes the same result. The Statute applies to an exchange of real
property, so that an agreement by an owner of property authorizing an agent to
negotiate for the exchange of the owner's property for some other parcel of
property must be in writing in order to enforce collection of compensation from
the owner for the agent's services." (l Miller & Starr, op. cit. supra , § 1:62,
p. 176, fns. omitted.) Thus, even though property is not technically "sold or
purchased" in an exchange, the statute of frauds applies.

   Miller and Starr also cite the cases holding that an agreement for a broker
to obtain an option to purchase property must be in writing to be enforceable.
(1 Miller & Starr, op. cit. supra , § 1:62, pp. 176-177.) Thus, even though the
option is also not an actual sale or purchase, it relates to a contract for the
sale or purchase of real estate.

   The oral contract alleged here is not a contract in which the brokers
participated in the joint venture or received a share of the joint venture for
their services. Instead, the action is alleged as a simple action by a real
estate broker for breach of contract to pay a real estate commission. 3 (See,
Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10136.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Indeed,
plaintiff Grant even alleges that the property was sold to the joint venture.
This allegation puts him squarely with the terms of Civil Code section 1624,
subdivision (d). Nevertheless, we consider his argument that there was no sale
because the owner merely contributed his property to the joint venture.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    We think that, in interpreting the scope of Civil Code section 1624,
subdivision (d) in a commission action by a licensed broker, we should consider
whether the broker's activities alleged were activities which required a real
estate license. ( Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10131.) If the activities required a
license, the broker is presumed to know that his commission agreement had to be
in writing to be enforceable. ( Phillippe v. Shapell Industries  (1987) 43
Cal.3d 1247, 1260-1261 [241 Cal.Rptr. 22, 743 P.2d 1279].) "To recover
compensation for services that require a real estate license, the agent must
have the required license and a memorandum signed by the owner which satisfies
the Statute of Frauds." (1 Miller & Starr, op cit. supra , § 1:62, p. 174.)

   The Real Estate Law ( Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10000 et seq.) defines the types
of activities that require a person to obtain a real estate broker's license. In
addition to the obtaining of buyers and sellers for real estate, the law
includes persons who solicit the exchange of real estate "or a business
opportunity." ( Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10131.) This phraseology results from  the
merging of the real estate and business opportunity licenses in 1965. (Review of
Selected 1965 Code Legislation (Cont.Ed.Bar 1965) p. 14.)

   A "business opportunity" is defined in Business and Professions Code section
10030 to include "the sale or lease of the business and goodwill of an existing
business enterprise or opportunity."

   The background and history of this phrase is discussed in the recent case of
All Points Traders, Inc. v. Barrington Associates  (1989) 211 Cal.App.3d 723
[259 Cal.Rptr. 780]. In that case, the court found that the term "encompasses
any transfer of the ownership of an entire ongoing business in corporate form
whether by transfer of all the stock or all the assets." ( Id. , at p. 731.) The
court there points out that Business and Professions Code section 10131.3 " adds
to the definition of real estate broker those persons who assist in certain
noncorporate securities transactions in small real estate investment entities.
Section 10131.3 refers to those securities 'as specified in  Section 25206 of
the Corporations Code,' i.e., 'any interest in any general or limited
partnership, joint venture . . . engaged solely in, investment in or gain from
an interest in real property, including, but not limited to, a sale, exchange,
trade or development.'" (211 Cal.App.3d at p. 733.) 4 Thus, a real estate
broker's license was required for the activities undertaken here by the licensed
real estate brokers.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   See,
also, Business and Professions Code section 10131.2 and Review of Selected 1965
Code Legislation (Cont.Ed.Bar 1965) page 14: "The merging of real estate and
business opportunity licenses should clarify the law and benefit licensees and
the public."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Since the activities of the brokers here required a license, we find that the
transaction was a transaction by which the brokers were employed to "procure,
introduce, or find a purchaser or seller of real estate . . . for . . . a
commission." Accordingly, we find that the statute of frauds applies to a
commission agreement which employs licensed real estate brokers to find persons
who will finance the development of a particular parcel of real property in a
joint venture with the present property owner. 5 Plaintiffs cannot recover on
the alleged oral commission agreement.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   In an
analogous situation, Miller and Starr states: " CC § 1624(d) was amended in 1963
to enlarge the requirement to include an authority to lease real estate, or to
find a lessor or lessee for a lease with a period longer than one year. It does
not specifically reference a sale or assignment of a leasehold estate.  B & P C
§ 10133(b) provides that a license is required for the sale, purchase, or
exchange of a lease regardless of the term of the lease. Since a license is
required to negotiate a lease assignment, it is reasonable to require his
compensation agreement to be in writing under CC § 1624(d). See B & P C § 10136
." (Miller & Starr, op. cit. supra , § 1:56, p. 156, fn. 64.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   THE ALLEGED FRAUD CAUSE OF ACTION

   Plaintiff Grant next contends that, even if the statute of frauds bars his
commission action, he can maintain his fraud cause of action. He relies   on
Phillippe v. Shapell Industries , supra , 43 Cal.3d 1247, which states: "We
conclude that a licensed real estate broker cannot invoke equitable estoppel to
avoid the statute of frauds unless the broker shows actual fraud." ( Id. , at p.
1252.) After explaining why the real estate commission in that case was subject
to the statute of frauds, and why the agreement in that case did not comply with
the statute, the court discussed why the equitable estoppel doctrine did not
prevent the defendant from asserting the statute of frauds defense.

   The court explained that "it was not speaking of actual fraud but of the
'fraud' that inheres in situations where there is an unconscionable injury to
the promisee under an invalid oral contract or unjust enrichment to the
promisor." (43 Cal.3d at p. 1262.)

   The court found that "the broker's reliance on the oral contract was not
reasonable in light of the broker's presumed knowledge of the requirements of
the statute of frauds." (43 Cal.3d at p. 1262.) Accordingly his reliance was not
reasonable, and he suffered no unconscionable injury.

   In discussing when an action for actual fraud could be maintained, the court
said: "To recover for fraud in any case the plaintiff must show that he
reasonably relied on the defendant's misrepresentations. The plaintiff cannot
recover if his reliance was not justified or reasonable. [Citations.] As
discussed above, a broker's presumed knowledge of the statute of frauds
precludes him from showing the reasonable reliance on an oral agreement that is
necessary to assert equitable estoppel. [Citations.] . . . By parity of
reasoning, a broker's reliance on an oral promise to pay a commission . . .
cannot be sufficiently reasonable to support an action for fraud. A broker's
reliance, however, on a representation that the necessary contract has in fact
been executed may be reasonable and thus support an action for fraud or the
assertion of equitable estoppel. [Citations.] [P] There may be other types of
promises on which a broker could reasonably rely. We do not purport in this
opinion to identify  every such promise. We believe, however, that a licensed
broker's reliance can be reasonable only in rather limited circumstances.
Whether a broker's reliance is reasonable must be determined on the facts of
each case." (43 Cal.3d at p. 1270.) 6

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   See,
generally, 2 Corbin, Contracts (1990 pocket supp.) section 416, page 121,
discussing Phillippe v. Shapell Industries, Inc. , supra , 43 Cal.3d 1247:
"There does not appear to be anything 'harsh and inflexible' in requiring a real
estate broker always  to comply with the statute of frauds applicable to his
business, within which he is charged with special knowledge on the basis of his
license. The fraud exception allowed by the majority seems a reasonable one;
even an expert can be misled to his unjust detriment by a perpetrator of fraud."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The only fraud alleged here is that: "Defendant HALVERSON increased the price
of his property to cover a 10 percent commission, but failed and  refused to pay
same upon the transfer of the property." This allegation is coupled with
allegations that defendant Halverson never intended to pay the commission and
that the commission was not paid. These allegations do not allege any unusual
type of promise that would bring plaintiffs within the narrow exception for
actual fraud described above. (See, generally, Miller & Starr, op. cit. supra ,
§ 1:67, pp. 187-192.) The brokers' presumed knowledge of the statute of frauds
prevents them from reasonably relying on any oral commission promises made by
defendant Halverson. We therefore find that defendant's demurrer to plaintiffs'
fraud cause of action was properly sustained.

   THE ALLEGED CAUSE OF ACTION FOR INTENTIONAL INTERFERENCE WITH PROSPECTIVE
ECONOMIC ADVANTAGE

   Plaintiffs next contend that they can maintain their alleged sixth cause of
action for intentional interference with prospective economic advantage. 7
Plaintiffs pled that defendants Magdych and Oleson promised plaintiff Lewis that
they would pay the commission if Mr. Halverson did not pay it, that this
agreement constituted a prospective economic advantage, and that Mr. Halverson
intentionally interfered with that economic relationship. The specific acts of
Mr. Halverson in this regard are not alleged.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   The
argument is confusing because it cites the sixth cause of action. This cause of
action is by plaintiff Lewis against defendant Halverson but its charging
allegations do not distinguish between plaintiff Lewis and plaintiff Grant. The
appellants' brief refers to this cause of action as being by Grant, but the term
"Grant" is defined in appellantsq brief to include both plaintiffs.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    In Buckaloo v. Johnson  (1975) 14 Cal.3d 815 [122 Cal.Rptr. 745, 537 P.2d
865], our Supreme Court considered this issue. The court specifically noted
that: "the tort [of intentional interference with prospective advantage] is
considerably more inclusive than actions based on contract or interference with
contract, and thus is not dependent on the existence of a valid contract. But
this broad assertion must be qualified by the statement that the wrong
complained of cannot be merely a failure on the part of the actor to comply with
an unenforceable contract. The statute of frauds conclusively establishes that
brokerage contracts with either the vendor or the vendee must be in writing. We
have neither the authority nor the inclination to circumvent that declared
policy by permitting tort actions to become an expedient substitute for contract
actions specifically forbidden by statute." ( Id. , at pp. 826-827.)

   The court held that the elements of the tort of intentional interference with
prospective economic advantage in the real estate broker context  are: "(1) an
economic relationship between broker and vendor or broker and vendee containing
the probability of future economic benefit to the broker, (2) knowledge by the
defendant of the existence of the relationship, (3) intentional acts on the part
of the defendant designed to disrupt the relationship, (4) actual disruption of
the relationship, (5) damages to the plaintiff proximately caused by the acts of
the defendant." (14 Cal.3d at p. 827.)

    The allegations of the complaint here are insufficient to plead a cause of
action because plaintiffs do not allege any intentional acts by Mr. Halverson
that were designed to disrupt the alleged relationship between plaintiff Lewis
and defendants Magdych and Oleson, nor any actual disruption of the alleged
relationship. The trial court therefore properly sustained the demurrer on this
ground.

   The issue thus becomes whether the trial court erred in failing to allow
plaintiffs the opportunity to amend their complaint to allege specific
intentional acts by Mr. Halverson, and the consequent disruption of the
relationship. While it is possible that these omissions could be cured by
amendment, we agree with defendant that the alleged wrong is only the failure to
comply with an unenforceable contract. In such a situation, Buckaloo  governs
and the tort cause of action cannot substitute for the contract cause of action
which is barred by the statute of frauds. ( Buckaloo v. Johnson , supra , 14
Cal.3d 815, 826-827.) We therefore conclude that the trial court properly
refused to give the plaintiffs leave to amend the sixth cause of action.

   OTHER CAUSES OF ACTION

   Plaintiffs contend that the trial court's ruling on the third cause of action
(common counts), the fifth cause of action (conspiracy), and the eighth cause of
action (unjust enrichment) was wrong because the underlying causes of action are
not barred by the statute of frauds. Since we have concluded that the contract
and fraud causes of action are barred by the statute of frauds, and that the
cause of action for intentional interference with prospective economic advantage
cannot be used to avoid the bar of the statute of frauds in this situation, the
court's ruling on the third, fifth, and eighth causes of action was also
correct.

   Defendant Halverson was not named in the remaining causes of action (the
second cause of action and the seventh cause of action). Accordingly, his
demurrer, and the trial court's decision, did not address those causes of
action.

    DISPOSITION 8

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -8
Defendants contend that they should be awarded sanctions because plaintiff filed
a frivolous appeal. Finding that neither the objective nor the subjective
standards for a frivolous appeal have been met in this case, we decline to
consider their request further. ( In re Marriage of Flaherty  (1982) 31 Cal.3d
637 [183 Cal.Rptr. 508, 646 P.2d 179].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The trial court's order dismissing the action against defendant Halverson
with prejudice is affirmed. 9

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -9   The trial
court signed an order sustaining the demurrer and dismissing the action with
prejudice as to defendant Halverson. An order sustaining a demurrer without
leave to amend is nonappealable (9 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (3d ed. 1985) Appeal,
§ 82, pp. 104-105) but an order of dismissal has the effect of a final judgment
and is appealable as such ( id. , at § 74, p. 99).
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Dabney, J., and Timlin, J., concurred.


                              98 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          GRUBB AND ELLIS COMPANY et al., Plaintiffs, Cross-defendants
               and Respondents, v. DANIEL S. SPENGLER, Defendant,
                        Cross-complainant and Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 68509

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Five

            143 Cal. App. 3d 890; 192 Cal. Rptr. 637; 1983 Cal. App.
                   LEXIS 1824; 26 Wage & Hour Cas. (BNA) 901


                                 June 14, 1983

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Santa Clara County, No. 387250, O. Vincent
Bruno, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1) Appellate Review § 12--Decisions Appealable--Memorandum of Decision.  --A
memorandum of decision is not an appealable order.

(2) Appellate Review § 59--Notice of Appeal--Construing Notice of Appeal as
Referring to Judgment.  --A notice of appeal purporting to appeal from a trial
court's memorandum of decision and notice of intended judgment, which is not an
appealable order, was construed by the Court of Appeal as referring to the
judgment entered in the case.

(3) Appellate Review § 184--Determination and Disposition of Cause--Harmless and
Reversible Error--Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law--Failure to Serve
Proposed Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Judgment on Parties.  --In a
civil action in which the trial court rendered judgment in favor of plaintiff
and against defendant on his cross-complaint, the fact that plaintiff failed to
serve proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law and judgment on
defendant, as was then provided for in Cal. Rules of Court, rule 232, was not
grounds for reversal on appeal. The record did not reveal that defendant took
advantage of the remedy provided by rule 232(c), by submitting his own findings
when plaintiff failed to timely serve him with its findings. The record also did
not reveal that defendant made any inquiry respecting the findings at any time
after his request for findings was filed. Furthermore, defendant made no showing
of prejudice as a result of the failure to serve proposed findings and judgment
upon him. Failure to serve proposed findings upon the parties as required by
rule 232 is a mere irregularity and not grounds for reversal.

(4a) (4b) Labor § 10--Regulation of Working Conditions--Wages--Real Estate
Salesmen--Entitlement to Minimum Wage.  --In an action by a real estate broker
against a salesman formerly employed by the broker under an "independent
contractor" agreement, which provided for compensation based solely on
commissions, to recover the balance due on certain promissory notes executed by
the salesman, which were claimed to represent loans made to the salesman in the
form of a monthly draw against commissions, in which the salesman
cross-complained for declaratory relief, asserting that under the "independent
contractor" agreement he was an employee and as such entitled to an hourly
minimum wage, there was sufficient evidence to sustain the trial court's finding
that the salesman was not an employee of the broker for the purpose of
entitlement to minimum wages. The federal minimum wage law (29 U.S.C. § 206)
applies only to employees engaged in interstate commerce and nothing indicated
the broker was engaged in interstate commerce. In any case, since federal
legislation excludes real estate salespersons from the definition of employee
for purposes of federal employment taxes (26 U.S.C. § 3508), it is unlikely they
would be considered employees for purposes of the minimum wage laws. The state
minimum wage law specifically excludes outside salesmen from its coverage. (
Lab. Code, § 1171.) Finally, the salesman failed to show that he was an employee
under the traditional common law "control" test. He admitted that he entered
into an agreement with the broker which provided he was to be an independent
contractor. Evidence that the broker periodically reviewed his performance was
insufficient to establish the kind of control over the manner in which he
performed his work that would indicate an employer-employee relationship.

(5) Pleading § 97--Necessity for Proof--Admissions in Pleadings.  --Matters
admitted in pleadings do not require proof.

COUNSEL: Daniel S. Spengler, in pro. per., and Dreyer, Shulman, Dubbin, Kraft &
Green for Defendant, Cross-complainant and Appellant.

James D'A. Welch for Plaintiffs, Cross-defendants and Respondents.

JUDGES: Opinion by Feinerman, P. J., with Stephens and Ashby, JJ., concurring.

OPINION BY: FEINERMAN

OPINION

     Defendant, Daniel S. Spengler (Spengler), who appears here in pro. per.,
purports to appeal from the memorandum of decision and notice of intended
judgment.   A memorandum of decision is not an appealable order. ( Estate of
Pieper (1964) 224 Cal.App.2d 670, 675 [37 Cal.Rptr. 46].)  However, we construe
the notice of appeal, filed November 26, 1980, as referring to the judgment
entered August 4, 1980.  (See Gregory v. Hamilton (1978) 77 Cal.App.3d 213, 215,
fn. 1. [142 Cal.Rptr. 563]; Channell v. Anthony (1976) 58 Cal.App.3d 290, 302
[129 Cal.Rptr.  704].)

   Suit was originally filed by Grubb and Ellis Commercial Brokerage Company
(Grubb and Ellis) on certain promissory notes executed by Spengler in favor of
Grubb and Ellis totaling $ 9,100, of which Grubb and Ellis claimed $ 6,574.84
remained due and payable by Spengler, plus interest at the rate of 7 percent per
annum.  Grubb and Ellis took the position that Spengler had been engaged by them
on July 12, 1976, as a real estate salesman under what they termed an
"independent contractor agreement" that provided for compensation based solely
on commissions to be collected from parties to real estate transactions.  Grubb
and Ellis claimed that the promissory notes executed by Spengler represented
loans made by Grubb and Ellis to Spengler in the form of a monthly  draw against
commissions.  The promissory notes were payable within six months or upon
termination of Spengler's relationship with Grubb and Ellis.  Spengler was
terminated on July 29, 1977, and the plaintiffs claim the notes became due and
payable at that time.

   Spengler cross-complained for declaratory relief asserting that under the
independent contractor agreement with Grubb and Ellis he was an employee and as
such was entitled to an hourly minimum wage and social security benefits.
Spengler also claimed moneys were due to him on the theory of quantum meruit,
and he sought damages for breach of contract and fraud.

   After a court trial, judgment was rendered in favor of Grubb and Ellis on its
complaint in the amount of $ 5,694.42 plus interest from November 30, 1976, to
date of judgment and $ 1,147.25 in attorneys' fees and costs.  Judgment was
rendered against Spengler on all counts of his cross-complaint.

     Spengler contends that the fact that Grubb and Ellis failed to serve the
proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law and judgment on him, as was
then provided for in rule 232 of the California Rules of Court, is grounds for
reversal on appeal. 1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   At the
time of the trial in this case,  Code of Civil Procedure section 632 required
the trial court to render findings of fact and conclusions of law upon request
of a party, and rule 232, California Rules of Court, specified the procedures
and time limits for requesting and submitting proposed findings, making
objections and counterfindings, etc.  In 1981, Code of Civil Procedure section
632 was amended to delete the requirement of findings, and rule 232, California
Rules of Court, was amended to reflect the changes in Code of Civil Procedure
section 632.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The trial court filed and served its memorandum of decision and notice of
intended judgment on June 9, 1980.  Spengler filed his request for findings of
fact and conclusions of law on June 16, 1980.  A notice to prepare findings was
served by the court on June 17, 1980.  The proposed findings of fact and
conclusions of law and the proposed judgment are dated June 30, 1980, and were
signed by the court and filed on August 4, 1980.  The record indicates that the
proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law and judgment were not served upon
Spengler.  Rule 232(c) provided at the time here pertinent that, "If the
proposed findings, conclusions and judgment are not served and submitted within
such time [15 days after service of a notice to prepare findings], or any
additional time granted by the court as provided by subdivision (i), 2 any other
party who appeared at the trial may: (1) prepare, serve and submit to the court
his proposed findings, conclusions and judgment, or (2) serve on all other
parties  and file a notice of motion for an order that findings and conclusions
be deemed waived." The record does not reveal that Spengler took advantage of
the remedy provided by subdivision (c) of rule 232 by submitting his own
findings when Grubb and Ellis failed to timely serve him with its findings.  The
record does not reveal that Spengler made any inquiry respecting the findings at
any time after his request for findings was filed.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2
Subdivision (i) of rule 232 provided "The court may, by written order, extend
any of the times prescribed herein and at any time prior to the entry of
judgment, whether or not a signed judgment is filed, it may, for good cause
shown and upon such terms as may be just, excuse a noncompliance with the time
limits prescribed for doing any act required by this rule."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In Tsarnas v. Bailey (1962) 205 Cal.App.2d 593 [23 Cal.Rptr. 336], the court,
in construing former Code of Civil Procedure section 634 which provided for
service of proposed findings upon all parties, stated at page 596: "The final
contention on appeal is that the judgment is invalid since the findings of fact
were not served on the defendant before the signing of the judgment in violation
of section 634 of the Code of Civil Procedure. However, both the cases decided
before and after the 1959 amendment to this section have uniformly held that
failure to serve the findings is a mere irregularity and not grounds for
reversal [citations]." (See Ball v. City Council (1967) 252 Cal.App.2d 136 at
pp. 146-147 [60 Cal.Rptr.  139].) The same reasoning is applicable with respect
to the requirements of service of proposed findings contained in rule 232 of the
California Rules of Court at the time here pertinent.  (See Estate of Cooper
(1970) 11 Cal.App.3d 1114, 1121-1122 [90 Cal.Rptr. 283].) Spengler has made no
showing of prejudice as a result of the failure to serve proposed findings and
judgment upon him.  He has not demonstrated cause for reversal of the judgment
on this ground.

   In its findings of fact, the trial court found that Spengler executed various
promissory notes while a real estate salesperson for Grubb and Ellis, and that,
pursuant to stipulation of the parties, the amount outstanding on the notes was
$ 5,694.42 with interest at the rate of 7 percent (7%)  from November 30, 1976,
to date of judgment.  The trial court found that the relationship between
Spengler and Grubb and Ellis was governed by the written independent contractor
agreement, that Spengler's service with Grubb and Ellis was terminated in
accordance with the agreement, and that Grubb and Ellis had not breached the
agreement.

   In its conclusions of law, the trial court stated, "Defendant Daniel S.
Spengler at all times material to the above-entitled case, was not an employee
of the Plaintiff, but rather an independent contractor and therefore, was not
entitled to a minimum wage," and "was not subject to the Social Security System
. . . and was entitled only to compensation based on commissions earned
according to the Independent Contractor Agreement . . .  ."

   Spengler challenges the trial court's finding that he was an independent
contractor.

    The answer to the question whether the relationship between a real estate
broker and his real estate salesperson is one of employer and employee or one of
principal and independent contractor depends upon the particular area of law one
is examining.

   It seems clear that for purposes of the administration of the real estate
law, the salesperson is the employee and agent of the broker. (See Bus. & Prof.
Code, §§ 10132, 10137, 10151, 10160, 10177, subd. (h); Grand v. Griesinger
(1958) 160 Cal.App.2d 397, 404-406 [325 P.2d 475].)

   For purposes of establishing tort liability, the California courts have held
that a broker is liable under the doctrine of respondeat superior for the
tortious acts of his salespeople during the course and scope of business because
a salesperson is the agent of the broker. Thus, in Gipson v. Davis Realty Co.
(1963) 215 Cal.App.2d 190, at pages 206-207 [30 Cal.Rptr. 253], the court
stated: "We are satisfied, accordingly, that while it may be a question of fact
whether in each case a real estate salesman is an employee within the common law
definition of master and servant, the Legislature has, by virtue of statutory
enactment, made such a salesman an agent of the broker as a matter of law. A
consideration of the several statutory provisions applicable to a real estate
salesman impels the conclusion that such person can act only for, on behalf of,
and in place of the broker under whom he is licensed, and that his acts are
limited to those which he does and performs as an agent for such broker.
[Citation.] We conclude, therefore, that a salesman, insofar as his relationship
with the broker who employs him is concerned, cannot be classed as an
independent contractor. Accordingly, any contract which purports to change that
relationship from that of agent to independent contractor is invalid as being
contrary to the provisions of the Real Estate Law. [Citation.]"

   The status of a real estate salesman for purposes of workers' compensation
insurance is less clear.  In two early cases, prior to the enactment of the Real
Estate Law ( Bus. & Prof. Code, § 10000 et seq.), the courts found that an
employer-employee relationship existed.  In so concluding, the courts reviewed
the circumstances surrounding the work relationship, considering the amount of
control the broker exerted over his salesmen and weighing such factors as the
method of compensation, who paid the salesman's expenses, how much time the
salesman devoted to his work, and how much control the broker exerted over the
salesman's movement and method of selling.

    Payne v. White House Properties, Inc. (1980) 112 Cal.App.3d 465 [169
Cal.Rptr. 373], considered the same question, but after the enactment of
Business and Professions Codesection 10177, subdivision (h), which provides that
the commissioner may suspend or revoke the license of a broker who has failed to
exercise reasonable supervision over the activities of his salesmen. The  court
examined the question: " . .  . whether or not the real estate broker is now
required to exert that degree of supervision and control over real estate
salespersons so that salespersons are employees for the purpose of worker's
compensation as a matter  of law." (112 Cal.App.3d at p. 470.) The court
concluded that, 'In most instances the real estate salesperson would be an
employee for the purposes of worker's compensation, but that determination
remains a question of fact." (112 Cal.App.3d at p. 471.) 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Payne v.
White House Properties Inc., supra, 112 Cal.App.3d 465, 472, the court concluded
that there was sufficient evidence to sustain the conclusion that the salesman
was not an employee for purposes of worker's compensation insurance.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    In a related case, Resnik v. Anderson & Miles (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 569 [167
Cal.Rptr. 340], a real estate salesperson filed a claim with the California
Labor Commission for commissions which he claimed his broker owed to him.  The
appellate court considered the question of whether the Labor Commissioner had
jurisdiction over the salesperson's claim, his jurisdiction being limited to
employee claims.  ( Lab. Code, §§ 96, 98, subd. (a).) The court concluded that
the salesperson was an agent-employee as a matter of law. (109 Cal.App.3d at pp.
572-573.)

   In 1953 the issue of whether a real estate salesperson was an employee for
purposes of unemployment insurance was clearly settled by the enactment of
section 650 of the Unemployment Insurance Code. It provides in pertinent part,
"'Employment' does not include services performed as a real estate . . . broker
or as a real estate . . . salesman by an individual who is licensed in one of
such classes by the state and who is remunerated solely by way of commission."
Hence, for purposes of the unemployment insurance law a real estate salesperson
who is compensated solely on a commission basis, as was Spengler in the case
before us, is not an employee.

   The status of real estate salespersons for purposes of federal employment
taxes has been settled by the recent enactment of Internal Revenue Code section
3508 (26 U.S.C.A. § 3508, Pub.L. No. 97-248, 96 Stat. 551).  That section
provides in pertinent part, "(a) General Rule. -- For purposes of this title, in
the case of services performed as a qualified real estate agent . . . -- (1) the
individual performing such services shall not be treated as an employee, and (2)
the person for whom such services are performed shall not be treated as an
employer." 4

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   The term
"qualified real estate agent" is defined in Internal Revenue Code section 3508,
subdivision (b)(1) as "any individual who is a sales person if [para. ] (A) such
individual is a licensed real estate agent, [para. ] (B) substantially all of
the remuneration (whether or not paid in cash) for the services performed by
such individual as a real estate agent is directly related to sales or other
output (including the performance of services) rather than to the number of
hours worked, and [para. ] (C) the services performed by the individual are
performed pursuant to a written contract between such individual and the person
for whom the services are performed and such contract provides that the
individual will not be treated as an employee with respect to such services for
Federal tax purposes."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     At the time pertinent in this case, the Internal Revenue Code and the
applicable Treasury regulations embodied the usual common law rule for
determining the existence of the relationship of employer and employee based
generally on the amount of control exercised by the employer over the employee.
(26 C.F.R. § 31.3121(d)-1(c), § 31.3401(c)-1.) In two reported cases in which
the Internal Revenue Service has attempted to enforce the provisions of the
Internal Revenue Code relating to social security and income tax withholding
against the earnings of real estate salesmen, the federal court held, in each
case, that the salesmen were not employees for such purposes.  (See
Dimmitt-Rickhoff-Bayer Real Estate Co. v. Finnegan (8th Cir. 1950) 179 F.2d 882;
Henry Broderick, Inc. v. Squire (9th Cir. 1947) 163 F.2d 980.)

     Insofar as our research reveals, no case or statutory enactment has
specifically addressed itself to the question whether minimum wage laws are
applicable to real estate salesmen. The federal legislation (29 U.S.C.A. § 206)
applies only to employees engaged in interstate commerce. (29 U.S.C.A. § 203 (b)
.) Nothing in the record indicates that Grubb and Ellis was engaged in
interstate commerce. In any case,  in light of the fact that federal legislation
excludes real estate salespersons from the definition of employees for purposes
of federal employment taxes, it is unlikely that they would be considered
employees for purposes of the minimum wage laws.

   The state minimum wage laws specifically exclude outside salesmen from
coverage.  ( Lab. Code, § 1171.) "The apparent reason for specifically providing
that this chapter does not apply to individuals employed as outside salesmen is
that such employees normally control their own hours and are paid on a
commission basis." (Review of Selected 1972 Legislation (1973) 4 Pacific L.J.
213, pp. 482-483.) In title 8, California Administrative Code, section 11345,
subdivision 2(J), "Outside salesperson" is defined as follows: "'Outside
Salesperson' means any person, 18 years of age or over, who customarily and
regularly works more than half the working time away from the employer's place
of business selling tangible or intangible items or obtaining orders or
contracts for products, services or use of facilities." Under Labor Code section
1171, there is a distinction between an independent contractor, who is not an
employee, and an outside salesperson, who is an employee, but has been
specifically excluded from the application of the minimum wage law. In the usual
case, a real estate person would probably qualify as a non-employee either under
the traditional common law "control" rule or as an outside salesperson as
defined in Labor Code section 1171.  In both circumstances, the minimum wage
laws would not be applicable to real estate salespersons.

    In the case before us, minimal evidence was offered by Spengler in support
of his claim that he was an employee under the traditional common law "control"
test.  In his first amended complaint, Spengler admitted that he entered into an
independent contractor agreement with Grubb and Ellis.   (See fn. 5.) The
agreement was attached to his cross-complaint and incorporated by reference. 5
The agreement provided in part, "This agreement does not constitute a hiring by
either party.  It is the parties' intention that, so far as shall be in
conformity with law, the Salesperson [Spengler] shall be an independent
contractor and not G & E's [Grubb and Ellis'] employee." Bill Puterbaugh,
district manager of Grubb and Ellis at the time the company negotiated an
agreement with Spengler, testified that Spengler worked for Grubb and Ellis as
an independent contractor. The testimony pointed to by Spengler respecting the
extent of company supervision was to the following effect: When a person first
started with Grubb and Ellis, the company had "regular review sessions" with
him.  The salesmen also filled out a form called "transactions in progress" on a
monthly basis.  Mr. Puterbaugh testified, "we reviewed with them how they were
doing on the transactions and tried to note[,] counsel and advise them." Mr.
Puterbaugh testified that the purpose of the "transactions in progress" form was
to provide a reason for the managers to talk to the salesmen "once a month."

 This evidence is insufficient to establish the kind of control over the manner
in which Spengler performed his work that would indicate an employer-employee
relationship.  ( S. A. Gerrard Co. v. Industrial Acc. Com. (1941) 17 Cal.2d 411,
413-414 [110 P.2d 377]; Automatic Canteen Co. v. State Board of Equalization
(1965) 238 Cal.App.2d 372, 386-387 [47 Cal.Rptr. 848].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   Matters
admitted in pleadings do not require proof.  ( People v. Bestline Products, Inc.
(1976) 61 Cal.App.3d 879, 921 [132 Cal.Rptr.  767].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   While there may be some doubt as to whether a broker may hire a salesperson
on an independent contractor basis (see Gipson v. Davis Realty Co., supra, 215
Cal.App.2d 190 at p. 207), the evidence presented in this case was clearly
sufficient to sustain the trial court's finding that Spengler was not an
employee of Grubb and Ellis for the purpose of entitlement to minimum wages.

   The judgment is affirmed.


                              99 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            Estate of WALTER De HART, Deceased.  WOODROW L. LEWIS et
          al., Appellants, v. WALTER EUGENE De HART, as Administrator,
                                etc., Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 25502

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

            196 Cal. App. 2d 452; 16 Cal. Rptr. 603; 1961 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1597


                                October 23, 1961

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from an order of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County vacating a minute order confirming a sale of real property.  Clyde C.
Triplett, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Brokers -- Duties -- Good Faith.  --The relationship between a broker and
his principal, being fiduciary in nature, imposes on the broker the duty of
acting in the highest good faith toward his principal. This duty precludes the
broker from assuming a position adverse to that of his principal unless the
principal consents, and places on the broker a legal obligation to disclose to
his principal all the facts within his knowledge material to the matter in
connection with which he is employed.

(2) Agency--Relation Between Principal and Agent--Evidence.  -- When the acts of
an agent have been questioned by his principal and the fiduciary relationship
established, the burden is on the agent to prove that he acted with utmost good
faith toward his principal and that he made full disclosure prior to the
transaction of all the facts relating thereto.

(3) Brokers--Liabilities--Evidence.  --An order vacating a minute order
confirming a sale of real property by a real estate broker was proper where it
appeared that the administrator of an estate employed the broker to sell a
parcel of estate realty, that, though inquiry was made as to the identity of the
purchaser, the broker failed to inform the administrator's attorney that the
purchaser was the broker's mother, herself a licensed real estate broker, that
while the escrow between the estate and the broker's mother was still pending
the mother sold the property to a third person at a substantial profit, that the
broker had knowledge of such transaction because he handled the initial phases,
and that as a part thereof it was contemplated that a large, new loan would be
placed on the property, to which the estate's interest would be subordinated.

COUNSEL: Woodrow L. Lewis and Agnes M. Lewis, in pro. per., for Appellants.

Ball, Yudelson, Brown & Di Giuseppe and Collman E. Yudelson for Respondent.

JUDGES: Fox, P. J.  Ashburn, J., and Herndon, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: FOX

OPINION

     This is an appeal from an order vacating a minute order confirming a sale
of real estate.

    The property here in question was located at 21307 Caroldale Avenue, in
Torrance; it is a part of the estate of Walter De Hart, deceased, and appraised
at $ 10,500.  The administrator engaged Woodrow L. Lewis who is licensed and
operates as a real estate broker under the fictitious firm name of A & M Real
Estate, to obtain a purchaser for this property and agreed to pay said broker a
commission for effecting a sale thereof.  In due course the broker presented to
the administrator a proposal from Agnes M. Lewis to purchase this property for $
9,600.  The administrator thereupon filed a petition for the confirmation of the
sale to Mrs. Lewis, which came on for hearing in the probate court on July 5,
1960, at which time a minute order was entered confirming the sale and providing
for the payment of a commission to A & M Real Estate for services as agent in
obtaining the purchaser and effecting the sale.  On July 7th an escrow was
opened to consummate the sale between the estate and Mrs. Lewis.  The purported
purchaser, Mrs. Lewis, is the mother of Woodrow Lewis, the broker. This
relationship, however, was not disclosed to the administrator, although inquiry
was made on behalf of the administrator as to what, if any, relationship existed
between the broker and his prospective purchaser.

   * Seventeen days later, on July 22d, a contract was entered into by Mrs.
Lewis for the sale of this property to Michael P. Brink, who testified that the
purchase price was $ 11,900, with a down payment of $ 500, a first trust deed of
$ 8,400, and a second of $ 3,000; with monthly payments of $ 97, $ 67 of which
was to be paid on the first encumbrance and $ 30 on the second.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*   In a
letter dated May 10, 1960, counsel for the estate after referring to other
matters, made the following inquiry of appellants: "We note that the name of the
purchaser is Agnes M. Lewis, an unmarried woman.  Due to the similarity of names
involved, please advise whether or not Miss Lewis is any relation to your office
or any of the principals in your office, and, if so, whether or not your office
has any continuing interest in such real property, whether as joint venturer,
broker, or otherwise.  Please state any such interest and relationship in full
and in detail.  Based on what your letter may disclose, it may be necessary to
furnish affidavits to the court, and it may be necessary that evidence be
submitted in court on the point." The record does not contain any reply to this
inquiry.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     The initial phase of the Brink transaction was handled by Mr. Lewis.  He
received and receipted for the down payment the Brinks made.  It appears that
the Brink deal contemplated that the estate would subordinate its interest of $
3,000 in the property to a new and increased first encumbrance of $ 8,400.
Provision for a new first encumbrance was made in the escrow instructions
between the estate and Mrs. Lewis.  It was there stated: "It is hereby
understood that a new first deed of trust, the loan to be executed by Lewis and
Sons [a firm name under which Mrs. Lewis' other two sons also acted as brokers],
will be placed on the subject property." A loan commitment for $ 8,400 had been
made by a lending institution.

   On September 15th, the probate judge, who entered the minute order referred
to above, issued on his own motion a citation directing Mr. Lewis, Mrs. Lewis,
Mr. Brink, and the administrator to appear in his court at a specified time and
there to show cause why the order confirming the sale of said real property to
Mrs. Lewis should not be vacated and set aside.  After an inquiry into the
various phases of the aforesaid transaction, the trial court vacated its minute
order of July 5th confirming the sale of the said property to Mrs. Lewis and
authorizing the payment of a commission to A & M Real Estate [Mr. Lewis] as
broker. In support of its order the trial court found, inter alia, that A & M
Real Estate was employed by the administrator to obtain a purchaser for said
property, that it agreed so to act and accepted such employment; that after
agreeing so to act and in connection with such bid and previously confirmed sale
said A & M Real  Estate "in truth and in fact represented not the Administrator
and the estate in accordance with such employment, but, at all times after the
acceptance of such employment, represented said purchaser [Mrs. Lewis], and that
such facts were wrongfully and fraudulently withheld from the court and the
Administrator"; that said property was resold by Mrs. Lewis to Brink for $
11,900 (a gross profit of $ 2,300) while the escrow covering the sale from the
administrator to her was pending; "that A & M Real Estate, through Woodrow
Lewis, a partner in such real estate firm, had knowledge" thereof; that "the
foregoing facts [constituted] a fraud upon this court and upon the Administrator
in connection with the sale of said real property by the Administrator and the
confirmation thereof"; and that such sale was not for the best interests of the
estate or the beneficiaries thereof.  The  evidence and the reasonable
inferences therefrom adequately support the above findings.

     "The relationship between a broker and his principal is fiduciary in
nature, and imposes upon the broker the duty of acting in the highest good faith
toward his principal.  This duty of good faith precludes the broker from
assuming a position adverse to that of his principal unless the principal
consents.  Moreover, it places upon the broker a legal obligation to disclose to
his principal all the facts within his knowledge which are material to the
matter in connection with which he is employed." (9 Cal.Jur.2d 199; Bate v.
Marsteller, 175 Cal.App.2d 573, 580-581 [346 P.2d 903]. To the same effect see
Adams v. Herman, 106 Cal.App.2d 92, 98 [234 P.2d 695]; Thompson v. Stoakes, 46
Cal.App.2d 285, 289-290 [115 P.2d 830]; Whittaker v. Otto, 188 Cal.App.2d 619,
624 [10 Cal.Rptr. 689].)  In Schwarting v. Artel, 40 Cal.App.2d 433, 441 [105
P.2d 380], this court stated: "When the acts of an agent have been questioned by
his principal and the fiduciary relationship has been established, the burden is
cast upon the agent to prove that he acted with the utmost good faith toward his
principal [citations] and that he made a full disclosure prior to the
transaction of all the facts relating to the transactions under attack." This
statement was quoted with approval in Adams v. Herman, supra, and in Bate v.
Marsteller, supra, page 581.

     In appellants' opening brief they state: "The appellants readily admit that
the broker, Woodrow Lewis, acted for the purchaser and yet claimed a commission
from the estate to be paid out of the proceeds of the sale." Although inquiry
was made, Woodrow Lewis failed to inform the attorney for the administrator that
the purchaser was his mother.  It was established from Mr. Lewis' own testimony
that he had knowledge of the sale of the property to Mr. Brink at a substantial
profit, for he handled the initial phases of that transaction during which time
the escrow between the estate and his mother was still pending.  This, too, was
without the knowledge of the administrator. It also appears that it was
contemplated that a large, new loan would be placed upon the property, to which
the estate's interest would be subordinated.

   From these facts it is apparent that the broker failed to act in the highest
good faith toward his principal and that he failed to disclose to his principal
all the facts within his  knowledge which were material to the transaction that
he was employed to handle.

   The trial court was therefore abundantly justified in vacating the minute
order confirming the sale to Mrs. Lewis and allowing A & M Real Estate (Mr.
Lewis) a commission for effecting such sale.  To hold otherwise would be to open
the door to all sorts of chicanery and double dealing and would be contrary to
sound public policy and the fiduciary obligation which a real estate broker owes
his principal.

   But, argue appellants, the court did not find that a fiduciary relationship
existed between the broker and the representatives of the estate; and that Mr.
Lewis, the broker, was nothing more than a middleman.  It is true that the court
did not expressly find that a fiduciary relationship existed, but such finding
is implicit in the findings that the court did make and in the order that it
made.  In this connection we must indulge every reasonable inference which the
trial judge could properly draw from the facts and circumstances in this matter,
and bear in mind that it is the province of the trial judge to evaluate the
credibility of the witnesses and determine the weight to which their testimony
is entitled.  Applying these principles, it is obvious that it cannot be said as
a matter of law that the broker owed the estate no fiduciary duty.

   In an effort to show that the representatives of the estate knew that the
broker, Woodrow Lewis, was representing the purchaser, his mother, the
appellants sought and received permission to produce additional evidence in this
court.  This additional evidence consists of photostatic copies of letters from
the attorney of the estate dated respectively May 10, June 3, and June 28, 1960,
relative to the hearing on petition for confirmation of the sale on July 5th.
They merely suggest that it might be advisable that a representative from the
Lewis office be present to protect the position of the buyer in the event of
higher bids being made in open court.  There is not the slightest intimation in
any of these letters that the attorney for the estate knew that the buyer was
the mother of the broker.

   There is no substance to appellants' argument that the evidence does not
support (1) a finding that Agnes M. Lewis failed to disclose that she was a
California licensed real estate broker; and (2) that an escrow for the resale of
the property was pending simultaneously with the escrow covering the sale from
the estate to Mrs. Lewis.  Neither of these matters is  in any way material to
the disposition of this case.  Obviously it is unimportant whether the sale to
Mr. Brink was through an escrow or simply by contract without any escrow.

   Appellants seem to argue that they did not have a fair trial. In this
connection they complain that the court issued the order to show cause on its
own motion; that the trial judge conducted the hearing in "an inquisitorial
fashion"; that he reached an opinion on a material issue before the evidence on
the issue was submitted; and that he "apparently delegated to an adverse
attorney the responsibility of deciding whether the vacating [of the order
confirming the sale] was to the best interest of the estate." There is not the
slightest merit in any of these complaints; they do not deserve specific
discussion.  The record discloses that appellants had a full opportunity to
present their side of this controversy and that they had a fair trial.

   The order is affirmed.


                              100 of 100 DOCUMENTS

               Estate of DENCHALY HARABEDIAN, Deceased.  PAULINE
          KARDASHIAN, as Executrix, etc., Petitioner and Appellant, v.
                FRED J. AKASHI et al., Objectors and Respondents

                                 Civ. No. 27319

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Four

          220 Cal. App. 2d 1; 34 Cal. Rptr. 668; 1963 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      2219


                               September 6, 1963

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Appellant's Petition for a Hearing by the Supreme Court
was Denied October 23, 1963.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from an order of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County refusing confirmation of the sale of real property by the executrix of an
estate.  Clarke E. Stephens, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Decedents' Estates--Assets--Real Estate.  --Title to a decedent's real
property vests in the decedent's heirs and devisees, subject only to divestment
by reason of the administration of the estate.

(2) Id.--Sales--Objections to Confirmation.  --Where a decedent's heirs deed to
a grantee the decedent's real property, the grantee is a "person interested" in
the estate within the meaning of Prob. Code, § 756, who may object to the
confirmation of the sale of the property to another.

(3) Id.--Sales--Objections to Confirmation.  --One who contracts with a
decedent's heirs for the purchase of the decedent's property acquires a
sufficient interest as a purchaser under the contract to qualify as a person
interested in the decedent's estate within the meaning of Prob. Code, § 756, to
object to the confirmation of a sale of the decedent's property to another.

(4) Id.--Sales--Objections to Confirmation.  --Where a decedent's heirs had
contracted with a third party for a sale of the decedent's property and
thereafter the executrix of the estate petitioned for the confirmation of a sale
of the property to one who bid a higher price for the property than the price
offered by the third party, the offer of a loan to the estate by the third party
without interest in an amount sufficient to cover unpaid administration expenses
and costs advanced by the executrix removed the necessity for the sale to the
high bidder; that a mortgage on the property was required as security for the
loan was immaterial, as the third party had contracted with the heirs to pay
more for the property than the amount of the mortgage and the loan could be paid
when the sale to the third party was made.

(5) Id.--Sales--Objections to Confirmation.  --Where a decedent's heirs had
contracted with a third party for a sale of the decedent's property and the
third party objected to the confirmation of a sale of the property at a higher
figure to one who bid on the property, the court, in refusing to confirm the
sale to the high bidder on the ground the sale was unnecessary to pay
administration expenses, properly refused to pass on the adequacy of
consideration to support the contract with the third party; neither the heirs
nor the contract of sale with the third party was before the court, and any
issue as to consideration for the contract was a matter between the parties to
the contract.

COUNSEL: Michael D. Hiller for Petitioner and Appellant.

Andrew W. Lockton III for Objectors and Respondents.

JUDGES: Jefferson, J.  Burke, P. J., and Kingsley, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: JEFFERSON

OPINION

     This is an appeal from an order refusing to confirm the sale of real
property by the executrix of the above entitled estate.

   Respondents entered into an agreement with the heirs of the estate, as
evidenced by escrow instructions signed July 13, 1962, whereby respondents
agreed to buy and the heirs agreed to sell certain real property in the estate
for the sum of $ 8,000 cash, conveyance to be made, "at such time as the said
estate probate is completed." Subsequently, a notice of sale of the same real
property was published by appellant (executrix), who is also one of the heirs.
Offers were obtained, with a high bid of $ 13,000 being submitted on November
16, 1962, to the Los Angeles Superior Court for confirmation. Objections
interposed by respondents were sustained by the court, and appellant's petition
for confirmation was denied.  This appeal followed.

   Appellant contends that respondents are not "persons interested" in the
instant estate as required by Probate Code section 756, so as to have standing
to object to confirmation  of the sale.  The issue is whether or not one who has
entered into a written contract with an heir to purchase real property in
probate is a person interested in the estate within the meaning of section 756.

     It is well established that title to real property belonging to a decedent
vests at the death of the decedent in the heirs and devisees of the decedent,
subject only to divestment by reason of the administration of the estate.  (
Estate of Newlove, 142 Cal. 377 [75 P. 1083].)

     It is also clear that if one of the heirs deeds to a grantee real property
that belonged to the decedent, the grantee is a "person interested" in the
estate under Probate Code section 756.  In the case of Estate of Steward, 1
Cal.App. 57 [81 P. 728] one of twenty heirs gave a deed conveying his interest
in one of two pieces of real property in the estate to a third party grantee.
When the administrator of the estate subsequently applied for an order
permitting  the sale of the property, the grantee filed objections, stating that
the other parcel of land should be sold instead of the parcel in which she had
an interest.  In confirming the decision of the lower court sustaining the
grantee's objections, the court held that the grantee was a person interested in
the estate and was thus entitled to oppose the application for the order of
sale. The court stated (at p. 60) that: "As grantee of one of the heirs of the
deceased, she would be entitled, upon a distribution of the estate, to the share
of the heir so conveyed to her [citations], and was thus a person interested in
the estate; . . ."

   In the more recent case of Estate of Weaver, 158 Cal.App.2d 367 [322 P.2d
522], the heirs gave the grantee both a quitclaim and a warranty deed to real
property belonging to the decedent. The lower court confirmed a subsequent sale
of the same property over the objections of the grantees (to the prior
conveyance) who contended there was no necessity for the sale.  In reversing the
lower court, the court on appeal upheld the objections of the grantees and thus
also their standing to object.

     While the heirs in the instant case have not granted or deeded the subject
real property to the respondents, it is the view of this court that the latter
have acquired a sufficient interest as purchasers under the contract to qualify
them as persons interested in the estate within the meaning of Probate Code
section 756.

     Appellant maintains that the evidence does not support  the finding of the
court below that no necessity for sale was shown.  Probate Code section 754
requires a showing on the part of an executor or administrator that the sale of
estate property is necessary to satisfy obligations of the estate or that the
sale is for the best interests of the estate.  Appellant, in her petition for
confirmation of the sale, listed as her reason for selling the property, "It is
necessary for the payment of debts, expenses of administration and taxes."
Appellant alleged the existence of unpaid administration expenses and costs
advanced by appellant in the amount of $ 5,812.15.  At the hearing of the
petition for confirmation respondents offered to loan the estate up to $ 7,000
without interest to pay any alleged expenses, "to become a lien on the land"
they had contracted to purchase.  A loan of $ 6,000 was thereupon approved by
the court.  The question is raised whether the loan offer removed the necessity
for sale.

   In the case of Estate of Weaver, supra, the objector offered to pay the
expenses of administration of an estate.  In reversing the confirmation of sale
by the lower court, the appellate court said (p. 372) that ". . . where, as in
the present case, the only possible reason for the sale is to pay the expenses
of administration, and where that necessity has been removed by tender of a
cashier's check by counsel and a bona fide offer to pay whatever additional
expense the court may find, then any reason for the sale has been completely
removed, and hence it was error to confirm the sale." (For a similar holding,
see Estate of Rawitzer, 175 Cal. 585 [166 P. 581].)

   The fact that in the instant case a mortgage on the property was required as
security for the loan, should not prevent the application of the rule stated in
Estate of Weaver, supra, and Estate of Rawitzer, supra. In the case of Estate of
Newlove, supra, 142 Cal. 377, an appellant contended that it was not necessary
to sell certain real property in the estate, because the trial court had made
the finding that enough money could be raised by a mortgage. The court in
refusing appellant's contention, stated (pp. 381-382.):

   "This is not conclusive.  The court is not bound to refuse an order of sale
whenever it appears that the required money can be obtained by a mortgage. It
may inquire into the wisdom of mortgaging the property and the means of payment
thereof possessed by the heirs. In the present case it does not appear that any
of the heirs have any property or means other than  their interests in the
estate.  The land produces an income of not more than two thousand dollars a
year and it is  manifest that if a loan of fifty thousand dollars were made with
no other means of payment, the estate could not even pay legal interest thereon,
and that the distributees must inevitably lose the entire property, unless at
some time before default and foreclosure they could make a sale of the property.
In view of these conditions the court did not err in finding that a sale was
necessary."

   In the case before us, the court did inquire into the wisdom of mortgaging
the real property, and found in favor of so doing.  As pointed out by
respondents, the means of repaying the mortgage are obvious, as respondents have
contracted with the heirs to purchase the property for more than the amount of
the mortgage.

     Appellant contends that respondents, having refused to participate in the
open bidding after notification that the estate would sell the property at
private sale, stand in the position of "disappointed bidders," and thus have no
standing since their bid was not presented for court confirmation. It is clear
from the evidence, however, respondents were not bidders at all, not having
offered to buy the property from the estate.  Respondents' contractual
relationship was with the heirs and respondents' standing in court was a persons
who had acquired their interest through the heirs acting independently of the
estate.  The fact that one of the heirs was also executrix of the estate would
not change this result.

   Appellant contends the court below committed reversible error in failing to
make a finding on the question of adequacy of consideration to support the
contract between respondents and the heirs. Appellant argues that in light of
the $ 13,000 bid received at the sale for which confirmation was sought, the
respondents' promise to pay $ 8,000 was "inadequate consideration per se." 1 The
only parties before the court, however, were the executrix, in her capacity as
ex-executrix, and respondents.  Since neither the heirs (the other parties to
the contract), nor the contract of sale itself, were before the court, the court
properly refused to pass on the issue of adequacy of consideration to support
the contract.  Any issue as to consideration is a matter between the parties to
the contract of sale, respondents as buyers and the individual heirs as sellers.


- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1
Parenthetically, it is noteworthy that the original appraisal of the property
was $ 4,000 and the reappraisal, ordered at the time of the hearing of
objections to the sale, $ 8,500.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Other contentions made by appellant, we, having considered,  find to be
without merit, and not warranting further discussion.

   The order is affirmed.
