
                               1 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of C. GREG and MICHELLE SHAUGHNESSY.  C.
             GREG SHAUGHNESSY, Respondent, v. MICHELLE SHAUGHNESSY,
                                   Appellant.

                                    D046465

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FOURTH APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION ONE

          139 Cal. App. 4th 1225; 43 Cal. Rptr. 3d 642; 2006 Cal. App.
                     LEXIS 783; 2006 Daily Journal DAR 6552


                              May 26, 2006, Filed

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of San Diego County, No. D460893, Thomas C.
Hendrix, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports

(7) Dissolution of Marriage § 68--Spousal Support--Modification and Termination
--Factors--Gifts--From Parents--Yearly.--In ordering a reduction and ultimate
termination of spousal support, the trial court properly considered under Fam.
Code, § 4320, subd. (n), that the supported spouse's parents were providing a
gift of $ 20,000 each year. There is no per se rule precluding a trial court's
considering monetary gifts that a supported spouse may receive, in determining
spousal support.

   [11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (10th ed. 2005) Husband and Wife, § 194.]

COUNSEL: Bruce M. Beals for Appellant.

C. Greg Shaughnessy, in pro. per.; Feuerstein & Murphy, Richard P. Feuerstein;
and Stephen Temko for Respondent.

JUDGES: Aaron, J., with McConnell, P. J., and Nares, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: Aaron

OPINION

    AARON, J.--

I.

INTRODUCTION

   Michelle Shaughnessy (Michelle) appeals from a postjudgment order entered on
April 14, 2005, modifying a 2003 judgment that required her former husband, C.
Greg Shaughnessy (Greg), to pay her spousal support. Michelle and Greg were
married for 15 years and had no children. At the time they separated in March
1995, Michelle was 35 years old. By 2005, Greg had been paying Michelle spousal
support for nearly 10 years, supplementing her income as a self-employed
florist. In the 2005 order modifying the judgment, the trial court ordered that
the amount of spousal support be reduced from $ 2,000 per month to $ 1,000 per
month beginning January 1, 2006, and that support terminate on June 30, 2006,
unless Michelle demonstrates a compelling reason to extend the period of
support.

    On appeal, Michelle claims the trial court abused its discretion in ordering
that spousal support be reduced and then terminated. Specifically, Michelle
contends that there has been no material change in circumstances since the
issuance of the prior spousal support award that would justify a change in the
support order, and that the evidence did not support the court's finding that
Michelle would be sufficiently self-supporting by the dates the court set for
the reduction and termination of support. Michelle also claims that the trial
court abused its discretion in ordering her support reduced and then terminated
without first providing her with adequate warning of the court's expectation
that she become self-supporting.

   We conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in modifying
the prior spousal support award, based on the following  changed circumstances:
Michelle failed to diligently seek to become self-supporting, as required by the
terms of the prior spousal support award; Michelle was currently receiving $
20,000 per year from her parents; and the trial court could now determine that
Michelle's benign tumor would not affect her ability to become self-supporting.
We also conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in finding
that Michelle would be sufficiently self-supporting by the dates the court set
for the reduction and termination of support. Finally, we conclude that the
court provided Michelle with adequate notice of her obligation to attempt to
become self-supporting. Accordingly, we affirm the order.

II.

FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

   Greg and Michelle married in November 1979 and separated in March 1995. They
had no children together. In August 2000, Greg filed a petition for dissolution
of the marriage. In February 2003, Michelle filed an amended request for
dissolution of the marriage in which she requested that Greg pay her spousal
support.

   In February 2003, the court held a hearing regarding Michelle's request for
spousal support, among other issues. By that time, Greg had been paying support
for nearly eight years. In March 2003, the court entered a judgment dissolving
the parties' marital status as of December 31, 2002, and reserving jurisdiction
over other issues, including spousal support. On April 24, 2003, the court
entered a partial judgment on the reserved issues.

   In its April 2003 judgment, with respect to spousal support, the court
stated:

    "1. The court finds that as of the date of separation the parties enjoyed an
upper middle class lifestyle as evidenced by the fact that the parties traveled
frequently and they owned two pieces of property.

   "2. The court finds that [Michelle's] earning capacity is not sufficient to
meet her needs for the following reasons:

   "a. [Michelle] does not possess marketable employment skills for the current
job market. [Michelle] has a journalism degree, however, she has been a florist
during most of the marriage. [Michelle] needs to be retrained and obtain
computer skills.

   "b. [Greg] earns a high wage and has the ability to pay a reasonable spousal
support award.

   "c. Based on [Michelle's] needs as established during the marriage
[Michelle]'s income and earning capacity are insufficient to meet her needs.
[Michelle's] expenses are high as currently presented but even if the amount was
reduced to a reasonable amount, [Michelle] still needs spousal support.

   "d. [Michelle] has significant separate property assets that produce income
for the benefit of [Michelle]. The rate of return on [Michelle's] investments is
not enough to sustain her life expectancy since [Michelle] is still a young
woman.

   "e. The marriage was of long duration, lasting more than fifteen years. The
support order is presumed to be open ended in marriages of long duration.

   "f. On the issue of health, the court finds there was significant evidence of
[Michelle's] depression, however, this factor will not interfere with
[Michelle's] ability to obtain employment. [Michelle] is being treated for a
benign tumor with medication. The  court is unable to determine the effect of
that medical condition on [Michelle] in the future and on the issue of ongoing
health insurance for [Michelle]. [Greg] appears to be in good health.

   "g. The court finds the evidence regarding the issue of domestic violence by
[Michelle] against [Greg] to be situational. There was no documentation at the
time of the alleged domestic violence.

   "h. There are no other tax consequences to the parties except those related
to the sale of the parties' rental property. The tax consequences are considered
by the court in determining the spousal support award.

   "i. The balance of hardships weigh in favor of [Michelle].

    "j. The requirement that parties should be self-supporting after one-half
the length of the marriage does not apply to a marriage of long duration.
[Michelle] began to realize one year ago she needs marketable skills and needs
to look at retraining options.

   "3. [Greg] will pay $ 2,000 per month in spousal support to [Michelle]
effective January 1, 2003. [Greg] will receive credit for any amount of support
he paid to [Michelle] in the months of January and February 2003.

   "4. The court retains jurisdiction on the matter of spousal support."

   In May 2004, Greg filed an application for an order to show cause (OSC)
seeking to require that Michelle submit to a vocational examination and an
independent medical examination. In a companion declaration filed with his
application, Greg requested that the court terminate spousal support, or in the
alternative, modify the prior spousal support award. As a second alternative,
Greg requested that the court issue a jurisdictional step-down order pertaining
to spousal support. In July 2004, the court ordered that Michelle submit to a
vocational examination and an independent medical examination, based on a
stipulation between the parties. During December 2004, Michelle underwent the
vocational and medical examinations.

   In February 2005, after the parties filed briefs with accompanying
declarations, and lodged exhibits, the court held a hearing regarding Greg's
request to terminate or modify spousal support. On April 14, 2005, the court
entered an order that provided that the amount of spousal support would be
reduced to $ 1,000 per month beginning January 1, 2006. The court also ordered
that spousal support terminate on June 30, 2006, unless Michelle is able to
demonstrate a compelling reason to extend the period of support.

   The trial court's April 2005 order states in relevant part:

   "Findings:

   "1. The parties were married for 15 years.

   "2. [Greg] has been paying spousal support to [Michelle] for almost 10 years.

   "3. [Michelle 1] was forewarned by the trial judge that she should be looking
at seven years to begin to be self-supporting.

    "4. [Michelle] does have a benign tumor, but that does not affect her
ability to become self-supporting; it only affects her higher health care
premiums.

    "5. [Michelle] is still relatively young at 46 years of age.

   "6. [Michelle] now has separate property investments in the amount of $
500,000.

   "7. [Michelle] has continued in her floral business despite the fact[] that
she now claims she nets only around $ 650 per month from the business.
[Michelle] should have been aware that if the above is true, the floral business
is not the means for her continued long term economic well being. On the other
hand, [Michelle] stated to the vocational expert that she netted $ 30,000 ($
2,500 per month) from the business.

   "8. [Michelle] states she is gifted $ 20,000 per year from her parents.

   "9. The court has considered the Family Law [section] 4320 factors and finds
there has been a change in circumstances that warrants modification of spousal
support.

   "Orders:

   "1. [Greg] shall continue to pay [Michelle] spousal support in the amount of
$ 2,000 per month through December 31, 2005.

   "2. Commencing January 1, 2006, spousal support shall be reduced to $ 1,000
per month.

   "3. Spousal support shall terminate on June 30, 2006, unless [Michelle] can
demonstrate in a motion filed prior to June 30, 2006 a compelling reason to
extend the time period.

   "4. The court finds the above step-down order is sufficient time for
[Michelle] to achieve the goal of becoming self-supporting.

   "5. Each party shall pay his/her respective attorney fees in that each has
sufficient liquid property assets."

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1    The
order actually refers to Greg, but it is clear from the record the trial court
intended to refer to Michelle.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Michelle timely appeals.

III.

DISCUSSION

The court did not abuse its discretion in modifying the April 2003 spousal
support award

   Michelle claims the trial court abused its discretion in modifying the April
2003 spousal support award.

A. Standard of review

   In In re Marriage of Schmir (2005) 134 Cal.App.4th 43, 47 [35 Cal. Rptr. 3d
716], the court noted that a trial court's order modifying a spousal support
award is reviewed for an abuse of discretion: "The modification of a spousal
support order is reviewed on appeal for abuse of discretion. In exercising its
discretion the trial court must follow established legal principles and base its
findings on substantial evidence. If the trial court conforms to these
requirements its order will be upheld whether or not the appellate court agrees
with it or would make the same order if it were a trial court." (Fn. omitted.)

B. The trial court did not abuse its discretion in determining that changed
circumstances warranted modifying the April 2003 spousal support award

   Michelle claims the trial court abused its discretion in determining that
changed circumstances supported modifying the April 2003 spousal support award.

1. The law governing a trial court's exercise of its discretion to modify a
spousal support order

   "In exercising discretion whether to modify a spousal support order, 'the
court considers the same criteria set forth in [Family Code] section 4320 as it
considered when making the initial order ... .  [Citation.]' " (In re Marriage
of Bower (2002) 96 Cal.App.4th 893, 899 [117 Cal. Rptr. 2d 520].) Family Code 2
section 4320 provides:

   "In ordering spousal support under this part, the court shall consider all of
the following circumstances:

    "(a) The extent to which the earning capacity of each party is sufficient to
maintain the standard of living established during the marriage, taking into
account all of the following:

   "(1) The marketable skills of the supported party; the job market for those
skills; the time and expenses required for the supported party to acquire the
appropriate education or training to develop those skills; and the possible need
for retraining or education to acquire other, more marketable skills or
employment.

   "(2) The extent to which the supported party's present or future earning
capacity is impaired by periods of unemployment that were incurred during the
marriage to permit the supported party to devote time to domestic duties.

   "(b) The extent to which the supported party contributed to the attainment of
an education, training, a career position, or a license by the supporting party.

   "(c) The ability of the supporting party to pay spousal support, taking into
account the supporting party's earning capacity, earned and unearned income,
assets, and standard of living.

   "(d) The needs of each party based on the standard of living established
during the marriage.

   "(e) The obligations and assets, including the separate property, of each
party.

   "(f) The duration of the marriage.

   "(g) The ability of the supported party to engage in gainful employment
without unduly interfering with the interests of dependent children in the
custody of the party.

   "(h) The age and health of the parties.

   "(i) Documented evidence of any history of domestic violence, as defined in
Section 6211, between the parties, including, but not limited to, consideration
of emotional distress resulting from domestic violence perpetrated against the
supported party by the supporting party, and consideration of any history of
violence against the supporting party by the supported party.

   "(j) The immediate and specific tax consequences to each party.

    "(k) The balance of the hardships to each party.

   "(l) The goal that the supported party shall be self-supporting within a
reasonable period of time. Except in the case of a marriage of long duration as
described in Section 4336, [3] a 'reasonable period of time' for purposes of
this section generally shall be one-half the length of the marriage. However,
nothing in this section is intended to limit the court's discretion to order
support for a greater or lesser length of time, based on any of the other
factors listed in this section, Section 4336, and the circumstances of the
parties.

   "(m) The criminal conviction of an abusive spouse shall be considered in
making a reduction or elimination of a spousal support award in accordance with
Section 4325.

   "(n) Any other factors the court determines are just and equitable."

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2    Unless
otherwise specified, all subsequent statutory references are to the Family Code.
3    Section 4336 provides a presumption that a marriage of 10 years or more is
a marriage of long duration.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    " ' "Modification of spousal support ... requires a material change of
circumstances since the last order. [Citations.]" ' " (In re Marriage of Bower,
supra, 96 Cal.App.4th at p. 899.) However, "[t]he standard rule that
modifications in support orders may only be granted if there has been a material
change of circumstances since the last order [citation] was ... not [designed]
to circumvent the goal that supported spouses become self-supporting within a
reasonable period of time. [Citation.]" (In re Marriage of Schaffer (1999) 69
Cal.App.4th 801, 803-804 [81 Cal. Rptr. 2d 797].)

2. Change of circumstances

   The trial court's April 2005 order contained several findings relevant to
whether changed circumstances warranted modification of the April 2003 award.

a. Michelle's failure to diligently seek to become self-supporting constitutes a
change in circumstances justifying a modification of the spousal support award

   Michelle contends that she diligently sought to become self-supporting
through employment.

(i) Applicable law

   Section 4320, subdivision (a) requires that in awarding spousal support, the
court consider the extent to which the supported party possesses,  or may come
to possess, marketable employment skills sufficient to achieve the marital
standard of living. Section 4320, subdivision (l) directs that the court also
consider "[t]he goal that the supported party shall be self-supporting within a
reasonable period of time."

   A trial court acts within its discretion in denying spousal support where the
supported spouse has failed to diligently seek employment sufficient to become
self-supporting. (In re Marriage of Sheridan (1983) 140 Cal. App. 3d 742, 749
[189 Cal. Rptr. 622] [trial court acted within its discretion in refusing to
continue spousal support after five years following a 13-year marriage, where
supported spouse "had done little to prepare herself for or to seek gainful
employment"]; In re Marriage of Rosan (1972) 24 Cal. App. 3d 885, 896 [101 Cal.
Rptr. 295] ["When evidence exists that the party to be supported has
unreasonably delayed or refused to seek employment consistent with her or his
ability ... that factor may be taken into consideration by the trial court in
fixing the amount of support in the first instance or in modification
proceedings"].) "Whether there has been such unreasonable delay is a question
addressed peculiarly to the trial court which heard the party's testimony and
observed the party's demeanor at trial." (In re Marriage of Sheridan, supra, 140
Cal. App. 3d at p. 749.) There is no requirement that the failure to exercise
diligence in seeking gainful employment has been in bad faith. (Ibid.)

   In In re Marriage of Schaffer, supra, 69 Cal.App.4th at page 812, in
affirming the trial court's refusal to continue spousal support after 15 years
of support, following a 24-year marriage, the Shaffer court observed that the
supporting spouse had "been forced to pay for [the supported spouse's]
unwillingness to consider more suitable employment for a period of 15 years."
The Shaffer court explained that "a supported spouse cannot make unwise
decisions which have the effect of preventing him or her from becoming
self-supporting and expect the supporting spouse to pick up the tab." (Ibid.)

   Further, a material change of circumstances warranting a modification of
spousal support may stem from unrealized expectations embodied in the previous
order. (In re Marriage of Lautsbaugh  (1999) 72 Cal.App.4th 1131, 1133 [85 Cal.
Rptr. 2d 688].) Specifically, changed expectations pertaining to the ability of
a supported spouse to become self-supporting may constitute a change of
circumstances warranting a modification of spousal support. (In re Marriage of
Beust (1994) 23 Cal.App.4th 24, 29 [28 Cal. Rptr. 2d 201].) Thus, if a court's
initial spousal support award contemplates that a supported spouse will take
some action to decrease the need for spousal support following the issuance of
the order and the supported spouse fails to take that action, the court may
modify the award on the ground of changed circumstances.

(ii) Factual background

   In its initial spousal support award, the trial court found that Michelle did
"not possess marketable employment skills for the current job market." The court
further found that Michelle was a florist and that she would have to be
"retrained" in order to find more lucrative employment. The court noted that
Michelle had begun to realize, a year earlier, that she would have to obtain
marketable employment skills and consider employment retraining options.

   What Michelle's income was, both at the time of the initial support award in
2003, and in 2005, when the trial court modified the award, is not entirely
clear. In a February 2003 income and expense declaration, Michelle stated that
she earned an average of $ 2,102 per month ($ 25,224 per year) in net business
income from her floral business. However, she submitted a profit and loss
statement for her business that indicated that she had earned a total net profit
for calendar year 2002 of only $ 2,566 ($ 213.83 per month). The difference
between the two net income figures appears to be attributable to the fact that
the figure in the income and expense declaration was not a true self-employment
net income figure because it did not include deductions for the expenses
incurred in running the business, such as the cost of flowers and advertising.

   In her February 2005 income and expense declaration, Michelle stated that she
had earned an average of $ 641 per month in net income over the previous 12
months ($ 7,692 per year) from self-employment as a florist. Michelle also filed
a 2004 federal income tax profit statement for her floral business in which she
reported gross receipts of $ 37,771 and, after deducting $ 13,779 for the costs
of goods sold, gross income of $ 24,212. Michelle's profit statement indicated
that she had net income of $ 7,697, after deducting from her gross income $
5,011 in car and truck expenses and $ 6,269 for the business use of her home,
among other items. In a vocational evaluation dated January 7, 2005, evaluator
Kathleen Young stated that Michelle had said that "she nets approximately $
30,000 per year," from self-employment.

   In a July 6, 2004 rebuttal declaration submitted in support of her order to
show cause to increase spousal support, Michelle stated: "To further increase my
skills, next month I begin a computer instruction course designed toward
developing an internet business. I am hoping that this venture may ultimately
replace my floral income altogether." Vocational evaluator Young stated that
Michelle had informed her that "her short-term goal is to continue with her
floral arranging business," and that "she has considered starting some type of
Internet/E-Bay business, but currently, does not have any specific plan of
action." Young also stated that Michelle had informed her that "she is very
confident she will continue earning a stable income long-term, in her floral
design business." Young opined that Michelle's "current earnings of $
25,000-30,000 per year  is her maximum current wage earning capacity." With
respect to future earning capacity, Young stated that with retraining to become
a graphic designer, which would take approximately two to three full-time
semesters to complete, Michelle's "earnings would most likely start out close to
$ 30,000 per year, and increase with time on the job."

   In its April 2005 order modifying spousal support, the trial court noted that
Michelle had continued in the floral business despite claiming to net only
approximately $  650 per month.

(iii) Michelle failed to diligently seek to become self-supporting, as required
by the terms of the prior spousal support award

   The trial court's initial spousal support award was premised, in part, on the
court's stated expectation that Michelle would obtain retraining in order to
increase her income and become self-supporting. However, by April 2005, the
evidence presented to the trial court indicated that Michelle had done little,
if anything, to obtain retraining to increase her income, and that she had not
otherwise been diligent in attempting to become self-supporting.

   We conclude that Michelle's failure to diligently pursue retraining in order
to attempt to become self-supporting constituted a change in circumstances
justifying a modification of the spousal support order.

b. The trial court did not abuse its discretion in considering the fact that
Michelle's parents gave her monetary gifts in the amount of $ 20,000 per year

   Michelle contends that a trial court may not consider monetary gifts to a
supported spouse in considering whether to modify a spousal support award.

   In April 2003, the trial court made no findings pertaining to any monetary
gifts to Michelle. In 2005, the trial court found that Michelle's parents gave
her $ 20,000 per year. 4

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4    Although
the record is not entirely clear as to the number of years Michelle's parents
had been making these gifts, Michelle raises no claim with respect to the
court's factual finding that she "is gifted $ 20,000 per year from her parents."
Further, Michelle acknowledges in her brief that she "confirmed receiving gift
income from her parents" in the trial court.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   There is no provision in the Family Code that expressly addresses whether a
trial court may consider monetary gifts in awarding spousal  support. 5 However,
section 4320, subdivision (n), directs trial courts to consider "[a]ny other
factors the court determines are just and equitable" in awarding spousal support
.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5    When the
Legislature intends to preclude a trial court from considering certain types of
income in determining spousal support, it has done so expressly. For example,
section 4323, subdivision (b) provides, "The income of a supporting spouse's
subsequent spouse or nonmarital partner shall not be considered when determining
or modifying spousal support." The absence of such an exception with respect to
monetary gifts suggests that a trial court is not precluded from considering
such gifts in determining a spousal support award. (See Moncharsh v. Heily &
Blase (1992) 3 Cal.4th 1, 26 [10 Cal. Rptr. 2d 183, 832 P.2d 899] [" ' " 'Where
a statute, with reference to one subject contains a given provision, the
omission of such provision from a similar statute concerning a related subject
... is significant to show that a different intention existed.' " [Citation.]'
[Citation]"].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    In In re Marriage of Smith (1990) 225 Cal. App. 3d 469, 480-482 [274 Cal.
Rptr. 911], the court explained that equitable considerations are paramount in
fashioning spousal support awards:

    "Some members of the bench and bar have been critical of the Legislature,
contending it has failed to specify the purpose of spousal support. This
criticism is unjustified and demonstrates a lack of understanding about why the
Legislature and appellate decisions have vested trial courts with such broad
discretion to decide this issue, whether at trial or upon a later request for
modification or termination. The purposes of spousal support inevitably vary
from case to case, depending upon the parties and the facts and circumstances of
the case ... .

   "In other words, the purpose of spousal support cannot be defined by the
Legislature; it is a determination to be made by the trial court in each case
before it, based upon the facts and equities of that case, weighing each of the
circumstances or guidelines specified by the Legislature in [former] section
4801, subdivision (a) [current section 4320], which are applicable to that case,
as well as those specified by appropriate appellate case law. In making its
order on the issue of spousal support, it is essential that the trial court
possess broad discretion in order to fairly exercise the weighing process
contemplated by [former] section 4801, subdivision (a), with the goal of
accomplishing substantial justice for the parties in the case before the court.
The issue of spousal support, including its purpose, is one which is truly
personal to the parties.

   "Equitable considerations are the most significant factor in these cases. The
Legislature and the appellate courts specify guidelines which must be considered
by trial courts in deciding spousal support issues, but in the final analysis
trial courts must possess broad discretion to decide the applicability and
weight of these guidelines as they apply to the facts and equities of each
case."

    The express provision in section 4320, subdivision (n) that a trial court is
to consider any factors the court determines are just and equitable in awarding
spousal support, the underlying purpose of California's spousal support statutes
as outlined by the Smith court, and the absence of a specific provision on the
issue, all support the conclusion that there is no per se rule precluding a
trial court's considering monetary gifts a supported spouse may receive, in
determining spousal support.

   The parties have not cited, and our independent research has not uncovered,
any California case that specifically addresses whether a trial court may
consider monetary gifts to a supported spouse in determining spousal support.
Michelle relies on In re Marriage of McQuoid (1991) 9 Cal.App.4th 1353 [12 Cal.
Rptr. 2d 737] (McQuoid) for the proposition that "[t]he court should not expect
Michelle's parents to supplement her monthly living expenses as a replacement
for spousal support." In McQuoid, the court addressed whether the trial court
erred in determining the supported spouse's needs for purposes of awarding
spousal support when, in setting the amount of spousal support, it considered
expenses that the supported spouse did not actually incur:

   "Husband argues that wife's nursing income is adequate to meet 'basic living
costs.' He maintains that her expense claim is inflated because it includes
?desirable' costs as well as 'necessary' ones. He apparently refers to the fact
that wife's expense declaration estimated rent payments of $ 850 a month,
although she was admittedly paying far less because she and her daughters were
living in the home of wife's mother who was also providing free child care.
Husband's argument apparently is since his mother-in-law is subsidizing his wife
and  children's living expenses he has no support obligation for the value of
that subsidy. He misconstrues the law.

   "In awarding spousal support the court is obliged to consider a number of
factors including ?[t]he needs of each party based on the standard of living
established during the marriage.' ([Former] § 4801 [current § 4320, subd. (d)].)
... [Citation.] Reasonable rent and child care costs were appropriately
considered in determining wife's monthly expenses." (Id. at p. 1360.)

   The McQuoid court did not address the issue presented in this case, namely,
whether a trial court is precluded from considering monetary gifts to the
supported spouse in awarding spousal support. Rather, the McQuoid court held
that the trial court had not abused it discretion in considering certain
expenses that the supported spouse had not actually incurred in determining one
of the statutory factors (§ 4320, subd. (d)) a trial court must consider in
awarding spousal support. The McQuoid court did not address whether a trial
court could properly consider the value of the in-kind contributions pursuant to
section 4320, subdivision (n)'s requirement that a court consider ?[a]ny other
factors the court determines are just and equitable."

    In In re Marriage of Loh (2001) 93 Cal.App.4th 325 [112 Cal. Rptr. 2d 893] (
Loh), the court determined that a trial court could consider in-kind
contributions in setting child support pursuant to section 4057, subdivision
(b)(5), which authorizes a trial court to award an amount of child support other
than that calculated by use of the guideline formula provided in section 4055
when "[a]pplication of the formula would be unjust or inappropriate due to
special circumstances in the particular case." (§ 4057, subd. (b)(5); see Loh,
supra, 93 Cal.App.4th at p. 335.) Both section 4057, subdivision (b)(5) and
section 4320, subdivision (n) are "catch-all" provisions that clarify the
court's authority to consider special circumstances in a particular case in
determining child support (§ 4057, subd. (b)(5)) and spousal support (§ 4320,
subd. (n)). (Hogoboom and King, Cal. Practice Guide: Family Law (The Rutter
Group 2005) (hereafter Hogoboom and King) ¶ 6:261, p. 6-116.6 [§ 4057, subd.
(b)(5) is a "catch-all" provision]; id., ¶ 6:927, p. 6-338 [§ 4320, subd. (n) is
a "catch-all" provision].)

   There is more reason to conclude that a trial court may consider gifts in
setting spousal support than in setting child support, because the purpose of
spousal support varies on a case by case basis while "[t]he overriding policy
behind the child support statutes is to assure that children share in their
parents' standard of living and have adequate support." (In re Marriage of
Cheriton (2001) 92 Cal.App.4th 269, 312 [111 Cal. Rptr. 2d 755].) Unlike child
support, which courts generally calculate in accordance with the mathematical
formula set forth in the mandatory guidelines (id. at p. 284), in awarding
spousal support, a trial court has broad discretion in weighing numerous
statutory factors. (Id. at p. 283.) If a trial court has the authority to
consider gifts made to a spouse in determining child support, it follows that a
trial court may consider gifts when exercising its broader discretion in
fashioning an award of spousal support. 6

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6    In re
Marriage of Schulze (1997) 60 Cal.App.4th 519 [70 Cal. Rptr. 2d 488] (Schulze),
on which Michelle relies, is not to the contrary. In Schulze the court stated,
in dicta, "Gifts are not mentioned in section 4058, and, judging from the use of
language lifted straight from the Internal Revenue Code, should logically be
outside the purview of the child support statute." (Schulze, supra, 60
Cal.App.4th at p. 529.) However, the Schulze court also noted, "Because the
record here is susceptible of the finding that the condominium subsidy and the
use of the Mercedes were both employment perquisites and therefore within
section 4058, we are spared the problem of whether they still might be used as
factors to increase support even if they were gifts outside section 4058." (Id.
at p. 530, fn. 10.) In Loh, Presiding Justice Sills, the author of both Schulze
and Loh, explained that courts may consider such in-kind contributions in
awarding child support pursuant to section 4057. (Loh, supra, 93 Cal.App.4th at
p. 335.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     In holding that a trial court may exercise its discretion to consider third
party gifts to a supported spouse in determining a spousal support award, we
emphasize that we do not hold that the trial court must mechanically decrease a
supported spouse's award by the amount of any gifts  received, or even that the
trial court should in every case consider such gifts in determining the
appropriate level of support. Rather, we hold only that it is within the trial
court's broad discretion to consider evidence of monetary gifts as one factor,
together with evidence pertaining to all of the other section 4320 factors, in
determining the appropriate spousal support award. 7

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7    Although
Michelle contends that the trial court abused its discretion in weighing all of
the section 4320 factors, an argument we reject in part III.B.3, post, her sole
argument with specific reference to the monetary gifts she receives from her
parents is that such gifts are "not an appropriate consideration in modifying
support." We reject this broad proposition for the reasons stated in the body of
the opinion.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

c. The court determined that Michelle's benign tumor would not affect her
ability to become self-supporting

   New information concerning Michelle's health constituted a change of
circumstances supporting the court's modification of the spousal support award.

   Section 4320, subdivision (h) provides that the court must consider the
health of the parties in ordering spousal support. (See, e.g., In re Marriage of
Brantner (1977) 67 Cal. App. 3d 416, 417 [136 Cal. Rptr. 635] [concluding trial
court abused its discretion in reducing spousal support in view of, among other
factors, the possibility the former spouse might become blind in the near
future].)

   In its original judgment, the trial court noted that Michelle's earning
capacity was not sufficient to meet her needs because, among other reasons, the
court was unable to determine the effect her health might have on her in the
future. At the hearing on which the initial support order was based, the court
stated: "As far as the age and health of the parties ... . [¶] As far as
[Michelle], there was significant evidence submitted that she has depression,
which the Court does not feel is going to interfere with her ability to gain
employment. However, she does also have a benign tumor, which requires her to
maintain medication. And that is her--her health is an unknown factor,
therefore, and as far as the effect it will have on her in the future and also
the effect it will have on her--on her ability to obtain health insurance to be
insured."

   In the April 2005 order modifying the original support order, the trial court
concluded that Michelle's benign tumor did not affect her ability to become
self-supporting. This finding was supported by the findings of Dr. Jeffrey
Sandler, who performed the independent medical examination of Michelle. In a
letter dated December 14, 2004, Sandler stated that Michelle  was able to work
on a full-time basis and that she had no current work restrictions.  Sandler did
not anticipate that there would be any change in Michelle's physical condition
in the future that would affect her ability to work.

   Thus, while in 2003, the court was "unable to determine" the effect the tumor
would have on Michelle's ability to work, by April 2005, the court had
sufficient information to determine that Michelle's tumor would not affect her
ability to become self-supporting. The trial court's April 2005 finding
concerning Michelle's health constituted a change of circumstances supporting
the court's modification of spousal support. (Compare Hogoboom and King, supra,
at ¶ 6:921, p. 6-332 ["it may be error to set a fixed termination date where the
supported party ... has unresolved medical or psychiatric problems requiring
further treatment"].)

3. In view of the changed circumstances, the trial court did not abuse its
discretion in weighing the section 4320 factors

   In weighing the section 4320 factors in light of the changed circumstances,
the trial court could have reasonably concluded that a modification of the prior
spousal support award was warranted. By the time of the 2005 hearing on Greg's
OSC, Greg had been paying spousal support for nearly 10 years. Michelle was
still relatively young at 46 years of age, was working and continued to be
employable, and was receiving $ 20,000 per year from her parents. She had failed
to diligently seek to obtain retraining or to otherwise become self-supporting,
as required by the terms of the prior spousal support award. In addition,
Michelle owned investments valued at $ 500,000. Michelle notes that since the
time of the initial support order, her yearly health care expenses had increased
by approximately $ 6,000 and Greg's yearly earnings had increased by
approximately $ 10,000. However, we conclude that the trial court did not abuse
its discretion by failing to consider these facts. Rather, the court considered
this information together with all of the other section 4320 factors in
modifying the April 2003 spousal support award. This was not an abuse of
discretion.

C. The trial court did not abuse its discretion in finding that Michelle would
be sufficiently self-supporting by the dates the court set for the reduction and
termination of support

   Michelle claims the trial court abused its discretion in finding that she
would be sufficiently self-supporting by the dates the court set for the
reduction and termination of support.

1.Applicable law

   In In re Marriage of Morrison (1978) 20 Cal.3d 437, 453 [143 Cal. Rptr. 139,
573 P.2d 41] (Morrison), the California Supreme Court held  that courts should
be reticent about terminating support in lengthy marriages: "A trial court
should not terminate jurisdiction to extend a future support order after a
lengthy marriage, unless the record clearly indicates that the supported spouse
will be able to adequately meet his or her financial needs at the time selected
for termination of jurisdiction. In making its decision concerning the retention
of jurisdiction, the court must rely only on the evidence in the record and the
reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom. It must not engage in speculation.
If the record does not contain evidence of the supported spouse's ability to
meet his or her future needs, the court should not 'burn its  bridges' and fail
to retain jurisdiction. [Citation.]"

   However, the Morrison court emphasized that this standard does not require
that a trial court retain jurisdiction in every case involving a lengthy
marriage, particularly where the supported spouse is employed:

   "These standards will not require a trial court to retain jurisdiction in
every case involving a lengthy marriage. In some instances the record will
indicate that both spouses are employed, an increasingly prevalent situation
today, or that there are sufficient assets available to enable each to provide
for his or her needs. In that event, no support or support for only a limited
time, without a retention of jurisdiction, would be appropriate. [Citations.]
Where jurisdiction has been retained in the original order, future modification
hearings may well reveal that the supported spouse has found adequate
employment, has delayed seeking employment, or has refused available employment.
At that time, the court may appropriately consider such factors in deciding
whether or not to modify its original order." (Morrison, supra, 20 Cal.3d at p.
453.)

   "If the court feels the evidence justifies an order terminating jurisdiction
at a future date, but is concerned about unforeseeable circumstances which might
arise prior to that date, the proper approach would be to issue the kind of
order approved by In re Marriage of Richmond (1980) 105 Cal. App. 3d 352 [164
Cal. Rptr. 381]; what has become known as a 'Richmond' order." (In re Marriage
of Prietsch & Calhoun (1987) 190 Cal. App. 3d 645, 665 [235 Cal. Rptr. 587] (
Prietsch). The Prietsch court described the use of a "Richmond" order as
follows:

   "In order to avoid the Morrison prohibition against the trial court burning
its bridges by fixing a definite date in the future at which time jurisdiction
over spousal support will terminate, the court in a 'Richmond' order retains
jurisdiction to modify both the amount and term for jurisdiction over spousal
support conditioned upon the supported spouse, prior to the date set for
termination of jurisdiction, filing a motion and showing good cause why the
order should be modified either as to amount or term of jurisdiction, or both.

    "The effect of a 'Richmond' order is to tell each spouse that the supported
spouse has a specified period of time to become self-supporting, after which the
obligation of the supporting spouse will cease." (Prietsch, supra, 190 Cal. App.
3d at p. 665.)

   "[A] 'Richmond' order is the most appropriate form of order for spousal
support in all cases except (1) where spousal support is either not ordered, or
is ordered for a fixed term of short duration, (2) in the most lengthy marriages
where the circumstances justify truly 'permanent' spousal support, or (3) where
the supported spouse does not possess the capacity to become self-sufficient." (
Prietsch, supra, 190 Cal. App. 3d at p. 665.)

   Trial courts have broad discretion in determining the meaning of
"self-supporting" in any particular case. Although, in general, the meaning of
the term "self-supporting" is achieving the marital standard of living (see
Hogoboom and King, supra, at ¶ 6:926.1, p. 6-336), the concept of the marital
standard of living is itself often quite broad. Further, courts have held that
the goal of achieving the marital standard of living may decrease in relative
importance over time. (See In re Marriage of Rising (1999) 76 Cal.App.4th 472,
479, fn. 9 [90 Cal. Rptr. 2d 380] [concluding trial court did not abuse its
discretion in determining, 13 years after the dissolution, that "it was not
necessary (or appropriate) to award wife the amount of support required to allow
her to maintain the marital standard of living"].) Finally, although the marital
standard of living is an important factor in determining spousal support, it is
not the only factor, and its importance in determining whether it is "just and
reasonable" (§ 4330) to award spousal support will vary based on the court's
evaluation of the section 4320 factors.

2. Analysis

   In this case, the trial court could reasonably have found that Michelle had
the immediate capacity to earn $ 30,000 per year, and that if she had opted for
retraining as she was directed to do in 2003, her earnings would likely exceed $
30,000 per year in the future. In addition, the trial court was presented with
new information that Michelle had been receiving $ 20,000 per year from her
parents, that she owned liquid assets with a value of approximately $ 517,000
and that the equity in her house exceeded $ 400,000. Further, by the time the
court entered its order reducing and then terminating spousal support, Michelle
had been receiving spousal support for approximately 10 years.

   The trial court could have reasonably concluded that in view of all of these
circumstances, Michelle could become, and should become, sufficiently
self-supporting within the dates the court set for the reduction and termination
of spousal support. Further, in view of the fact that the date for termination
of spousal support was approximately 11 years after the date of separation, the
court could reasonably conclude that achieving the marital standard of living
was at this point in time deserving of less weight in balancing the section 4320
factors. (See In re Marriage of Rising, supra, 76 Cal.App.4th at p. 479, fn. 9.)


D. The trial court provided Michelle with adequate notice of her obligation to
attempt to become self-supporting

   Michelle claims the trial court abused its discretion by ordering support
reduced and then terminated without providing her with adequate notice of her
obligation to attempt to become self-supporting.

   In In re Marriage of Gavron (1988) 203 Cal. App. 3d 705, 712 [250 Cal. Rptr.
148] (Gavron), the Court of Appeal concluded that the trial court erred in
reducing a party's spousal support from $ 1,100 per month to $ 0 after a 25-year
marriage and approximately eight years of support, where "the record d[id] not
indicate that th[e] unemployed 57-year-old wife had any prior awareness that the
court would require her to become self-sufficient." The Gavron court held that a
supported spouse must be made aware of the court's expectation that the spouse
will attempt to become self-supporting: "Inherent in the concept that the
supported spouse's failure to at least make good-faith efforts to become
self-sufficient can constitute a change in circumstances which could warrant a
modification in spousal support is the premise that the supported spouse be made
aware of the obligation to become self-supporting. It is particularly
appropriate here that there should have been some reasonable advance warning
that after an appropriate period of time the supported spouse was expected to
become self-sufficient or face onerous legal and financial consequences. ... [¶]
... For example, there may be an explicit statement by the court at the time of
its original support order regarding employment  expectations of the supported
spouse [citation] ... ." (Ibid.)

   In the court's original judgment in this case, the court checked a box
indicating the applicability of the following provision: "NOTICE: It is the goal
of this state that each party shall make reasonable good faith efforts to become
self-supporting as provided for in Family Code section 4320. The failure to make
reasonable good faith efforts may be one of the factors considered by the court
as a basis for modifying or terminating spousal support.?

   Further, the court's April 2003 judgment states:

   "2. The court finds that [Michelle's] earning capacity is not sufficient to
meet her needs for the following reasons:

   "a. [Michelle]  does not possess marketable employment skills for the current
job market. [Michelle] has a journalism degree, however, she has  been a florist
during most of the marriage. [Michelle] needs to be retrained and obtain
computer skills. [¶] ... [¶]

   "j. The requirement that parties should be self-supporting after one-half the
length of the marriage does not apply to a marriage of long duration. [Michelle]
began to realize one year ago she needs marketable skills and needs to look at
retraining options."

   In addition, at the February 2003 hearing on which the original judgment was
based, the court stated: "Well, in this situation we have a marriage of long
duration. So at a minimum, we'd be looking at seven years as a sort of starting
off point as far as a reasonable period of time to begin to be self-supporting
... . [Michelle] began to realize that the floral business that she was
generating was not going to be a long-term answer for her economic needs. And
she now recognizes that she needs new marketable skills and is beginning to or
should begin to look into further retraining in that regard."

   The court's statements at the February 2003 hearing and in its original
judgment provided Michelle with notice that the court expected her to become
self-supporting. The court referred to the statutory goal that former spouses
become self-supporting and noted that Michelle would require retraining in order
to achieve that goal. The court thus clearly communicated to Michelle its
expectation that she would attempt to become self-supporting. Further, Michelle
was significantly younger than the supported spouse in Gavron and was working at
the time the court made its original support award and Greg had been paying
support for 10 years after a 15-year marriage, while the husband in Gavron had
been paying support for eight years after a 25-year marriage. (Gavron, supra,
203 Cal. App. 3d 705.)

   Although the marriage in this case was a lengthy one, that fact alone does
not justify an unlimited spousal support award. In the absence of circumstances
demonstrating that a spouse is incapable of becoming self-supporting, a person
in Michelle's position cannot reasonably expect to receive spousal support
indefinitely. Rather, the spouse should expect to be required to become
self-supporting within a reasonable period of time. As noted above, Michelle was
a college-educated 35 year old at the time she and Greg separated, and had no
children from their marriage. She has had nearly 11 years since their separation
to pursue more lucrative employment, but has failed to do so. Under these
circumstances, receiving support for more than 10 years after a 15-year
marriage, as Michelle has, is more than reasonable.

 IV.

DISPOSITION

   The order is affirmed. Respondent is entitled to costs on appeal.

   McConnell, P. J., and Nares, J., concurred.


                               2 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             In re the Marriage of JOANNA H. and ROBERT N. RABKIN.
               JOANNA H.  RABKIN, Appellant, v. ROBERT N. RABKIN,
                                   Respondent

                                  No. A022669

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

           179 Cal. App. 3d 1071; 225 Cal. Rptr. 219; 1986 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1462


                                 April 14, 1986

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Respondent's Petition for Review by the Supreme Court
was Denied August 13, 1986.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Alameda County, No. 522257-1, Michael E.
Ballachey, Judge.

COUNSEL: Robert L. Walker, Walker & Bull and Burnstein, Walker & Bull for
Appellant.

Bryce C. Anderson for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Rouse, J., with Kline, P. J., and Smith, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: ROUSE

OPINION

     Joanna Rabkin (wife) appeals from an order which reduced the amount of
monthly spousal support which Robert Rabkin (husband) was required to pay,
effective December 1, 1982, and further provided that on November 30, 1989,
unless another order was made, spousal support would be reduced to a reservation
of jurisdiction by the court.

   The pertinent facts are that on March 17, 1981, an interlocutory judgment
dissolving the parties' marriage was filed.  In this judgment, the court
reserved jurisdiction to rule on all the remaining issues in the case, including
spousal support, child support and the division of the community assets.

   The parties had been married for over 20 years.  There were two children born
of the marriage, but only one of these children was still a minor when the
dissolution action was commenced.  Husband is a physician and wife had once
worked as a laboratory technician, but had not been employed in any capacity
since 1963.  At the time of the dissolution proceedings, she already suffered
from a degenerative disease of the lumbar spine and left knee.  Since her
medical condition prevented her from standing for any prolonged period of time,
it was not possible for her to resume her work as a laboratory technician.

   On May 27, 1981, in open court, the parties entered into an oral stipulation
which was intended to settle all of the property division and support issues in
the action.  This agreement was subsequently reduced to writing and incorporated
into an order of the court.  Among the most significant assets awarded to
husband was his medical corporation and a pension plan  which contained
approximately $ 175,000 on the date when the parties separated.  The most
significant asset awarded to wife was her right to receive the first $ 214,000
in proceeds from the sale of the parties' large family home in Alameda.

   The spousal support provisions of the parties' agreement 1 are directly
related to certain other topics covered in the agreement.  First, the spousal
support provisions were designed to take into consideration the fact that the
parties' one minor child, Halina, who was to reside with wife, would reach the
age of 18 on January 19, 1982, but would not graduate from high school until
June 1982.  Thus, husband's obligation to pay child support, which the agreement
set at $ 400 per month, would terminate on January 19, 1982, although Halina
would be residing with wife until June 1982.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   The
parties' agreement actually consisted of two documents: a "Marital Settlement
Agreement" and a "Letter Agreement" which is specifically mentioned in the
"Marital Settlement Agreement." References herein to the parties' "agreement"
are intended to include both of these documents.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Second, the parties' agreement provided that their marital residence in
Alameda would immediately be listed for sale at the price of $ 395,000.  Wife
was entitled to reside in the house until it was sold and was to be responsible
for all normal expenses connected therewith, including taxes, insurance and
maintenance.  Upon the sale of the residence, wife was entitled to  the first $
214,000 from the proceeds of the sale, either in the form of cash if the
downpayment was sufficiently large, or otherwise partly in cash and partly in
installment payments of principal.  The parties contemplated "a prompt sale" of
the Alameda residence and wife's spousal support payments were geared toward a
sale of the residence by December 31, 1981.

   The manner in which wife's spousal support payments were tailored around the
needs of the parties' minor child and the sale of the marital residence is
evident from the varying spousal support payments set forth in the parties'
agreement: husband was obligated to pay wife $ 2,100 per month until December
31, 1981 (on which date the house would presumably be sold, wife would be
relieved of her obligation to maintain the house and she would also receive her
share of the proceeds of the sale).  In January 1982, wife was to receive
spousal support in the amount of $ 1,500 per month, and she was also to receive
the final $ 400 installment of child support for Halina.  In the months of
February through June 1982, spousal support was set at $ 1,900 per month (to
accommodate the fact that wife would be supporting Halina until her graduation
from high school, without the benefit of any child support).  Commencing in July
1982, spousal support of $ 1,500 per month was payable to wife until her
remarriage, the death of either party, or further order of the court.

    The parties' agreement provided that spousal support was "established in
contemplation of a prompt sale of said Alameda residence.  Accordingly, said
sale and the alternative housing (purchase or rental) required shall not
constitute a substantial change of circumstances upon which to base a motion for
a change in spousal support." 2 However, the parties also agreed that in the
event that the marital residence had not been sold prior to December 31, 1981,
wife could move to increase her spousal support, but that "[the] maximum amount
of support that [wife]  will seek is $ 600 per month additionally until sale of
the house.  [Husband] will seek to limit the amount and the duration of such
additional support only."

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   The
parties' agreement also identified two other events which would trigger no
change in spousal support. It was agreed that an increase in husband's gross
earnings from $ 60,000 to $ 75,000 per year "shall not constitute a substantial
change of circumstances upon which to base a motion for increased support"; and
it was also agreed that if wife were to become employed, her first $ 750 per
month of gross earnings "shall be received by her without adjustment of spousal
support payable by Husband .  . . ."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   As of late November 1981, the marital residence had not been sold and only
one offer, which was substantially below the asking price, had been received.
On December 3, 1981, wife moved for an increase in spousal support. In her
supporting declaration, wife averred that although she had fully cooperated with
the listing broker, the condition of the real estate market was currently such
that it was unlikely that the marital residence could be sold in the foreseeable
future.  She also averred that due to recent serious medical problems, which had
required surgery on both her knees, she was physically unable to personally
perform certain chores necessary to maintain the house and would have to
periodically employ both a gardener and a cleaning person.  She sought a spousal
support increase of $ 600 per month, based upon the fact that the house had not
sold, and an additional increase of $ 200 a month to cover the cost of employing
a gardener and a cleaning person.  Wife also sought a lump sum payment covering
medical expenses which she had recently incurred and which were not covered by
her medical insurance, and an order requiring husband to pay her uninsured
medical expenses in the future.

   On February 8, 1982, husband responded by moving for a reduction in spousal
support, based upon the fact that he had recently lost virtually all of his
clothing and other personal property in a mudslide.  He claimed that it would
cost $ 7,500 to replace his clothing and that he was attempting to obtain a low
interest loan from his family or friends.  He asked that wife's spousal  support
be reduced from $ 1,900 to $ 1,500 a month.

   On February 18, 1982, husband filed another motion, seeking to reduce spousal
support as of July 1982 from $ 1,500 to $ 1,250 per month.

    On June 10, 1982, the trial court ruled on the parties' respective motions.
The court ordered that spousal support would be increased from $ 1,500 to $
1,750 per month as of June 1982.  The court further ordered that husband would
pay 60 percent of all medical and dental expenses incurred by wife prior to
January 1982 which were not covered by insurance, and that commencing in January
1982 spousal support was increased to include 60 percent of wife's reasonable
and necessary medical and dental expenses subsequently incurred which were not
covered by insurance, plus 60 percent of the utility bills and maintenance
expenses on the marital residence as long as husband's share of those expenses
did not exceed $ 200 per month.  In its order the court expressly provided that
all of these spousal support increases were to continue until the sale of the
family residence or the occurrence of certain other specified events.  The
court's order also stated, in pertinent part, that "Sale of the family residence
shall be deemed a change in circumstance entitling either party to seek a new
order regarding spousal support."

   On July 8, 1982, wife moved for reconsideration of certain portions of the
June 10 order.  Among other things, wife sought to have the court delete the
provision stating that the sale of the marital residence would constitute a
change of circumstances upon which a motion for a modification of spousal
support could be made.  She contended that this provision was directly in
conflict with a provision in the parties' written agreement to the effect that
the sale of the marital residence should not be deemed a change of circumstances
justifying a modification in spousal support.

   On August 24, 1982, husband also sought reconsideration of the June 10 order.
He claimed that his financial condition was still poor and that the parties'
written agreement contemplated that wife would be responsible for her own
medical expenses and for the expenses of maintaining the marital residence until
such time as it was sold.

   Although the parties later filed further documents in support of their
respective motions for reconsideration and modification of the June 10 order,
the order remained in effect and was not modified in any way.  Neither party
appealed from that order.

   On September 10, 1982, husband moved for an order compelling the sale of the
marital residence. Although wife opposed the motion, it was granted.
Thereafter, the house was sold, with the escrow closing on November 1, 1982.
The purchase price was $ 300,000, with a $ 100,000 cash downpayment. Wife
received $ 55,000 of the downpayment and paid $ 10,000 of that sum to her
attorney in payment of legal fees.  She was also entitled to receive monthly
payments of $ 1,792.84 on a seven-year promissory note secured  by a first deed
of trust on the house.  Wife entered into a contract to purchase a new home for
$ 150,000.  She intended to use, as a downpayment on her new home, the remaining
$ 45,000 which she had received when the marital residence was sold.  She
estimated that her monthly mortgage payments on the new house would come to
approximately $ 1,300.  Wife had also sold a 10-acre lot for $ 15,000 in cash.

   On November 19, 1982, by minute order, the court directed that as of November
1, 1982, the provisions of the June 10 order,  which required husband to pay 60
percent of wife's uninsured dental and medical expenses and 60 percent of
certain expenses connected with the marital residence, were rescinded.  In
addition, as of December 1, 1982, spousal support was decreased to $ 1,250 per
month continuing until the death of either party, wife's remarriage or further
order of the court.  In the absence of any such further order, spousal support
was to be reduced to a reservation of jurisdiction on November 30, 1989.

    Husband's counsel was directed to prepare an order consistent with the
court's minute order.  He subsequently did so, and the latter order was signed
and filed on March 7, 1983.  On May 5, 1983, wife appealed from those portions
of the latter order which reduced spousal support to $ 1,250 per month as of
December 1, 1982, and further reduced spousal support to a reservation of
jurisdiction on November 30, 1989.

I.

     Wife's first contention on appeal is that the trial court committed
reversible error because it based its decision to reduce spousal support at
least partly upon the sale of the marital residence, thus ignoring the fact that
the parties' written agreement expressly provided that the sale of that
residence "shall not constitute a substantial change of circumstances upon which
to base a motion for a change in spousal support." Wife points out that Civil
Code section 4811, subdivision (b), provides, in pertinent part, that the
provisions of any agreement or order for the support of either party shall be
subject to subsequent modification or revocation by court order "except to the
extent that any written agreement, or, if there is no written agreement, any
oral agreement entered into in open court between the parties, specifically
provides to the contrary." Wife cites abundant California case law upholding the
enforceability of agreements providing for nonmodifiable spousal support awards.
While she concedes that the written agreement here in issue did not purport to
make spousal support "irrevocably and unconditionally non-modifiable," she
asserts that a property settlement agreement providing that modification of
spousal support cannot be based upon the occurrence of certain specified events
is equally valid and enforceable.   Wife premises this argument upon the
language of Civil Code section 4811, subdivision (b), and case law to that
effect.  (See, e.g., Plumer v. Plumer (1957) 48 Cal.2d 820, 825-826 [313 P.2d
549].)

   Wife asserts that it is clear that the trial court did base its order
reducing spousal support at least partially upon the sale of the marital
residence because the court so stated at a hearing held on November 17, 1982,
when the parties argued their respective positions on husband's motion to reduce
spousal support. At that time, the court expressed the view that it considered
itself bound by two other provisions in the parties' agreement to the effect
that wife could not obtain an increase in spousal support based upon the fact
that husband's gross earnings had increased to $ 75,000 per year, and that
husband could not obtain a decrease in spousal support based upon the fact that
wife had become employed and was earning $ 750 per month.  (See fn. 1, ante, at
p.  1075.) However, the court indicated that it did not consider itself bound by
the provision pertaining to the sale of the marital residence. The court
characterized that provision as merely imposing a limitation to the effect that
wife's "purchase of a home is not a substantial change of circumstances upon
which to base a motion for change in spousal support." (Italics added.) The
court went on to explain that the provision in question could reasonably be
interpreted as precluding wife from basing a motion for increased spousal
support upon the fact that she had bought "'a bigger and more expensive house'"
following the sale of the marital residence. The court then concluded, "I think
it's a matter of the Court's discretion based upon a change in circumstances
which has occurred here: one, the sale of the home; two, some expenses incurred
by [husband] as a result of a hill falling on his [rented] house and some other
evidence that's come to light here today with respect to funds available to
[wife]." The court also expressed its agreement with husband's counsel that the
mortgage payments which wife was to receive from the purchasers of the marital
residence could be taken into consideration in deciding whether her spousal
support should be reduced.

   Wife argues that these comments by the trial judge make it clear that he not
only  decreased spousal support in direct violation of the prohibition set forth
in the parties' written property settlement agreement, but that he also based
such reduction upon two other improper considerations: the fact that wife had
sold an undeveloped parcel of real property for $ 15,000 and the fact that she
would receive approximately $ 1,800 per month in mortgage payments now that the
marital residence had been sold.  In effect, she claims that the trial court's
reliance upon these factors in reducing spousal support constituted an abuse of
discretion because the court was thereby penalizing her for receiving her fair
share of the community property.

    Husband denies that the spousal support reduction was contrary to the
parties' agreement.  He takes the position that, since the parties' agreement
provided that wife could apply for an increase in spousal support of up to $ 600
per month in the event that the marital residence did not sell by December 31,
1981, "Common sense dictates that the parties could not have intended that
[wife] keep this additional support once the family home sold, and the
maintenance expense no longer existed."

   Husband's own analysis of the situation serves to demonstrate the lack of
merit in his position.  He contends that the parties' agreement should be
reasonably interpreted to mean that wife was temporarily entitled to increased
spousal support to cover the costs of maintaining the family residence in the
event that it had not sold by December 31, 1981, but that the justification for
such additional support ceased to exist when the house sold and wife was no
longer burdened with the maintenance expenses.

   Certain conclusions can logically be drawn from provisions in the agreement.
The parties clearly intended that the sale of the house, whenever it occurred,
would have no effect upon spousal support, but that a delay in the sale of the
house might justify a temporary increase of up to $ 600 per month in spousal
support payments to cover the cost of maintaining the house until it sold.  That
this $ 600 figure represented the parties' estimate of the monthly cost of
maintaining the house is evident from the fact that if no delay in the sale had
occurred and the house had sold by December 31, 1981, the total monthly sum due
wife to cover her own expenses and those of her daughter would immediately have
decreased by $ 600, from $ 2,500 to $ 1,900, in January 1982.  In July 1982,
when her daughter would presumably no longer be living with her, a further
reduction would occur and wife's spousal support would thereafter be $ 1,500, in
the absence of a change of circumstances other than the three events which the
parties had agreed would not justify a change in spousal support. Thus, it is
clear that, had the marital residence been sold by December 31, 1981, wife's
permanent spousal support was intended to remain indefinitely at $ 1,500 per
month absent a material change in the needs or resources of the parties, the
death of either of them, or the remarriage of wife.

   According to our interpretation of the parties' agreement, the November 19
order was improper.  The agreement provided for a temporary increase in spousal
support to cover maintenance expenses on the marital residence in the event of a
delay in the sale of that residence.  Any such increase was intended by the
parties to be temporary and to be subject to termination once the house sold.
It was entirely appropriate, once the house had sold, for the trial court to
terminate the provisions of the June 10 order which required husband to
contribute up to $ 200 per month in the form of increased  spousal support
toward the maintenance of the house.  However, we find no justification for the
court's decision to make an additional reduction of $ 250 per month in wife's
spousal support as of December 1, 1982, and to reduce spousal support to a
reservation of jurisdiction in 1989.

   As previously pointed out, wife's permanent spousal support was set at $
1,500 per month, and the parties agreed that the sale of the marital residence
would not constitute grounds for a change in spousal support. The parties
contemplated nothing beyond a temporary increase in spousal support which was to
be granted only in the  case of a delayed sale and which was to terminate when
the sale took place.  Had there been no delay in sale, wife would have commenced
receiving permanent spousal support in the amount of $ 1,500 in July 1982.

   At the hearing held on November 17, 1982, the trial court stated that it was
basing its decision upon three factors: the sale of the marital residence;
husband's prior expenses necessitated by the loss of his personal property in a
mudslide; and the fact that wife had certain additional funds available to her
because she had sold an undeveloped parcel of real property for $ 15,000.  The
court also made it clear that its reliance upon the sale of the marital
residence as a factor justifying a reduction in spousal support included the
fact that as a result of that sale, wife would be receiving approximately $
1,800 per month in mortgage payments from the purchasers of the home.

   We have concluded that none of these factors furnished a proper basis for the
trial court's $ 250 per month reduction in wife's permanent spousal support. As
for the sale of the family residence and wife's resulting right to receive
approximately $ 1,800 in monthly mortgage payments, such right constituted the
single major asset awarded to wife as her one-half share of the community
property. The parties' agreement, which was very carefully drafted by skilled
attorneys, provided that wife would receive her share of the community property
and spousal support. It makes no more sense to reduce wife's spousal support
because she received her rightful share of the community property than it would
to increase wife's spousal support because husband received his rightful share
of the community property. (In fact, husband testified at the Nov. 17, 1982,
hearing that his pension plan, which was allegedly worth $ 175,000 on the date
of separation, was now worth between $ 260,000 and $ 270,000.) In any event, the
parties' agreement expressly provided that the sale of the marital residence
could not be considered a change in circumstances justifying a modification of
spousal support. 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Since the
personal property loss sustained by husband as a result of a mudslide had
earlier been rejected by the court as a basis for reducing spousal support, we
are inclined to discount the possibility that such event could warrant the
reduction in spousal support which was ordered on November 19.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     Finally, it was improper for the trial court to place any reliance upon the
fact that wife had sold an undeveloped lot, which was part of her share of the
community property, for $ 15,000 in cash.  The transformation of one
nonincome-producing asset into another constitutes no basis for a modification
of spousal support. 4 ( In re Marriage of Kuppinger (1975) 48 Cal.App.3d 628,
635 [120 Cal.Rptr. 654].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   Wife gave
contradictory testimony at the November 17 hearing concerning the sale of the
undeveloped parcel of real property. Initially, she testified that she had
received no offers on the property and had not transferred it to anyone, but
later admitted that she had sold it in June for $ 15,000 in cash.  While this
testimony would entitle the trial court to view wife as a witness of doubtful
credibility, it would not afford a valid basis for a reduction in spousal
support which was in violation of the parties' written agreement and also based
upon improper considerations.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      We conclude that this case runs afoul of the settled rule that a trial
court, while possessing broad discretion to modify spousal support, cannot do so
in the absence of a material change of circumstances occurring subsequent to the
last prior order.  ( In re Marriage of Kuppinger, supra, 48 Cal.App.3d 628, 633
.) We find no such material change in this instance.

II.

     Husband contends that, even if the trial court erred by treating the sale
of the marital residence as a change in circumstances, wife is nevertheless
precluded from arguing the point on appeal because the order of June 10, 1982,
which temporarily increased spousal support, contained a provision to the effect
that a sale of the  family residence "shall be deemed a change in circumstance
entitling either party to seek a new order regarding spousal support." He claims
that, because wife did not appeal from the June 10 order, under the doctrine of
res judicata the language in that order was binding on the parties in all
subsequent proceedings.   Also, husband contends that wife is equitably estopped
from attacking that language in the June 10 order because she accepted the
benefits of that order, which temporarily increased her spousal support.

     Neither theory upon which husband relies is applicable here.  The very
cases upon which he relies make it clear that the principle of res judicata is
applicable only to issues actually before the court and necessarily decided by
it.  ( Wodicka v. Wodicka (1976) 17 Cal.3d 181, 188-189 [130 Cal.Rptr. 515, 550
P.2d 1051]; Rasmussen v. Rasmussen (1969) 275 Cal.App.2d 443, 450-451 [79
Cal.Rptr. 842].) In Rasmussen, supra, the appellate court pointed out that where
the sole issue before the trial court was how much the husband owed and not
whether he owed alimony or support which was an inseparable part of the
consideration for the property  settlement agreement, the parties were not bound
by the trial court's characterization of the husband's obligation as "alimony."
( Id., at p. 450.) Likewise, in Stanson v. Mott (1976) 17 Cal.3d 206, 212 [130
Cal.Rptr. 697, 551 P.2d 1], the plaintiff was held not to have been collaterally
estopped from challenging certain language, contained in an appellate court
decision, which was irrelevant to that decision and therefore pure dicta.

   In this instance, the sole question before the trial court when it rendered
the June 10 order was whether wife was entitled to a temporary increase in
spousal support because the marital residence had not sold by December 31, 1981,
and she was in need of additional funds in order to continue to properly
maintain the home until it was sold.  Such temporary relief was authorized by
the parties' written agreement and had nothing to do with the question of
whether the sale of the residence would constitute a change of circumstances for
the purpose of further spousal support proceedings.  (The parties' written
agreement expressly provided that it would not.) Thus, the statement in the June
10 order characterizing the sale of the marital residence as a change of
circumstances justifying a future modification of spousal support was
unnecessary to the court's decision and purely gratuitous.    Under such
circumstances, the doctrine of res judicata is inapplicable; also, there would
appear to be no valid basis for holding that wife was equitably estopped from
challenging the language in question because she accepted the modest $ 200
increase in monthly spousal support which was granted her for the purpose of
maintaining the marital residence.

   The order of March 7, 1983, is reversed and the matter remanded for further
proceedings consistent with the views expressed herein.  If, upon such remand,
it should be determined that the order of March 7, 1983, deprived wife of money
which she was entitled to receive, the trial court should accomplish equitable
restitution of the money so lost.  ( In re Marriage of Jacobs (1981) 126
Cal.App.3d 832, 835 [179 Cal.Rptr. 169].) Also, the trial court might deem it
appropriate to make new findings of fact based upon the parties' present
circumstances.  ( In re Marriage of Fransen (1983) 142 Cal.App.3d 419, 431-432
[190 Cal.Rptr. 885].)


                               3 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of LOIS A. and FRANKLIN M. GARCIA.  LOIS
            A. GARCIA, Appellant, v. FRANKLIN M. GARCIA, Respondent

                                  No. C002967

            Court of Appeal of California, Third Appellate District

            224 Cal. App. 3d 885; 274 Cal. Rptr. 194; 1990 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1103


                                October 18, 1990

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Placer County, No. 69392, J. Richard
Couzens, Judge.

COUNSEL: Sally K. Callahan and Callahan & Barbera for Appellant.

William Neil Shepherd for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Scotland, J., with Carr, Acting P. J., and Marler, J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: SCOTLAND

OPINION

     This case involves two issues which frequently arise in family law matters:
(1) an order that one spouse pay a community debt in lieu of spousal support;
and (2) the obligation of a spouse to compensate the community for the exclusive
use of a community asset following separation.

   After appellant (hereinafter wife) filed for dissolution of her 33-year
marriage, pendente lite orders ( Civ. Code, § 4357) granted her temporary use of
the family residence and directed respondent (hereinafter husband) to make the
mortgage payments "[i]n lieu of spousal support." In the ensuing judgment,  the
trial court found that wife's financial needs exceeded her income by an amount
greater than the mortgage payment and ordered husband to continue making a
portion of the mortgage payment in lieu of spousal support until the residence
was sold.  However, the trial court concluded that wife was required to
reimburse the community for the rental value of the residence during her
exclusive occupancy.  Thus, it ordered her to pay husband $ 400 per month
(one-half of the rental value) from the date of  separation until the residence
was sold, for a total of approximately $ 15,000.

   On appeal, wife contends that she, in effect, made the mortgage payments
because husband was required to pay the mortgage as a form of spousal support.
It follows, she argues, that since the payment approximated the home's monthly
rental value, she owed the community no further compensation for her
postseparation use of the family residence. Wife also asserts that the
reimbursement order constituted an impermissible, retroactive modification of
spousal support and was invalid under property law.  Husband counters that no
spousal support was ordered, paid or retroactively modified, and that wife was
properly directed to compensate the community for her use of the residence.

   We agree with wife.  For the reasons stated below, we find that (1) the
orders requiring husband to make mortgage payments "in lieu of spousal support"
were spousal support orders which effectively compelled wife to devote her
entire monthly support entitlement to payment of the mortgage; and (2) since
wife, in effect, made the mortgage payment on the family residence, she was not
required to reimburse the community for her exclusive use of this asset because
its rental value approximated the mortgage payment and she did not obtain
Epstein credits ( In re Marriage of Epstein (1979) 24 Cal.3d 76 [154 Cal.Rptr.
413, 592 P.2d 1165]) for the mortgage payments she made.  Accordingly, we shall
reverse that portion of the judgment which requires wife to pay husband for her
postseparation use of the residence. 1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Because
we conclude that the judgment must be reversed in part as a matter of family
law, we need not consider wife's alternative argument that the judgment also
violates principles of property law.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Facts and Procedural Background

   A detailed review of the history of this case is necessary due to husband's
claim that he never was ordered to pay spousal support.

   The parties married in June 1951.  Following their separation in June 1984,
wife was awarded exclusive use of the family residence. On wife's order to show
cause in August 1984, the superior court directed husband to make the entire $
912 mortgage payment for the months of August and September "in lieu of spousal
support." This obligation was extended by court orders in October and December
1984.

   The issue of spousal support was next heard in March 1985.  According to
husband's income and expense declaration, his net monthly income was  $ 2,333.98
based on a gross income of $ 4,083.73, and his monthly expenses were $ 1,912.
Wife declared that her net income each month was $ 1,477.33 based on a gross of
$ 2,373, and her monthly expenses were $ 4,172, including over $ 1,300 for
mortgage, property taxes and insurance, and home maintenance.  Noting that
husband "has almost double" wife's income and "is cohabiting and sharing living
expenses with an individual who has yet to disclose her income, but who is on
his  bank accounts and sharing dollar for dollar expenses with him," wife urged
the court to require husband to continue making the house payment as spousal
support. Acknowledging that he had been ordered to make the payment on the
family home "as a form of spousal support," husband proposed that he pay wife "$
500 a month, to be applied to the house payment, not as spousal support; and
that wife be allowed to take all tax benefits from the house payment." Once
again, the court ordered husband to make the entire mortgage payment "in lieu of
spousal support."

   In December 1985, under the heading "Modification . . . Spousal Support,"
husband moved to terminate the order requiring him to make the house payment in
lieu of support.  The motion was based primarily upon husband's claim that wife
was cohabiting with a boyfriend in the family home. Wife denied the allegation,
the court found insufficient evidence to support husband's claim, and the motion
was dropped from the calendar.

   In July 1986, husband filed another motion to terminate his duty to make the
mortgage payments.  He noted that the court had ordered the family residence to
be sold, that he had "agreed not to file a motion to modify spousal support,
with the understanding that the parties would cooperate in the sale and that his
obligation to continue making the payment would cease when the residence was
sold" but that wife was refusing to cooperate with the sales process, and that
requiring him to make the house payment was "far and above the local county [
spousal support] guidelines." Following a hearing, the court reduced husband's
payment to $ 681.31 and ordered wife to pay the remainder of the mortgage.

   Trial commenced on July 30, 1986.  We have not been provided a reporter's
transcript of that proceeding.  However, we can glean husband's position on the
issues from points and authorities he filed at the trial court's request.  With
respect to spousal support, he proposed that the then-existing order requiring
him to make payments toward the home mortgage be continued for three months and
thereafter he pay spousal support of no more than $ 150 per month.  As to the
issue before us, he contended "that since [wife] has had the exclusive use and
possession of [the family] home since the parties separated, she should
reimburse the community at its fair rental value which is $ 800 per month."

     In its tentative decision, the trial court stated: "Husband requests a
charge for the reasonable rental value of the residence during wife's occupancy
since separation.  Wife was given exclusive use of the residence.  On March 29,
1985, husband was ordered to make the monthly payment on the residence in lieu
of spousal support. The payments on the residence are approximately $ 925.00 per
month.  The rental value of the residence is $ 800.00 per month.  Wife obviously
does not owe any Epstein credits to husband because of his payment of her share
of the mortgage. Wife, however, does owe husband one-half the rental value of
the residence.  Accordingly, wife shall pay husband $ 400 per month from the
date of separation until the house sells." (Italics in original.)

   Although wife did not make a timely request for a statement of decision, she
filed an "objection" to the tentative decision in which she claimed that the
order for reimbursement was an impermissible retroactive modification of spousal
support. The trial court rejected wife's objection, and judgment was entered.

   Consistent with the tentative decision, the judgment ordered wife to
compensate husband for wife's postseparation use of the family residence. As for
spousal support, the judgment states that the court found wife's net monthly
disposable income to be $ 1,775, but that "her needs including the mortgage
payment on the family residence, are approximately $ 3,000.00 per month . . . ."
Finding husband's net monthly disposable income to be $ 2,500, with expenses of
$ 2,500 including the mortgage on the family home, the court ordered husband to
"continue to pay the portion of the mortgage payment in lieu of support as
heretofore ordered on the family residence until it is sold with the court
reserving jurisdiction to award support to [wife] and upon final sale of the
residence, the support obligation shall be subject to modification." This appeal
followed.

   Discussion

   The legal principles which underlie this dispute are well established.
Where one spouse has the exclusive use of a community asset during the period
between separation and trial, that spouse may be required to compensate the
community for the reasonable value of that use.  ( In re Marriage of Watts
(1985) 171 Cal.App.3d 366, 372-374 [217 Cal.Rptr. 301]; In re Marriage of Tucker
(1983) 141 Cal.App.3d 128, 136 [190 Cal.Rptr. 127]; Hogoboom & King, Cal.
Practice Guide: Family Law (Rutter 1990) 8:196.1.) A corollary of this principle
is that where the asset is not owned outright by the community but is being
financed, and the monthly payments equal or exceed the reasonable value of the
asset's use, the spouse may satisfy the duty to compensate the community for use
of the  asset by making the monthly finance payments from his or her separate
property. (Ibid.; see In re Marriage of Epstein, supra, 24 Cal.3d at pp. 84-85;
Marriage of Hebbring (1989) 207 Cal.App.3d 1260, 1271 [255 Cal.Rptr. 488]; In re
Marriage of McNeill (1984) 160 Cal.App.3d 548, 564 [206 Cal.Rptr. 641]; In re
Marriage of Smith (1978) 79 Cal.App.3d 725, 747 [145 Cal.Rptr. 205]; Adams &
Sevitch, Cal. Family Law Practice (8th ed.) § D.89.)

   This duty to compensate often is invoked to reject a claim by the paying
spouse that the community should reimburse him or her for the monthly payments
even though the spouse had the exclusive use of the asset.  "Thus, reimbursement
will usually not be ordered for payments on obligations on the family home made
by the spouse remaining in the home, or for automobile payments made by the
spouse using the vehicle between separation and trial."  ( Hebbring, supra, 207
Cal.App.3d at p. 1271.)

   The case before us presents the mirror image of the situation discussed in
Hebbring.  The result must be the same.  Where a spouse with exclusive use of a
community asset after separation makes the monthly finance payments on the
asset, he or she is not required to further compensate the community for use of
the community asset where the monthly finance charges equal or exceed the
reasonable value of said use each month and the paying spouse does not obtain
Epstein credits for the monthly payments.

   Application of this principle to the present case turns on a determination of
the character of husband's obligation to make the mortgage payments "in lieu of
spousal support."

   Wife does not dispute that she had exclusive use of the family residence
during the period between separation and trial.  Nor does she dispute that the
community was entitled to compensation for the reasonable value of said use.
She contends, however,  that she already had satisfied her duty to compensate
the community because it was she who, in effect, had paid the mortgage. This is
so, she reasons, because the mortgage was paid by husband in lieu of spousal
support, i.e., with funds that wife otherwise would have received in cash for
her support; the fact that husband sent them directly to the mortgage holder is
irrelevant.  Thus, she claims that the trial court, by acceding to husband's
request that she pay him one-half of the rental value, "essentially ordered Wife
to reimburse Husband for spousal support received by her, and as such is [an
impermissible] retroactive modification of the spousal support orders . . . ."

   Husband counters by claiming "[t]he record is abundantly clear that the Wife
was not awarded spousal support." Rather, he argues, "The trial court
specifically ordered the Husband to make the house payment 'in lieu of'  spousal
support. There is no possible interpretation of 'in lieu of', other than there
will be no temporary spousal support and instead, we will order the Husband to
make the house payments."

   Wife, not husband, correctly characterizes the awards.

     It is permissible to include in a spousal support order a requirement that
the payment of overdue or future debts, or a portion thereof, be made to third
parties.  ( Civ. Code, § 4358; In re Marriage of Epstein, supra, 24 Cal.3d at p.
85; In re Marriage of Chala (1979) 92 Cal.App.3d 996, 1000 [155 Cal.Rptr. 605];
Bushman v. Superior Court (1973) 33 Cal.App.3d 177, 181-183 [108 Cal.Rptr. 765];
In re Hendricks (1970) 5 Cal.App.3d 793, 797-798 [85 Cal.Rptr. 220].) As
explained in Chala, spousal support is intended to meet the future living
expenses of the supported spouse. Where payment of a continuing debt to a third
party is related to such living expenses, it "is clearly a form of spousal
support . . . ." ( Chala, supra, at p. 1002.) For example, if the wife is living
in the family residence and the husband is not, an order requiring the husband
to pay all or part of the monthly mortgage is justifiable as spousal support
because it meets the wife's need for housing.  (Ibid.) Similarly, the supporting
spouse may be ordered to pay past unpaid debts as spousal support, because an
award which does not expressly encompass such debts may be depleted by creditors
demanding payment from the spouse receiving the support award, thereby reducing
the supported spouse's ability to meet current living expenses. (Ibid.)

   In some cases, an order for payment of a debt to a third party as a form of
spousal support has an important, and sometimes necessary, incidental benefit.
It may ensure that the spousal support award will be used for a required living
expense rather than be squandered on unnecessary things.  Moreover, an order for
payment of a continuing debt as a form of temporary spousal support may serve to
guarantee that a community asset will be preserved pending trial.  For example,
an order to pay the mortgage on the family residence provides the supported
spouse with needed housing while maintaining the community asset.

     Contrary to husband's argument, there is an ambiguity lurking in the trial
court's use of the phrase "in lieu of spousal support." When used in conjunction
with the term "in lieu of," the words "spousal support" could refer either to
husband's legal duty to pay spousal support or to the payments by which that
duty is discharged.  Thus, it could be argued that the court may have ordered
husband to pay the mortgage in lieu of any duty to pay support, or it may have
directed him, in the discharge of his support duty, to pay the mortgage in lieu
of any other form of payment.  Husband can prevail in his quest to be
compensated for wife's exclusive use of the  family residence only if the orders
are construed as rejecting any duty of support.  Only then would wife be
foreclosed from asserting that the mortgage payments effectively were made by
her and satisfied her requirement to compensate the community for her exclusive
use of the home.

   Several factors persuade us that husband's interpretation of the orders is
untenable, and that spousal support orders were imposed.

    Civil Code section 4357 allows the superior court to award temporary spousal
support during the pendency of the dissolution proceeding.  Such awards are
within the court's discretion and are based on the relative needs of the parties
and their respective abilities to pay.  ( In re Marriage of Stich (1985) 169
Cal.App.3d 64, 71-74 [214 Cal.Rptr. 919]; Hogoboom & King, op. cit. supra , 5:6;
Adams & Sevitch, op. cit. supra, §§ N.13-N.20.2; 11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law
(9th ed. 1990) Husband and Wife, § 181, p. 215.) These factors suggest that the
judges who fashioned the pendente lite orders for payment of the mortgage in
lieu of spousal support exercised their discretion in favor of awarding
temporary support; wife's needs exceeded her income, and husband had sufficient
income to enable him to pay support -- he made more than his monthly living
expenses and apparently was sharing these expenses with a companion.

   Courts have recognized that the existence of a need for support is a prime
consideration in determining whether a given payment is, in reality, in
discharge of an obligation of support.  ( In re Marriage of Epstein, supra, 24
Cal.3d at p. 86, fn. 5; In re Marriage of Smith, supra, 79 Cal.App.3d at p. 748
.) A second key consideration is whether the payment was in addition to
reasonable support already being provided by the paying spouse, either pursuant
to or in the absence of a court order.  (Ibid.) Because wife needed support, but
husband was not providing it in any other form, the inference is compelling that
the mortgage payments were intended as a form of support.

   Language in the pendente lite orders after hearing also support this
conclusion.  The first two orders expressly provided that husband "shall pay as
spousal support [para.] (1) To [wife] [para.] (2) Amount: $ [para.] In lieu of
spousal support, . . . [husband] shall make the entire payment on the family
residence . . . ." The December 1984 order continued the prior orders in full
force and effect.  The March 1985 minute order states, "The court orders support
to petitioner in the amount of $ 912 [the sum of the house payment] . . . ." The
order after hearing specifies that the payment be made on the mortgage in lieu
of spousal support.

   We note, as well, that during the pendente lite hearings, husband took a
position contrary to that which he advances on appeal.  In a "Statement of
Issues and Proposed Disposition of Temporary Support" filed February 25, 1985,
husband's former attorney acknowledged, "On August 27, 1984, [husband] was
ordered to pay the entire house payment on the family home, which is currently
occupied by [wife], as a form of spousal support." (Italics added.)  This
concession in superior court undermines the position husband now takes on
appeal.

   Similarly, the trial court's judgment leads to the conclusion that the
continuing order for mortgage payments was intended as spousal support. First,
in its tentative decision, which is consistent with the judgment,  the court
placed the direction to make mortgage payments in lieu of support under the
heading, "Spousal Support." Second, in the judgment, the court stated that "upon
the final sale of the residence, the support obligation shall be subject to
modification." The term "modification" presupposes the existence of a support
order to be modified. Third, the trial court directed husband to name wife as
beneficiary of his life insurance in order "to secure payment of the support
obligation." Had no spousal support award been in existence, this directive
would have been unnecessary.  In sum, we find the trial court's judgment
incompatible with husband's contention that no spousal support had been ordered.

   Our conclusion that spousal support orders were issued is further bolstered
by considerations of policy.  "The amount of temporary support is usually fixed
in a manner which will assure to the extent financially possible, that payments
on debts will be made, to preserve both the community assets pending trial and
the credit standing of the spouses." ( In re Marriage of Hebbring, supra, 207
Cal.App.3d at pp. 1270-1271.) In directing husband to fulfill his spousal
support duty by making payments directly to the mortgage holder, the court
assured that the mortgage would be paid, that the home would not be lost to
foreclosure before the proceedings had concluded, and that the parties' credit
standing would not be needlessly impaired.  Supported spouses could not be
expected to acquiesce in such orders if they are thereby exposed to a
reimbursement claim like that asserted by husband.  As wife points out, had she
known that she would have been ordered to reimburse the community for her use of
the family residence, she would have sought a support payment in cash and made
the house payments herself.

   Lastly, we note that, although the phrase "in lieu of spousal support" would
appear ambiguous to one who is unfamiliar with the practice of family law, it is
a term of art commonly used by family law courts and practitioners to describe a
spousal  support award comprised of payments other than cash to the supported
spouse. Common sense leads to the conclusion that the court would not have used
this term unless the court meant  the award to be a spousal support order.  For
example, if the court simply were making a pendente lite order for the payment
of a community obligation, for which the paying spouse may later be entitled to
Epstein credits, it could have said so; there would have been no purpose served
by deeming the order to be "in lieu of spousal support." By its very nature, the
term presupposes a spousal support obligation.  Although we have undertaken a
technical analysis of this term under the circumstances presented by this case,
we have no doubt that at the time the pendente lite orders were made, the
parties, their attorneys and the court understood that the orders were spousal
support awards. 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   While we
find that the orders compelling husband to make mortgage payments in lieu of
spousal support were, in fact, spousal support awards, we are not called upon to
deal with the tax consequences of these orders since the parties did not raise
this issue.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Nevertheless, husband cites In re Marriage of Watts, supra, 171 Cal.App.3d
366, for the proposition that the determination whether to order compensation
for the exclusive use of a community asset "should be made after taking into
account all the circumstances under which exclusive possession was ordered." (
Id., at p. 374.) He states, without citation to authority or the record, that
while this case was pending the Placer County Superior Court adopted temporary
support guidelines which would have limited wife's monthly support to less than
$ 200, far less than the $ 925 he had been paying on the mortgage. He argues
that wife "flagrantly violated the court's order that she cooperate in the sale
of the residence, took no action to move the case towards its conclusion, kept
the use of the residence and all of the furnishings from the date of separation,
June 1984, until long after the trial in 1986, and the Judgment in 1987." Thus,
he claims, "Here the trial court considered all these circumstances and
determined that reimbursement was necessary."

   Nothing in the record supports husband's claim that the reimbursement order
was premised on the enactment of the support guidelines or on wife's alleged
lack of cooperation.  Even if it were, it could not be sustained on that basis.
The trial court's authority to consider "all the circumstances" in determining
whether to order compensation does not include the authority to award
reimbursement if it concludes that a prior temporary support order was too
generous. Civil Code section 4357 provides that a temporary support order "may
be modified or revoked at any time except as to any amount that may have accrued
prior to the date of filing of the notice of motion or order to show cause to
modify or revoke." (Italics added.) This statute has been construed to prohibit
retroactive modifications of temporary support. ( In re Marriage of Van Sickle
(1977) 68 Cal.App.3d 728, 740 [137 Cal.Rptr. 568].) Had the trial court awarded
husband compensation for wife's use of the family residence on the ground that
the prior orders  had been too generous, its action would be invalid as a
retroactive modification of those prior orders. 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Husband
devotes a substantial portion of his brief to arguments that, because wife did
not request a statement of decision or provide a reporter's transcript of the
1986 trial, she may not challenge the factual underpinnings of the judgment.
She does not do so.  Her contention is that the reimbursement order is invalid
as a matter of law.  The present record suffices to resolve that contention.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      In sum, the record before the trial court showed that prior to July 1986,
the entire mortgage payment (in excess of $ 900) was made from spousal support
funds that effectively were wife's separate property. After the support order
was modified in July 1986, the major portion of the payment was made from
support funds, with the remainder paid from wife's separate property. Thus, at
all times wife's payments exceeded the $ 800 per month rental value fixed by the
trial court.  Wife did not seek, and did not receive, Epstein credits for
payment of the mortgage. Accordingly, the mortgage payments satisfied her
responsibility to compensate the community for her exclusive use of the home.
Further compensation should not have been ordered.

   That portion of the judgment directing wife to pay husband $ 400 per month
from the date of separation until the family residence is sold is reversed.  In
all other respects, the judgment is affirmed.  Wife shall recover her costs on
appeal.


                               4 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of SAMEER KHERA and MADHU SAMEER. SAMEER
                 KHERA, Respondent, v. MADHU SAMEER, Appellant.

                                    H035957

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SIXTH APPELLATE DISTRICT

          206 Cal. App. 4th 1467; 143 Cal. Rptr. 3d 81; 2012 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 716


                          June 19, 2012, Opinion Filed

PRIOR-HISTORY:
   Superior Court of Santa Clara County, No. FL116302, Edward J. Davila, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(7) Dissolution of Marriage § 69--Spousal Support--Modification--Change of
Circumstances--Contingent Termination--Reasonable Diligence--Financial
Self-sufficiency--Economy--Education.--For purposes of showing changed
circumstances on a request under Fam. Code, § 3651, to modify a Richmond-type
spousal support order, the supported spouse did not show that she diligently
acted to achieve financial  self-sufficiency. She did not show that the state's
general economic situation impeded her ability to obtain full-time employment in
her chosen field, and her voluntary decision to pursue a doctoral degree rather
than entering the working world did not constitute a material change of
circumstances.

   [Kirkland et al., Cal. Family Law Practice and Procedure (2012) ch. 51, §
51.24; 11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (10th ed. 2005) Husband and Wife, §§ 282,
284.]

COUNSEL: J. Hector Moreno; Tone & Tone and Francine R. Adkins Tone for
Appellant.

Gregory R. Ellis for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Elia, J., with Rushing, P. J., and Premo, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: Elia

OPINION

    ELIA, J.--Madhu Sameer appeals from the denial of her postjudgment motion to
modify the judgment's spousal support order, a hybrid stepdown, Richmond-type
order (see In re Marriage of Richmond (1980) 105 Cal.App.3d 352 [164 Cal. Rptr.
381]), which provided for the spousal support obligation of her former husband,
Sameer Khera, to terminate June 1, 2010, unless she made a good cause showing to
extend spousal support.1 Implicit in the parties' oral stipulation,  and the
judgment reflecting that agreement, was the expectation that, by June 1, 2010,
Madhu would have completed her master's degree in social work (MSW) and be able
to support herself. Since Madhu did not make any showing that her ability to be
self-supporting was an unrealized expectation, the court did not abuse its
discretion by denying her modification request.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   For ease
of reference and meaning no disrespect, we will refer to Madhu Sameer and Sameer
Khera by their first names.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

I

Procedural History

   On October 10, 2003, Sameer filed a petition for dissolution of marriage. The
parties reached a settlement agreement and, on May 18, 2007, placed it orally on
the record before the court. The February 25, 2008 judgment on reserved issues
reflected the parties' May 2007 agreement. It resolved issues of property
division, child custody, child support, pending contempt proceedings, and
spousal support.

   As to spousal support, the judgment provided for monthly support of $2,650
commencing on June 1, 2007, which was annually stepped down through June 1,
2010. For the period of June 1, 2009, through May 31, 2010, respondent Sameer
was required to pay appellant Madhu monthly spousal support of $1,650. The
judgment provided that "[o]n June 1, 2010, spousal support will be reduced to
zero, unless, before that date, [appellant Madhu] files a motion to have spousal
support continued and shows good cause as to why the Court should order spousal
support to be continued." The judgment stated with regard to childcare expenses:
"[C]ommencing June 1, 2007, the Parties shall each pay one-half of all: (a)
reasonable child care expenses incurred to permit a Party to work; (b) only
through October 30, 2007, reasonable child care expenses incurred to permit
[appellant Madhu] to obtain her MSW degree ... ."

   In February 2009, Madhu moved to set aside the judgment. Sameer filed
opposition papers and a declaration in response to the motion. Each party filed
a settlement conference statement and an income and expense declaration.

   Madhu sought modification of the judgment's spousal support provisions by an
order to show cause filed March 24, 2010. She requested the following relief:
"Wife requests that the Court determine the Marital Standard of Living ... and
thereby set the appropriate level of support. Based on those findings, Wife
requests that the Court order an upward modification of spousal support, which
includes a Smith Ostler obligation. Wife requests the Court appoint an expert to
assist in the determination of the same and request that Husband be ordered to
advance the costs required, subject to reallocation. Further, she requests that
Husband continue paying support beyond June 1, 2010 until that time that Wife
can become self-supporting."

   Madhu's supporting declaration stated that the parties had been married in
January 1986 and Sameer had filed for marital dissolution on October 10, 2003,
and they had three children. She indicated she had agreed to the parties'
stipulation under duress applied by her attorney and Sameer had failed to make
full financial disclosures. She asserted that the judgment's spousal support
provisions were "grossly inequitable" and did not include an Ostler & Smith
provision.2 She stated  that she was "living far below the standard" of her
marriage and was "currently struggling to meet even [her] most basic of needs."

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   In In re
Marriage of Ostler & Smith (1990) 223 Cal.App.3d 33 [272 Cal. Rptr. 560], the
trial court ordered, in addition to fixed spousal support, additional spousal
support in "a sum equal to 15 percent of his annual gross cash bonus when
received" in conjunction with an automatic stepdown that reduced "all spousal
support, both fixed and bonus percentage" "to $1 per year in three years ...
unless prior to that time, [the wife] files a motion and shows good cause why
the support order should be modified by demonstrating that she has made her best
efforts to become self-supporting." (Id. at p. 42.) The reviewing court upheld
the percentage award of future bonuses as spousal support, stating: "We
interpret [Civil Code former] section 4801, ... subdivision (a)(1)(C) ... [(now
Fam. Code, § 4320, subd. (b))], as mandating that the unpaid homemaker who is
the prime caretaker for the children of the marriage be given the same
consideration for such substantial contributions to the spouse whose career has
been fostered during the marriage. The trial court complied with the legislative
mandate to consider the extent to which [the supported spouse] contributed to
[the supporting spouse's] career by awarding her a percentage share of his extra
earnings for a period of time." (Id. at p. 49.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In her declaration, Madhu emphasized her husband's high earnings as an
executive and his extensive cash assets. She stated that, according to his W-2
forms, Sameer earned $593,111.41 in 2006 and $545,435.66 in 2007. The attached
W-2 forms showed he earned $417,160.47 in 2008. The attached income and expense
declaration dated September 30, 2009, indicated that his last month's salary or
wages were $18,610 and he had also received an "annual-stock 46,020, bonus
120,110," which suggests he may have been earning less in 2009 than he had in
2006 to 2008.

   As to her income, Madhu stated in her declaration that she was earning $9.00
per hour as an associate social worker. She was in a clinical psychology
doctoral program and able to work only about 24 hours per week. Madhu indicated
that she was "$87,000.00 in debt" and "on the verge of exhausting the remainder
of the cash reserve" awarded in the dissolution. She stated that she relied on
Sameer's support payment to provide for her and their children's most basic
needs.

   Madhu declared that it was "imperative" that the court order Sameer to
continue to pay "spousal support on an ongoing basis" and "grant [her] request
for an upward modification of the current spousal support order" so that she
could live at the marital standard of living. Her attached January 22, 2010
income and expense declaration showed that the previous month she had earned
$700 in salary or wages and $1,600 in commissions or bonuses and her average
monthly income in those categories varied.

   Most of the memorandum of points and authorities in support of Madhu's
request was devoted to attacking the judgment. As to modification of the
judgment's spousal support provisions, counsel for Madhu argued that "no showing
of changed circumstances is required due to the fact that the language contained
in the Judgment specifically allows for Wife to seek modification of the stated
order on or before June 1, 2010." Counsel alternatively contended that, even if
a change of circumstances is required, "modification may be grounded on a
showing of 'unrealized expectations.' " Citing In re Marriage of Beust (1994) 23
Cal.App.4th 24 [28 Cal.Rptr.2d 201], counsel asserted that "[s]o long as the
supported spouse has made reasonable efforts to become self-supporting, a change
of circumstances may be in the form of 'unrealized expectations' in the ability
of the supported spouse to become self-supporting within a certain period of
time." Counsel contended that despite Madhu's full-time enrollment in the
doctoral program in clinical psychology, "she has not yet met all of the
necessary requirements in order to graduate and has, therefore,  not yet been
able to support herself and the children" and "she is currently only able to
earn $9.00 per hour." On behalf of Madhu, counsel requested the court to
determine the marital standard of living, set the appropriate level of support,
order an upward modification of spousal support that included an Ostler & Smith
provision, and modify the existing order to require Sameer to continue paying
spousal support beyond June 1, 2010, until Madhu "can become self-supporting."

   Sameer filed a memorandum of points and authorities and a declaration in
opposition to the application for a modification of spousal support. The
memorandum represented that the parties had separated in June 2003 and  they had
two minor children who resided with Madhu and an adult child attending college
who lived with Sameer when not attending college.

   Sameer's declaration disclosed that Madhu had undergone a vocational
assessment before their May 2007 agreement. The vocational assessment
examination report, dated April 4, 2007, indicated that, at that time, Madhu was
attending a master's program in social work at California State University,
Fresno. She had completed the required practicum hours and would complete her
course work at the end of May 2007. Madhu indicated that she still needed to
complete her master's thesis and have it signed by her adviser. At one point she
indicated that she would be able to earn her MSW degree by August 1, 2007, but
then indicated that her master's thesis might not be done until as late as
November 2007. The report indicated that Madhu would be employable as soon as
she completed her thesis at a salary of between $38,000 and $42,000 per year.
Her earning capacity would increase significantly after she had completed the
requisite supervised work experience and obtained licensure as a licensed
clinical social worker (LCSW). As an LCSW, she could earn from $72,000 to
$93,000 per year.

   Sameer's declaration stated that forensic CPA Sally White determined in May
2007 that Madhu "required $44,193 annually to maintain [the parties'] marital
standard of living." He asserted that "instead of pursuing employment that would
permit her to be self-supporting, [Madhu] decided to seek her PhD." His
declaration also indicated that under their settlement, Madhu received about
$500,000 and substantial unexercised vested stock options and she would receive
half of the net proceeds of two properties when sold.

   In support of modification, Madhu's counsel argued at the hearing on May 6,
2010, that the family court was "absolutely obligated to go through the
[section] 4320 factors to determine whether or not the original support amount
met [his] client's needs based on the marital [living] standard." After
argument, the court denied the motion because it did not find there was
sufficient evidence to modify the spousal support prospectively. The court noted
that the motion to set aside the judgment was calendared and "depending on what
happens on that motion, it may then be appropriate to revisit the issue of
support ... ." Madhu's counsel asked, "is the Court making a finding that it is
not required to analyze the 4320 factors?" The court replied that it was "not
making any finding" and it had made its order. A formal order was filed.

   On appeal, Madhu argues that the trial court abused its discretion.

II

Discussion

A. Legal Background

    Family Code3 section 4330, subdivision (a), provides: "In a judgment of
dissolution of marriage ... of the parties, the court may order a party to pay
for the support of the other party an amount, for a period of time, that the
court determines is just and reasonable, based on the standard of living
established during the marriage, taking into consideration the circumstances as
provided in Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 4320)." Section 4320 states: "In
ordering spousal support under this part, the court shall consider all of the
following circumstances ... ." Those circumstances include, among others, "[t]he
extent to which the earning capacity of each party is sufficient to maintain the
standard of living established during the marriage" (§ 4320, subd. (a)), "[t]he
ability of the supporting party to pay spousal support" (§ 4320, subd. (c)),
"[t]he needs of each party based on the standard of living established during
the marriage" (§ 4320, subd. (d)), "[t]he duration of the marriage" (§ 4320,
subd. (f)) and "[t]he goal that the supported party shall be self-supporting
within a reasonable period of time" (§ 4320, subd. (l)).

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   All
further statutory references are to the Family Code unless otherwise stated.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Section 3651 provides that, with specified exceptions, "a support order may
be modified or terminated at any time as the court determines to be necessary."
(§ 3651, subd. (a).) An order for spousal support may not be modified or
terminated, however, if the parties have so agreed in a written agreement or in
an oral agreement entered into in open court. (§ 3651, subd. (d).)

   "Modification of spousal support, even if the prior amount is established by
agreement, requires a material change of circumstances since the last order.
[Citations.]" (In re Marriage of McCann (1996) 41 Cal.App.4th 978, 982 [48 Cal.
Rptr. 2d 864].) "A trial court considering whether to modify a spousal support
order considers the same criteria set forth in Family Code section 4320 as it
considered in making the initial order. [Citation.]" (In re Marriage of West
(2007) 152 Cal.App.4th 240, 247 [60 Cal. Rptr. 3d 858].) "In other words, in
considering a spousal support modification request--... given the predicate of a
change of circumstances--the trial court looks at the various factors bearing on
spousal support under section 4320." (In re Marriage of Kacik (2009) 179
Cal.App.4th 410, 422 [101 Cal. Rptr. 3d 745].)

   "A material change of circumstances may be in the form of unrealized
expectations. (In re Marriage of Beust[, supra,] 23 Cal.App.4th 24, 29 ... .) A
family law court may not find a change of circumstances, however, in the
reconsideration of a circumstance which has not changed since the previous
order. (In re Marriage Farrell (1985) 171 Cal.App.3d 695, 703 [217 Cal. Rptr.
397].) Circumstances accounted for in the previous order cannot constitute a
change of circumstances. (Hogoboom & King, Cal. Practice Guide: Family Law (The
Rutter Group 1999) ¶ 17:147 ... .)" (In re Marriage of Lautsbaugh (1999) 72
Cal.App.4th 1131, 1133 [85 Cal. Rptr. 2d 688].) "There is authority that the
parties have the power to decide whether a particular event will or will not be
deemed a material change of circumstances for purposes of modification of a
support order. (See Hogoboom & King, Cal. Practice Guide: Family Law (The Rutter
Group 2006) ¶¶ 17.141 to 17.144, pp. 17-32.19 to 17-32.20.)" (In re Marriage of
West, supra, 152 Cal.App.4th at p. 247.)

   "Except on written agreement of the parties to the contrary or a court order
terminating spousal support, the court retains jurisdiction indefinitely in a
proceeding for dissolution of marriage ... where the marriage is of long
duration." (§ 4336, subd. (a).) "For the purpose of retaining jurisdiction,
there is a presumption affecting the burden of producing evidence that a
marriage of 10 years or more, from the date of marriage to the date of
separation, is a marriage of long duration." (§ 4336, subd. (b).)

B. Judgment Reduced Spousal Support to Zero Absent Good Cause Showing

1. Richmond Order

   An order providing for contingent termination of spousal support on a
specific date unless, before that time, the supported spouse brings a motion to
modify for good cause is denominated a Richmond order after the decision of In
re Marriage of Richmond, supra, 105 Cal.App.3d 352 (Richmond). The order in
Richmond provided that the " 'obligation for spousal support shall continue
through the month of September 1981, at which time spousal support shall forever
terminate and the jurisdiction of this Court over the issue of spousal support
shall terminate, unless prior to September 30, 1981, [the supported spouse]
makes a showing of good cause to extend spousal support beyond that date.' " (
Id. at p. 354.) In upholding the order, the appellate court observed: "
'Limiting the duration of support so that both parties can develop their own
lives, free from obligations to each other, is a commendable [judicial] goal.'
([In re Marriage of Morrison (1978) 20 Cal.3d  437,] 452 [143 Cal. Rptr. 139,
573 P.2d 41].) And a spousal support order may, in a proper case, be fashioned
so as to encourage such supportive self-reliance, and to discourage delay in
preparation for or in seeking, or refusal of, available employment." (Id. at p.
356.) It stated: "On the record the court might have concluded it probable that
[the supported spouse] would be supportively self-sufficient at the designated
time, and reasonable that she, with better access to relevant evidence, make a
contrary showing." (Ibid.)

   "A Richmond order is normally issued with the expectation that if the
supported spouse exercises reasonable diligence, he or she will have become
self-supporting by the date set for support payments to end." (In re Marriage of
Berland (1989) 215 Cal.App.3d 1257, 1260 [264 Cal. Rptr. 210].) "The effect of a
'Richmond' order is to tell each spouse that the supported spouse has a
specified period of time to become self-supporting, after which the obligation
of the supporting spouse will cease. ... A 'Richmond' order psychologically
prepares the supported spouse for the time when he or she must be
self-supporting. It also places the burden of showing good cause for a change in
the order upon the one who is most able to exercise the control necessary to
meet the expectations the trial judge had in making the order." (In re Marriage
of Prietsch & Calhoun (1987) 190 Cal.App.3d 645, 665-666 [235 Cal. Rptr. 587].)

2. The Requirement of a Material Change of Circumstances

   "So long as the supported spouse has made reasonable efforts to become
self-supporting, a change of circumstances may be in the form of 'unrealized
expectations' in the ability of the supported spouse to become self-supporting
within a certain period of time. [Citations.] '[T]he question of reasonable
expectations is material and a failure to realize them may constitute a change
of circumstances justifying modification of the order.' (Bratnober v. Bratnober
(1957) 48 Cal.2d 259, 263 [309 P.2d 441].)" (In re Marriage of Beust, supra,  23
Cal.App.4th at p. 29.)

   In her reply brief, appellant Madhu asserts for the first time on appeal that
"under contract analysis of this particular original judgment, ... a 'change' of
circumstances was not required to bring a motion to extend the spousal support
order ... ." In her opening brief, she states: "Pursuant to a stipulated
Richmond order, the supported spouse has the burden of showing a change of
circumstances."

   "Obvious reasons of fairness militate against consideration of an issue
raised initially in the reply brief of an appellant. [Citations.]" (Varjabedian
v.  City of Madera (1977) 20 Cal.3d 285, 295, fn. 11 [142 Cal. Rptr. 429, 572
P.2d 43].) " '[T]he rule is that points raised in the reply brief for the first
time will not be considered, unless good reason is shown for failure to present
them before. [Citations.]' [Citation.]" (People v. Smithey (1999) 20 Cal.4th
936, 1017, fn. 26 [86 Cal. Rptr. 2d 243, 978 P.2d 1171].) The argument that
appellant was not required to show changed circumstances was forfeited by her
failure to raise it in her opening brief. In any case, the contention is without
merit.

   The clear implication of the judgment was that, absent unforeseen
circumstances, Madhu was expected to complete her MSW degree and be able to be
fully self-supporting by June 1, 2010. The judgment provided for the parties to
equally share the cost of additional child support for (1) childcare expenses to
permit a party to work and (2) childcare expenses to permit appellant Madhu to
obtain her MSW degree "only through October 30, 2007." Spousal support commenced
on June 1, 2007, but was annually stepped down and reached zero on June 1, 2010,
unless Madhu filed "a motion to have spousal support continued and show[ed] good
cause as to why the Court should order spousal support to be continued" by that
date.

   Black's Law Dictionary states that "[g]ood cause is often the burden placed
on a litigant ... to show why a request should be granted" and it means "[a]
legally sufficient reason." (Black's Law Dict. (9th ed. 2009) p. 251.) We reject
appellant Madhu's assertion that "[t]he readily apparent and ordinary meaning of
'good cause' " in the present circumstances is a showing that additional support
is appropriate based on a reevaluation of the section 4320 factors without any
showing of a material change in circumstances, such as "unrealized
expectations."4 Case law indicates  otherwise and she did not present any
evidence on this point.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   In her
reply brief, appellant Madhu complains that the parties' agreement did not
contain a Gavron warning, an explicit warning that she was expected to become
self-supporting. (See In re Marriage of Gavron (1988) 203 Cal.App.3d 705, 707,
711-712 [250 Cal. Rptr. 148] [reversing order terminating spousal support "based
on the wife's failure to become gainfully employed or to seek vocational
training" where no material change in the circumstances of wife who was still
"unemployed and, at best, marginally employable" as she had been at the time of
the prior support order and record did not reflect that "unemployed 57-year-old
wife had any prior awareness that the court would require her to become
self-sufficient"]; id. at p. 712 ["Inherent in the concept that the supported
spouse's failure to at least make good-faith efforts to become self-sufficient
can constitute a change in circumstances which could warrant a modification in
spousal support is the premise that the supported spouse be made aware of the
obligation to become self-supporting."]; see also § 4330, subd. (b) ["When
making an order for spousal support, the court may advise the recipient of
support that he or she should make reasonable efforts to assist in providing for
his or her support needs ... ."].) Unlike Gavron, the order from which Madhu is
appealing is not an order for termination. We have no reason to suppose that
Madhu was unaware of the expectation that she become self-supporting by June 1,
2010, since Madhu submitted to a vocational assessment which resulted in a
report regarding her job readiness and her potential salary range shortly before
agreeing to the stipulation. The stipulation provided child support for
childcare expenses to permit her to finish her MSW through only the end of
October 2007 and annual stepdowns in spousal support over a three-year period,
ending with zero spousal support unless she showed "good cause" to continue
support. (See In re Marriage of Gavron, supra, 203 Cal.App.3d at p. 712
["awareness of the judicial expectation of future self-sufficiency can arise in
numerous contexts"].) In any case, insofar as she is collaterally attacking the
judgment, this claim is not cognizable.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   "A motion for modification of spousal support may only be granted if there
has been a material change of circumstances since the last order. (In re
Marriage of Kuppinger (1975) 48 Cal.App.3d 628 [120 Cal. Rptr. 654].) Otherwise,
dissolution cases would have no finality and unhappy former spouses could bring
repeated actions for modification with no burden of showing a justification to
change the order. Litigants ' "are entitled to attempt, with some degree of
certainty, to reorder their finances and life style [sic] in reliance upon the
finality of the decree." ' [Citation.] Absent a change of circumstances, a
motion for modification is nothing more than an impermissible collateral attack
on a prior final order. [Citation.]" (In re Marriage of Smith (1990) 225
Cal.App.3d 469, 480 [274 Cal. Rptr. 911].)

   Even assuming that parties lawfully may agree to a future judicial
reevaluation of spousal support without any change of circumstances showing (cf.
In re Marriage of Maxfield (1983) 142 Cal.App.3d 755, 759 [191 Cal. Rptr. 267]
[not judicial error to omit findings of changed circumstances where parties
stipulated to spousal support modification and court entered order accordingly];
cf. also § 3591, subd. (c) [court cannot modify spousal support agreement if the
parties' written agreement or oral agreement entered into in open court
"specifically provides that the spousal support is not subject to
modification"]), the judgment in this case did not contain such a provision.
(Cf. In re Marriage of West, supra, 152 Cal.App.4th at pp. 244, 246-247 [order
incorporated stipulation that either party was entitled to seek judicial review
of the support award on or after a specified date but reviewing court declined
to decide whether language meant the parties could obtain a judicial review of
support without any showing of "change of circumstances" since there was a
material change of circumstances].) In the usual case, "[t]he change of
circumstances rule provides legal protection to marital settlement agreements. (
In re Marriage of Hentz [(1976)] 57 Cal.App.3d [899,] 901-902 [129 Cal. Rptr.
678].)" (In re Marriage of Farrell (1985) 171 Cal.App.3d 695, 703 [217 Cal.
Rptr. 397].)

3. Judgment Did Not Postpone Consideration of Section 4320 Criteria

   In a similar vein, appellant Madhu argues that the February 2008 judgment
merely postponed the analysis under section 4320 until she brought  a motion to
modify. As indicated by Madhu, the Richmond court remarked that the lower
court's spousal support order "postponed to the future, ... on what will
reasonably be deemed the better evidence of that day, determination of the
delicate question whether to continue, or terminate, spousal support." (
Richmond, supra, 105 Cal.App.3d at p. 356.) But the Richmond court did not say
that the lower court, in making its spousal support order  in the first place,
had put off proper consideration of the relevant statutory criteria. "In
awarding spousal support, the court must consider the mandatory guidelines of
section 4320 [(formerly Civ. Code, § 4801)]. Once the court does so, the
ultimate decision as to amount and duration of spousal support rests within its
broad discretion and will not be reversed on appeal absent an abuse of that
discretion. [Citation.]" (In re Marriage of Kerr (1999) 77 Cal.App.4th 87, 93
[91 Cal. Rptr. 2d 374], fn. omitted.) The Richmond court recognized that the
lower court had properly exercised its discretion and squarely placed the
procedural and evidentiary burden on the supported spouse to avoid termination
of spousal support. (Richmond, supra, 105 Cal.App.3d at p. 356.) Here, the
superior court could not consider modification absent a change in circumstances.


4. No Evidence of a Material Change in Circumstances

   Modification of spousal support based on consideration of the section 4320
factors constitutes error where the evidence does not show a material change of
circumstances. (In re Marriage of Dietz (2009) 176 Cal.App.4th 387, 401-403 [97
Cal. Rptr. 3d 616].) "The moving party has the burden of showing a material
change of circumstances since the last order was made. (In re Marriage of
Stephenson (1995) 39 Cal.App.4th 71, 77 [46 Cal. Rptr. 2d 8].)" (In re Marriage
of Tydlaska (2003) 114 Cal.App.4th 572, 575 [7 Cal. Rptr. 3d 594].)

   As to the existence of a change in circumstances, appellant Madhu argued
below that there were "unrealized expectations" with regard to her ability to
support herself. She now contends that the record shows that the parties'
expectation that she would be employed as a social worker at a salary of at
least $42,000 was not realized and, when she filed her modification motion, her
monthly income was only approximately $700. But her supporting declaration did
not show that she diligently acted to achieve financial self-sufficiency and,
despite her reasonable efforts, she had been unable to complete her MSW degree,
she had been unable to obtain full-time work as a social worker, or she had been
unable to find full-time employment at a salary that made her self-supporting.
An unrealized expectation of self-support requires "a showing that despite [the
supported spouse's] reasonable  efforts she was unable to support herself." (In
re Marriage of Aninger (1990) 220 Cal.App.3d 230, 241 [269 Cal. Rptr. 388].)

   Appellant Madhu argues that the record contains "no evidence of available
jobs because [respondent Sameer] failed to submit any evidence that gainful
employment exists." She states that "[t]he record contains no current or
relevant evidence that any job exists that suits [her] qualifications." She
refers to California's economic downturn in 2008 through 2009 and its high
unemployment rate in those years. But Madhu did not make any showing that the
state's general economic situation impeded her ability to obtain full-time
employment in her chosen field at a salary sufficient to be self-supporting. The
burden was on Madhu to show reasonable efforts to achieve this objective. (See
Evid. Code, §§ 500, 550.)

   Madhu also asserts there was a material change in circumstances because she
suffered a stroke and her monthly medical expenses and childcare expenses had
substantially increased, arguments that she did not make below. She cites to the
"Child Support Information" page of her January 22, 2010 income and expense
declaration, which was attached to her  declaration. The page contained the
information that she had a monthly childcare expense of $1,600 to enable her to
"work or get job training." It also showed she had incurred additional expenses
of $1,070: $70 for the children's health care not covered by insurance, $600 for
travel expenses for visitation, and $400 for the children's educational or other
special needs. Although unrelated to child support, appellant reported in the
section regarding special hardships on the "Child Support Information" page of
that income and expense declaration that she had a stroke in March 2009 and had
monthly extraordinary health expenses of $1,500. The record before us does not
reflect that Madhu "attach[ed] documentation of any item listed" in the special
hardship section per the form's directions.

   In any event, Madhu never mentioned the stroke or higher personal health care
expenditures in her declaration or in argument below. She presented no evidence
that any change in her health had affected her ability to complete her MSW
degree or obtain or maintain full-time employment. Rather, it was stated in the
supporting memorandum that Madhu had enrolled herself in a doctoral program in
clinical psychology and she had "decided on this course of action" "so that she
may one day support herself and the parties' children as near to the 'Marital
Standard of Living' as possible." In our view, a voluntary decision to pursue a
doctoral degree rather than entering the working world full time does not
constitute a material change of circumstances in the context of this case.

   As to childcare expenses, those are a component of child support. (§ 4062,
subd. (a)(1) ["The court shall order the following as additional child support:
[¶] (1) Child care costs related to employment or to reasonably necessary
education or training for employment skills."].) As previously stated, the
judgment reflecting the parties' agreement provided for childcare expenses
related to work to be equally shared by them. But it provided for a split of
childcare expenses to permit Madhu to obtain her MSW degree "only through
October 30, 2007." It did not provide for payment of child support to cover
childcare expenses incurred to allow Madhu to pursue additional education.
Although Madhu now mentions expenses related to their children, the appellate
record does not show that she argued or presented evidence to the superior court
that her total expenses related to the children had significantly increased
since the judgment. In any case, it would be inconsistent with the expectation
of self-support to view her childcare expenses incurred to voluntarily pursue a
doctoral degree as a change of circumstances if Madhu was currently able to be
fully self-supporting but chose not to work. The supported spouse in Beust,
unlike Madhu, "presented evidence that she ha[d] made reasonable efforts to
become self-supporting" but was nevertheless unable to become self-supporting. (
In re Marriage of Beust, supra, 23 Cal.App.4th at p. 30 [order denying
modification of spousal support reversed].)

   Madhu emphasizes the disparity between her financial situation and the
financial situation of Sameer and his new wife, pointing out their respective
incomes. "[E]quality of postseparation income is not an element of section 4320
in setting spousal support. (See § 4320.)" (In re Marriage of Ackerman (2006)
146 Cal.App.4th 191, 209 [52 Cal. Rptr. 3d 744].) A fortiori, an increased
inequality of income is not in itself a material change of circumstance. Also,
the income of a supporting spouse's subsequent spouse cannot be considered when
determining or modifying spousal support. (§ 4323, subd. (b).) Here,  Madhu did
not argue or present evidence that Sameer's ability to pay spousal support had
significantly increased since the February 2008 judgment.

   Although Madhu stated in her declaration that she was $87,000 in debt, she
did not explain its origin or state facts showing that her debt had
significantly increased since the judgment despite her reasonable efforts to
become self-sufficient. (Cf. In re Marriage of Aninger, supra, 220 Cal.App.3d at
p. 242 ["it would defeat the intent and reasonable expectations of the parties
that [the supported spouse] would achieve self-support if the court allowed her
to manufacture a change in circumstances by going into debt far beyond her
means" in purchasing her new residence].) Madhu asserted she was "on the verge
of exhausting" cash reserves awarded in the dissolution but she did not explain
where the money had gone or show that her assets had significantly decreased
since the judgment despite her reasonable efforts to become self-sufficient.

   "[I]n determining what constitutes a change in circumstances the trial court
is bound to give effect to the intent and reasonable expectations of the parties
as expressed in the agreement. [Citations.]" (In re Marriage of Aninger, supra,
220 Cal.App.3d at p. 238; see In re Marriage of Dietz, supra, 176 Cal.App.4th at
p. 399.) "[T]he trial court's discretion to modify the spousal support order is
constrained by the terms of the marital settlement agreement. The court may not
simply reevaluate the spousal support award." (In re Marriage of Aninger, supra,
220 Cal.App.3d at p. 238.)

   Nothing in the parties' stipulation, or the judgment entered pursuant to the
stipulation, suggested that the parties expected spousal support to facilitate a
voluntary decision by Madhu to pursue higher education beyond an MSW degree, if
she was able to be self-supporting based on her education and skills in the
existing job market. Madhu did not show that despite her reasonable efforts she
was unable to support herself. (Cf. In re Marriage of Aninger, supra, 220
Cal.App.3d at p. 241 ["[supported spouse] neither alleged nor proved any change
in circumstances affecting her ability to become self-supporting"].) It was not
an abuse of discretion to conclude that the evidence was insufficient to show a
material change of circumstances.

5. Marital Standard of Living

   Madhu states that the "judgment is silent as to the marital standard of
living" and "the trial court has never established the marital standard of
living." She contends that "the trial court abused its discretion by failing and
refusing to establish the marital standard of living and apply that standard as
a factor in determining spousal support." She points out that one of the factors
under section 4320 is "[t]he needs of each party based on the standard of living
established during the marriage." (§ 4320, subd. (d).)

   "The Legislature has never specified that spousal support must always meet
the needs of the supported spouse as measured by the marital standard of
living." (In re Marriage of Smith, supra, 225 Cal.App.3d at p. 488.) It is a
general reference point. (Id. at p. 475.) "[T]he trial court may fix spousal
support at an amount greater than, equal to or less than what the supported
spouse may require to maintain the marital standard of living, in  order to
achieve a just and reasonable result under the facts and circumstances of the
case." (Ibid.)

    Ordinarily, the court must make specific factual findings with respect to
the standard of living during the marriage. (See § 4332.) But in this case, the
amount and duration of spousal support was established by the parties'
agreement. "The court, by including the stipulation [regarding spousal support]
in its own decree, presumes that the parties arrived at a fair support award,
after arm's-length negotiations, that took into consideration all of the
circumstances as they then existed." (In re Marriage of Hentz, supra, 57
Cal.App.3d at p. 901.) Appellant Madhu cannot now collaterally attack the
judgment on the ground that the court did not establish the marital standard of
living. (See In re Marriage of Mulhern (1973) 29 Cal.App.3d 988, 992 [106 Cal.
Rptr. 78]; cf. § 2120 et seq. [relief from judgment].)

6. No Error or Abuse of Discretion

   "A modification of spousal support cannot be granted in the absence of proof
of a change in circumstances. However, the converse is not true; a showing of
changed circumstances does not necessarily mandate a modification of spousal
support." (In re Marriage of Poppe (1979) 97 Cal.App.3d 1, 10 [158 Cal. Rptr.
500].) Even assuming the mere fact that appellant Madhu was a Ph.D. student and
not employed full time constituted a material change of circumstances, the
appellate record does not establish that the superior court failed to consider
all relevant evidence of the section 4320 circumstances that was presented or
abused its discretion in denying appellant's motion.

   It is a fundamental rule of appellate review that a judgment is presumed
correct and the appealing party must affirmatively show error. (Denham v.
Superior Court (1970) 2 Cal.3d 557, 564 [86 Cal. Rptr. 65, 468 P.2d 193].) "[A]
reviewing court should not disturb the exercise of a trial court's discretion
unless it appears that there has been a miscarriage of justice." (Id. at p. 566
.)

   The burden of producing evidence was on appellant Madhu as the moving party.
(See Evid. Code, §§ 500, 550.) She did not present evidence of the marital
standard of living or her needs based on that standard. Madhu did not show that
she had made reasonable efforts to become fully self-supporting before June 1,
2010, but was unable to do so under the prevailing economic conditions. Based on
the evidence before it, the court did not abuse its discretion in refusing to
modify the judgment to extend spousal support. (Cf. In re Marriage of
Hoffmeister (1987) 191 Cal.App.3d 351, 364 [236 Cal. Rptr.  543] [continuing
disparity between supported spouse's income and expenses does not justify
modification]; Id., at p. 365 [in addition to showing a change of circumstances
consisting of an unrealized expectation that supported spouse would be
self-supporting, supported spouse must show efforts to become self-supporting];
In re Marriage of Sheridan (1983) 140 Cal.App.3d 742, 749 [189 Cal. Rptr. 622]
[supported spouse's failure to diligently seek gainful employment justified
denial of spousal support on modification motion]; cf. also In re Marriage of
Shaughnessy (2006) 139 Cal.App.4th 1225, 1247-1248 [43 Cal. Rptr. 3d 642]
[discussing meaning of "standard of living" and role of the marital standard in
upholding downward modification and eventual termination of spousal support]; In
re Marriage of Berland (1989) 215 Cal.App.3d 1257, 1260-1261 [264 Cal. Rptr.
210] [if trial court, in considering motion to modify Richmond spousal support
order, finds that the supported spouse failed "to exercise reasonable diligence
to become self-supporting, but that even if reasonable diligence ha[d] been
exercised the supported spouse would still not have  become fully
self-supporting, the court possesses the discretion to extend the duration of
the order and to fix the support in the amount the supported spouse would have
required if reasonable diligence had been exercised"]; In re Marriage of McElwee
(1988) 197 Cal.App.3d 902, 909-910 [243 Cal. Rptr. 179] [supported spouse's
improvident management of assets, intended as source of income, justified
judgment terminating spousal support without reservation of jurisdiction].)

C. Pending Motion to Set Aside Judgment

   Appellant argues that the trial court denied the modification motion based on
the "premise that the motion was subsumed in a pending motion to set aside the
judgment" and this constituted an abuse of discretion. The record does not
support her characterization.

D. No Reservation of Jurisdiction

   Insofar as appellant Madhu is suggesting that the court should have reserved
jurisdiction when it denied the modification motion, we reject it. The court had
no authority to make any changes to the judgment with respect to jurisdiction
over spousal support since it found the evidence did not warrant modification.
(See §§ 4335 ["An order for spousal support terminates at the end of the period
provided in the order and shall not be extended unless the court retains
jurisdiction in the order or under Section 4336."], 4336, subd. (a) ["Except on
written agreement of the parties to the contrary or a court order terminating
spousal support, the court retains jurisdiction indefinitely in a proceeding for
dissolution of marriage ... where the marriage is of long duration."].)

DISPOSITION

   The May 6, 2010 order denying modification of spousal support is affirmed.
Appellant shall bear costs on appeal.

   Rushing, P. J., and Premo, J., concurred.


                               5 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In re the Marriage of LOIS J. and ROBERT J. CHRISTIE. LOIS
           J. CHRISTIE, Appellant, v. ROBERT J. CHRISTIE, Respondent.

                                  No. D017027.

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FOURTH APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION ONE

           28 Cal. App. 4th 849; 34 Cal. Rptr. 2d 135; 1994 Cal. App.
          LEXIS 975; 94 Cal. Daily Op. Service 7443; 94 Daily Journal
                                   DAR 13630


                          September 28, 1994, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of San Diego County, No. DN 47940, Thomas Ray
Murphy, Judge.

COUNSEL: Roy B. Garrett for Appellant.

Ring & Cline and Richard D. Ring for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Todd, Acting P. J., with Huffman and Froehlich, JJ.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: TODD, Acting P. J.

OPINION

     TODD, Acting P. J.--Lois J. Christie appeals a portion of a September 1992
order of the family court terminating the court's jurisdiction over the matter
of spousal support as of June 1, 1994, subject to its jurisdiction to alter,
terminate or modify support in the interim, and immediately terminating its
jurisdiction to extend spousal support or spousal support jurisdiction beyond
June 1, 1994.

   Finding no abuse of the court's wide discretion in terminating spousal
support as of June 1, 1994, under the circumstances, we affirm that portion of
the order. However, we determine the trial court erred in immediately
terminating its jurisdiction to extend the spousal support order beyond the date
fixed for termination of spousal support. Thus, we reverse that portion of the
order and remand the matter to permit Lois to show good cause why the trial
court's jurisdiction should be extended beyond that date.

   FACTS

   The 13-year marriage of Lois and Robert began June 5, 1974. Lois and Robert
separated June 29, 1987, when Lois was 49 and Robert was 52. The marriage
terminated in November 1988. There were no children. In accordance with a
marital settlement agreement incorporated into the judgment, the court provided
for termination of spousal  support upon the death of either party, Lois's
remarriage or "further order of the Court." As of June 1, 1988, Robert began
paying Lois spousal support of $ 2,500 per month and continued to pay that
amount until November 1990. In October 1990 Robert's employment, which had been
paying him a salary of $ 125,000, terminated. He stopped paying spousal support
and in December 1990 filed an order to show cause re modification because he had
no income.

   One year after Robert's termination he received some $ 76,000 from a tax
deferred account ($ 18,500) and a wrongful termination settlement ($ 57,500).
Robert did not tell anyone about his receipt of funds from the settlement. In
the meantime he had obtained other employment in January 1991 at a salary of $
64,000 per year.

   During all of 1991 Robert paid just over $ 3,500 to Lois for his support
obligation. At the time of the April 1992 trial on Robert's order to show cause,
he was in arrears by a total of $ 42,680 on his $ 2,500 per month obligation.

   In the meantime, between November 1990 and April 1992, Lois had borrowed $
96,000 from a friend in order to pay debts, school expenses and living expenses,
including funds used in the purchase of a mobilehome.

   Lois was pursuing a teaching credential after having left the marriage with a
10th grade education. She attended Palomar College, receiving her A.A. degree,
then went on to California State University at San Marcos, from which she was to
receive her B.A. in December 1992. She wanted to obtain a teaching credential
because "I can teach until my seventies" and "they have a wonderful retirement
plan" and "and if I get ill or something happens, I can always teach part time;
I can substitute teach. This would also help me because I'm only going to come
out with very little retirement, also very little social security. I thought I
could supplement that with substituting." Lois made the dean's list every
semester and was in her third semester at the university at the time of trial,
carrying 18 units, significantly more than the average full-time student.

   After her December 1992 graduation, it would take Lois two semesters plus a
period of student teaching in order to get a credential to teach in secondary
schools in the State of California. Under the circumstances known to her at the
time of trial, Lois felt she would complete her credential work by the end of
May 1994 and should be obtaining work if all went well in September 1994. Lois
had not been gainfully employed since 1980, had done some minor work in a real
estate office but did not get paid for it and once had a real estate agent's
license which had lapsed. In 1974, when working at the same firm as Robert, Lois
earned $ 15,000 per year as an accountant. She was attempting to obtain her
teaching credential in order to avoid working for something between $ 4 and $ 8
an hour for the rest of her life.

   At the time of trial in April 1992, Lois was afflicted with a pulmonary
problem she had been coping with since 1974. In 1974, she had a collapsed lung,
with a number of cysts on the noncollapsed lung. At the time of trial, she was
taking medication for that condition which was of unknown etiology. Lois also
had Hashimoto's disease which causes difficulties with her  glands and for which
she was receiving medication. The disease had attacked the eye ducts and she had
recently had surgery for that condition.

   Lois was paying her own medical insurance at $ 150 per month and the
insurance was scheduled to expire in November of 1992. Of the $ 64,000 she
received from the property settlement at the time of dissolution of the
marriage, she had spent $ 20,000 on medical services and had $ 7,000 left.

   At trial, Lois requested the trial court retain jurisdiction and review the
matter in several years to determine whether or not modifications or termination
of jurisdiction was appropriate. On April 3, 1992, the trial court announced its
findings from the bench. On September 21, 1992,  the court filed written
findings including the following:

    "II

   "Spousal Support

   "

   "9. The court finds the judgment recited Respondent's gross income at the
time of dissolution was $ 9,695 per month. The court finds Respondent's present
gross income to be $ 5,000 per month. The court finds Petitioner had zero income
at dissolution and has zero income today.

   "

   "13. The court has considered the marketable skills of Petitioner. The court
concludes that Petitioner is presently employable with a capacity to earn
approximately $ 7.50 per hour. The court bas[e]s this conclusion after
Petitioner's testimony that she could earn between $ 6 and $ 8 per hour.

   "14. The court finds Petitioner has health problems but that these problems
at present do not impact Petitioner from living, going to school and having
hopefully a long normal life.

   "15. The court has considered the extent to which Petitioner contributed to
Respondent's education, training, career and position. The court finds there is
no indication that Petitioner has heretofore assisted Respondent in that regard.

   "

   "17. The court has considered the duration of the marriage and the support
paid to date.

    "18. The court finds that Petitioner may have a bachelor's degree and that
she may thereafter be employable as a school teacher on or about June, 1994. The
court finds that Petitioner is working diligently on said educational program
full time to become a teacher at this time. The court finds Petitioner wants to
be a school teacher.

   "19. The court finds that by becoming a full time student Petitioner has made
herself less employable during the school's duration. The court finds Petitioner
has prevented herself from earning money in a full time employment while
pursuing her teaching credential. The court does not know whether or not
Petitioner has the right to do that and expect Respondent to pay for it.

   "17. [sic] The court finds Petitioner intermarried [sic] for the first time
at the age of 17 years. The court does not know when she contracted her second
marriage.

   "18. [sic] The court is aware of the Heistermann decision by the Fourth
District Court of Appeal[]. The court is also aware of the Wilson decision by
the same court. These decisions appear to be in conflict to this court. The
court further understands that legislation has defined this marriage as being a
long term marriage by statute. The court finds that statute does not address
modification proceedings.

   "19. [sic] The court has considered the terrible pain of the parties in going
through one of these proceedings. The court has considered what they have gone
through and what they may go through hereafter.

   "20. The court finds Petitioner has expended in excess of $ 40,000 in
attorney's fees and that Respondent has expended between $ 10-$ 15,000 in
addition to this court's attorney fee order in favor of Petitioner to get to
this point in the proceedings. The court finds Respondent makes a gross income
of $ 60,000 per year. The court finds it is not practical for two people to have
to incur modification expenses such as those incurred by the parties and then be
expected to return to court in 1-2 years and to 'try again' . . . nor is it
reasonable for the court to ask them to return for a review.

   "III

   "Legal Basis

   "The legal basis for the court's decision is:

   1. In re [M]arriage of Heistermann (1991) 234 CA 3d 1195 [286 Cal. Rptr. 127]
;

   2. In re [M]arriage of Wilson (1988)  201 CA 3d 913 [247 Cal. Rptr. 522]; and

   3. Civil Code § 4801."

   The court's September 22, 1992, order modified spousal support as follows:

   a. $ 2,500 per month through January 31, 1991;

    b. $ 1,500 per month for the period February 1, 1991, through April 30,
1991;

   c. $ 1,350 per month for the period May 1, 1991, to June 1, 1994.

   The September 22, 1992, order provided for payment of spousal support by wage
assignment, found Lois had zero income and was a full-time student while Robert
had $ 5,000 gross monthly income, required payment of arrearages in spousal
support within 30 days, required Robert to maintain, as spousal support, his $
50,000 life insurance policy with Lois the beneficiary as to one-half for the
duration of his spousal support obligation and provided for payment of attorney
fees by Robert to Lois.

   With respect to its jurisdiction over spousal support, the court order reads:

   "The court retains continuing jurisdiction to alter, terminate or modify said
spousal support upon proper motion first having been made to the court on or
before June 1, 1994. Said spousal support shall cease upon the remarriage of
Petitioner or death of either party.

    "All jurisdiction of this court to alter, terminate o[r] modify said spousal
support shall cease on June 1, 1994. Pursuant to In re [M]arriage of Vomacka
(1984) 36 [Cal.] 3rd 459 [204 Cal. Rptr. 568, 683 P.2d 248], the court shall not
have jurisdiction to extend spousal support payments or spousal support
jurisdiction beyond June 1, 1994."

   DISCUSSION

   I

   There is no question raised by the parties that the applicable standard of
review is whether the trial court abused its discretion in entering the order in
question. (See In re Marriage of Wilson (1988) 201 Cal. App. 3d 913, 916 [247
Cal. Rptr. 522], "Wide discretion is vested in the trial court in determining
the amount and duration of spousal support.") The appropriate  guideline by
which the court's discretion is tested is to be found in former Civil Code
section 4801, subdivision (a) (now Family Code, 1 § 4320) reading:

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Effective
January 1, 1994, the Civil Code provisions were repealed and reenacted in
various sections in the new Family Code. (Stats. 1992, ch. 162; Stats. 1993,
chs. 219, 876.)

   For the most part we quote the Family Code provisions in this opinion.
Unspecified statutory references are to the Family Code.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    "In ordering spousal support under this part, the court shall consider all
of the following circumstances:

   "(a) The extent to which the earning capacity of each party is sufficient to
maintain the standard of living established during the marriage, taking into
account all of the following:

   "(1) The marketable skills of the supported party; the job market for those
skills; the time and expenses required for the supported party to acquire the
appropriate education or training to develop those skills; and the possible need
for retraining or education to acquire other, more marketable skills or
employment.

   "(2) The extent to which the supported party's present or future earning
capacity is impaired by periods of unemployment that were incurred during the
marriage to permit the supported party to devote time to domestic duties.

   "(b) The extent to which the supported party contributed to the attainment of
an education, training, a career position, or a license by the supporting party.

   "(c) The ability to pay of the supporting party, taking into account the
supporting party's earning capacity, earned and unearned income, assets, and
standard of living.

   "(d) The needs of each party based on the standard of living established
during the marriage.

   "(e) The obligations and assets, including the separate property, of each
party.

   "(f) The duration of the marriage.

   "(g) The ability of the supported party to engage in gainful employment
without unduly interfering with the interests of dependent children in the
custody of the party.

    "(h) The age and health of the parties.

   "(i) The immediate and specific tax consequences to each party.

   " (j) Any other factors the court determines are just and equitable."

   The portion of former  Civil Code section 4801, subdivision (d), much of
which is now Family Code section 4336, subdivisions (a) through (c), reads:

   "(a) Except on written agreement of the parties to the contrary or a court
order terminating spousal support, the court retains jurisdiction indefinitely
in a proceeding for dissolution of marriage or for legal separation of the
parties where the marriage is of long duration.

   "(b) For the purpose of retaining jurisdiction, there is a presumption
affecting the burden of producing evidence that a marriage of 10 years or more,
from the date of marriage to the date of separation,  is a marriage of long
duration. However, the court may consider periods of separation during the
marriage in determining whether the marriage is in fact of long duration.
Nothing in this subdivision precludes a court from determining that a marriage
of less than 10 years is a marriage of long duration.

   "(c) Nothing in this section limits the court's discretion to terminate
spousal support in later proceedings on a showing of changed circumstances."

   The Christies' 13-year marriage comes within the statutory definition of a
"marriage of long duration." Thus, the provisions of former Civil Code section
4801, subdivision (d), now Family Code section 4336, apply to this case. All
this means here, however, is that the court retained jurisdiction indefinitely
until it entered "a court order terminating spousal support," (§ 4336, subd. (a)
; see also § 4335 2 ) but there was no limitation on "the court's discretion to
terminate spousal support in later proceedings on a showing of changed
circumstances" (§ 4336, subd. (c)).   The first question in this case thus
becomes whether there was a showing of changed circumstances in the 1992 hearing
supporting the court's exercise of its discretion in ordering termination of its
jurisdiction to alter, terminate or modify spousal support as of June 1, 1994.
This question must be addressed in the context of the policies disfavoring
absolute termination of spousal support on a specified date and requiring in the
case of ambiguity in the  language of a marital settlement agreement that it
must be construed in favor of the right to spousal support. ( In re Marriage of
Vomacka (1984) 36 Cal. 3d 459, 467, 469 [204 Cal. Rptr. 568, 683 P.2d 248]; In
re Marriage of Morrison (1978) 20 Cal. 3d 437, 453 [143 Cal. Rptr. 139, 573 P.2d
41]; In re Marriage of Moore (1980) 113 Cal. App. 3d 22, 28 [169 Cal. Rptr. 619]
.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Family
Code section section 4335 reads: "An order for spousal support terminates at the
end of the period provided in the order and shall not be extended unless the
court retains jurisdiction in the order or under Section 4336." (Former Civ.
Code, § 4801, subd. (d).)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      The policy involved here, disfavoring absolute termination on a date
certain, requires that such an order will be overturned as an abuse of
discretion " 'unless the record clearly indicates that the supported spouse will
be able to adequately meet his or her financial needs at the time selected for
termination of jurisdiction. . . . If the record does not contain evidence of
the supported spouse's ability to meet his of her future needs, the court should
not "burn its bridges" and fail to retain jurisdiction. [Citation.]' " (In re
Marriage of Vomacka, supra, 36 Cal. 3d at p. 467, quoting In re Marriage of
Morrison, supra, 20 Cal. 3d at p. 453.) In other words, to support a
date-certain termination of a spousal support order there must be evidence in
the record the supported spouse " 'would be able to provide for herself at that
time.' " (36 Cal. 3d at p. 468.)

     The evidence, mostly from Lois, about her excellent educational preparation
for a teaching career, including her consistent membership on the dean's list,
her expectation about being credentialed by May 1994 and her obtaining a
teaching job in September 1994, is substantial that she would be able to
adequately meet her future financial needs and provide for herself at the time
selected for termination of spousal support. This evidence also demonstrates a
change of circumstances from Lois's earlier status during the support period as
an untrained,  supported person to that of a person who would be a fully
qualified professional teacher by the date of spousal support termination. At
the time of the hearing, Lois's educational achievement was a demonstrated
reality with completion appearing relatively certain.

   The trial court expressed concern with two cases from this court which it
viewed as in conflict. Those cases involved a supported spouse who was
permanently disabled at the time of the order. In In re Marriage of Heistermann
(1991) 234 Cal. App. 3d 1195 [286 Cal. Rptr. 127], an order terminating spousal
support after a total support period of nearly six years was overturned for lack
of a finding of changed circumstances at the time of the order. The marriage had
lasted 1 month short of 9 years and the supported spouse was 54 years old at the
time of the dissolution, had not worked for 14 or 15 years and had disabling
arthritis and emotional problems. The trial court had ordered termination not on
the basis of its finding changed circumstances in the form of the supported
spouse's cohabitation, then terminated, and possible employability, but rather
on the basis that the time  had come to shift the burden of support to society.
( Id. at p. 1203.) We reversed the support termination order because the trial
"court identified no change of circumstances to support its order setting a
termination date for actual support and terminating jurisdiction," ( id. at p.
1197) stating in part: "Here, although the almost nine-year marriage may be
characterized as of medium duration, given the original support order which
recognized [wife's] assumption of domestic responsibilities when she was in her
forties at [husband's] request, and which did not find the circumstances
warranted an order that she enter the work force, termination of support cannot
now be justified absent some changed circumstance which shows she will be
self-supporting at a particular date or other factors which justify
modification." ( Id. at p. 1204.)

   Heistermann summarized: "[T]he focus of the trial court's decision, as
reflected in its written statement, was not that [wife] would no longer need
support nor that the equities had shifted based on changed circumstances, but
was its erroneous perception that the mere passage of time required it to shift
the support obligation from the ex-spouse to society and to terminate its
jurisdiction over spousal support." (234 Cal. App. 3d at p. 1204.)

   Here, there was no such erroneous focus on the mere passage of time requiring
the court to shift the support obligation to society. Rather, as we have seen, a
demonstrated change of circumstances in terms of Lois's employment and earning
capability is present. Thus, there is no similarity between this case and
Heistermann.

   Likewise, there is no similarity between this case and In re Marriage of
Wilson, supra, 201 Cal. App. 3d 913, which involved a relatively short-term
marriage of five years, ten months, an original stipulation incorporated into
the judgment that there would be a spousal support term of only two years and,
after extensions, a total support period of four years, ten months. The
supported spouse had entered the marriage when she was in her 40's and was
working as a bartender. She became disabled during the marriage and could no
longer work as a bartender and regain her previous income-earning status. At the
time of the original two-year support stipulation, the extent of her injuries
was apparent. Nevertheless, the trial court had extended support until the
support period nearly equaled the length of the marriage. At the time of the
hearing leading to the termination order she was 48 years old. The supporting
spouse, a military retiree whose career was completed or substantially completed
before the marriage, was 46. (Id. at pp. 916, 918.) Before ordering the
termination of spousal support, the trial court weighed  the factors in section
4320.  (201 Cal. App. 3d at p. 917.) It balanced the equities and under the
circumstances decided the obligation to assist the supported spouse should shift
from the husband to society.

   Upholding the trial court's order terminating spousal support in Wilson, we
pointed  out that unlike the situation in In re Marriage of Morrison, supra, 20
Cal. 3d 437, the marriage was not lengthy and the supported spouse was not a
"displaced homemaker." (In re Marriage of Wilson, supra, 201 Cal. App. 3d 913,
918.) Moreover, on their separation the parties originally had agreed to a
two-year term of support. ( Id. at p. 919.) Thus, we determined the trial court
logically and reasonably applied the section 4320 factors, noting self-support
and length of marriage are each but one factor in the formula which involves
balancing of each in light of the others, even where a permanently disabled
spouse may be denied support. ( Id. at p. 920.)

   Except to the extent of its consideration and application of the abuse of
discretion standard, Wilson is not particularly applicable to this case
considering the short term marriage there involved, the ages and abilities of
the parties, the original limitation on the term of spousal support, and the
disability of the supported spouse. Nevertheless, Wilson tends to demonstrate
the breadth of the trial court's discretion in a case where termination of
ongoing spousal support is in issue. Wilson suggests that so long as there is a
proper weighing of the appropriate factors, it is likely the trial court's
exercise of its discretion in the matter will be upheld.

   The record here shows the trial court properly exercised its discretion in
setting the termination date for spousal support.

   II

     Did the trial court err in ordering an immediate termination of its
jurisdiction to extend spousal support payments or spousal support jurisdiction
beyond June 1, 1994? Yes. As discussed in part I, upon a proper showing of
changed circumstances in this spousal support termination proceeding involving a
former marriage of long duration, it is within the court's discretion to
establish a date certain for termination of spousal support. (§ 4336, subd. (c)
.) In addition, in its original order, the court could have deprived itself of
authority to extend spousal support beyond a fixed date by setting such a cutoff
date and not making "an express reservation of jurisdiction in the original
decree." ( In re Marriage of Foreman (1986) 183 Cal. App. 3d 129, 134 [228 Cal.
Rptr. 4].) In Foreman this court construed and  reconciled the language of
former  Civil Code section 4811, subdivision (b), 3 (see now Fam. Code, § 3590,
3591; 4 see also § 3651) providing that spousal support is modifiable unless the
agreement or decree contains specific language making it nonmodifiable, and
former Civil Code section  4801, subdivision (d), 5 (see now Fam. Code, § 4335 6
) providing that an order for spousal support terminates at the end of the
period specified in the order and shall not be extended unless the court retains
jurisdiction in the original order.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Former
Civil Code section 4811, subdivision (b), provided in part: "The provisions of
any agreement for the support of either party shall be deemed to be separate and
severable from the provisions of the agreement relating to property. All orders
for the support of either party based on the agreement shall be deemed
law-imposed and shall be deemed made under the power of the court to make the
orders. The provisions of any agreement or order for the support of either party
shall be subject to subsequent modification or revocation by court order, except
as to any amount that may have accrued prior to the date of filing of the notice
of motion or order to show cause to modify or revoke, and except to the extent
that any written agreement, or, if there is no written agreement, any oral
agreement entered into in open court between the parties, specifically provides
to the contrary." (Stats. 1983, ch. 1304, § 8, pp. 5251-5252, italics added.)
4    Family Code section 3590 reads: "The provisions of an agreement for support
of either party shall be deemed to be separate and severable from the provisions
of the agreement relating to property. An order for support of either party
based on the agreement shall be law-imposed and shall be made under the power of
the court to order spousal support."

    Family Code section 3591 reads:

   "(a) Except as provided in subdivisions (b) and (c), the provisions of an
agreement for the support of either party are subject to subsequent modification
or termination by court order.

   "(b) An agreement may not be modified or terminated as to an amount that
accrued before the date of the filing of the notice of motion or order to show
cause to modify or terminate.

   "(c) An agreement for spousal support may not be modified or revoked to the
extent that a written agreement, or, if there is no written agreement, an oral
agreement entered into in open court between the parties, specifically provides
that the spousal support is not subject to modification or termination."
(Italics added.)
5   Former  Civil Code section 4801, subdivision (d), as construed in Foreman
read in part: "An order for payment of an allowance for the support of one of
the parties shall terminate at the end of the period specified in the order and
shall not be extended unless the court in its original order retains
jurisdiction." (Stats. 1986, ch. 1096, § 1, p. 3838.)

   At the time Foreman was decided, former Civil Code section 4801, subdivision
(d), did not yet contain the provisions applicable to marriages of long duration
that were added in 1987. (See In re Marriage of Jones (1990) 222 Cap.App.3d 505,
513-514 [271 Cal. Rptr. 761]; Stats. 1987, ch. 1086, § 2, p. 3676.)
Nevertheless, there is continued vitality in Foreman's interpretation of the
portion of former Civil Code section 4801, subdivision (d), which parallels
Family Code section 4335's more generally applicable provision: "An order for
spousal support terminates at the end of the period provided in the order and
shall not be extended unless the court retains jurisdiction in the order or
under Section 4336." (222 Cal. App. 3d at p. 513.)
6   Section 4335, ante, footnote 2, reads somewhat differently from former Civil
Code section 4801, subdivision (d), ante, footnote 5. With respect to the
court's retention of jurisdiction, this provision deletes any reference to the
original order and adds a reference to section 4336. The last clause of section
4335 now reads that a spousal support order terminates at the end of the period
provided in the order and "shall not be extended unless the court retains
jurisdiction in the order or under Section 4336."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Foreman noted that under In re Marriage of Vomacka, supra, 36 Cal. 3d 459,
470, "retention of jurisdiction to extend spousal support payments may be
reasonably implied even in the absence of plain language in the court order to
that effect. . . . Language in spousal support orders suggesting modification of
their terms will be permitted and routinely interpreted as a retention of the
court's fundamental jurisdiction to modify, and, upon a proper factual showing,
to extend spousal support provisions contained therein. [Citation.]" (In re
Marriage   of Foreman, supra, 183 Cal. App. 3d at p. 132, italics in original.)
This court observed that Vomacka, supra, 36 Cal. 3d at p. 470, 7 and In re
Marriage of Benson (1985) 171 Cal. App. 3d 907, 910 [217 Cal. Rptr. 589], 8 both
involved implied retention of jurisdiction over spousal support sufficient to
authorize the trial court to extend the period of support beyond the cutoff date
set in the original decree so long as the motion for such a modification was
made before the cutoff date. (Foreman, supra, 183 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 132-134.)


- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   In In re
Marriage of Vomacka, supra, 36 Cal. 3d 459, 461-462, the trial court reserved
jurisdiction by continuing spousal support payments "until further order from
the Court," the death of either party, remarriage of the supported spouse or a
specified date (representing about three years), whichever is first to occur,
and to award support or to act on a request for such an award within a later
specified period (representing about two additional years).
8   In In re Marriage of Benson, supra, 171 Cal. App. 3d 907, 910, the court
reserved jurisdiction by ordering the support to continue until the earlier of
the death of either party, remarriage, until " 'modified by a court of competent
jurisdiction,' " (italics omitted) or expiration of a specified period of years
(eight years).
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The decree under review in Foreman, however, did not permit such an implied
reservation of jurisdiction. The 1974 decree ending the parties' 23-year
marriage provided that the monthly payment was to continue until the supported
spouse remarried, either party died, or 10 years passed, whichever first
occurred, with an additional "jurisdictional amount of $ 1.00 per year" for one
year.  (183 Cal. App. 3d at p. 131.) The decree provided these "spousal support
payments . . . shall not be modifiable under any circumstances until June 30,
1977 [covering the first three years]. Thereafter, said support payments may be
modified by the court on a proper showing by either party." ( Id. at p. 134,
italics omitted.) We held that this language, in its express references to
"payments," was limited to modifications of the amount of payments, and did not
imply a reservation of jurisdiction to extend the period of spousal support. We
thus upheld the trial court's order denying an extension of spousal support
beyond the 11th year, but increasing the amount for that last year from $ 1 to
the monthly amount awarded during the initial 10-year period. (Ibid.) In the
analysis leading to this conclusion we stated: " [S]ection 4811 [now Fam. Code,
§ 3590, 3591 and 3651] must be deemed to refer only to the power to modify the
terms of the support order for the time period designated in the original order
of support, and the ability  to extend that period of time deemed legislatively
limited by section 4801, subdivision (d) [now in § 4335] to those situations
where there has been an express reservation of jurisdiction in the original
decree." (Ibid.)

   Accordingly, analysis of the reservation of spousal support jurisdiction
issue must begin with the original decree. Its language must be examined to see
if there is an express or implied reservation of jurisdiction to extend the
period of support set forth in the order. If there is a reservation of
jurisdiction in the order or under Family Code section 4336, then the spousal
support period may be extended. Of course, if the order does not fix a period
after which the payment of spousal support shall terminate, then Family Code
section 4335 does not apply.

   Family Code section 4335 is not applicable to the original order here since
the court did not set a cutoff date. Instead, the original order in this case is
subject to  Family Code section 4336 which provides that a court "retains
jurisdiction indefinitely" over spousal support where the marriage is of long
duration, "[e]xcept on written agreement of the parties to the contrary or a
court order terminating spousal support . . . ." (§ 4336, subd. (a).) However,
nothing in section 4336 limits the court's discretion "to terminate spousal
support in later proceedings on a showing of changed circumstances." (§ 4336,
subd. (c).) In other words, the language in the marital settlement agreement and
original decree providing "Husband's obligation to pay spousal support to Wife
shall terminate upon Husband's death, Wife's death, Wife's remarriage, or
further order of court, whichever shall first occur," constituted a retention of
jurisdiction over spousal support. (In re Marriage of Vomacka, supra, 36 Cal. 3d
at p. 470, language in decree continuing support payments "until further order
from the Court," (italics omitted) among other stated contingencies and a
specific termination date, retains court's jurisdiction to modify, including
extend, spousal support when the motion for modification is made before the
cutoff date of support under the original award; see also In re Marriage of
Foreman, supra, 183 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 132, 133.) In addition, since the
original order contained no cutoff date in the spousal support provision, i.e.,
no "written agreement of the parties to the contrary or a court order
terminating spousal support," the provisions of section 4336 (former Civ. Code,
§ 4801, subd. (d)) came into play. Thus, the court retained jurisdiction
"indefinitely" in this marriage of long duration.

   What does this state of the law applicable to the case at bar mean in terms
of the court's authority to immediately end its jurisdiction to extend spousal
support beyond the date it has fixed for termination of support? In Vomacka, the
court stated: "[W]here jurisdiction to award, or grant requests for, spousal
support is reserved until a specified date the court has fundamental
jurisdiction until that date to take new action concerning such support. Such
new judicial action may include an extension of spousal support beyond the last
date the court can act." (In re Marriage of Vomacka, supra, 36 Cal. 3d at p. 474
.)

   When applied to the order here under review,  Vomacka's statement rather
clearly directs that the trial court, in modifying the spousal support
obligation by establishing a certain date for its termination while retaining
its "continuing jurisdiction to alter, terminate or modify" the award, retains
"fundamental jurisdiction" to extend the support beyond that date. This
conclusion is fully consistent with the language of Family Code section 4336,
subdivision (a), referring to the court's retaining its spousal support
"jurisdiction indefinitely." Moreover, there is nothing in this or any other
section that would call for a contrary conclusion. Rather, the modification
order under review, to the extent it sets a termination date and retains
jurisdiction, also fits within Family Code section 4335 because the court
"retains jurisdiction in the order [and] under Section 4336."

   Giving effect to the above quoted language of Vomacka and its strongly worded
policy against orders providing for absolute termination of spousal support on a
specified date, particularly with respect to lengthy marriages  (In re Marriage
of Vomacka, supra, 36 Cal. 3d at p. 467), we conclude the trial court erred in
immediately terminating its jurisdiction to extend spousal support beyond June
1, 1994.

   Lois should be given a reasonable time, not exceeding 60 days after
remittitur issues, to petition the court and show good cause why spousal support
should be continued beyond June 1, 1994.

     We note that to date Lois has shown no prejudice as a result of the order.
In this connection Lois's argument that the order violates her constitutional
rights was not raised in the trial court 9 and will not be considered for the
first time on appeal. (See Hale v. Morgan (1978) 22 Cal. 3d 388, 394 [149 Cal.
Rptr. 375, 584 P.2d 512], " ' "It is the general rule applicable in civil cases
that a constitutional question must be raised at the earliest opportunity or it
will be considered as waived." ' " [quoting Jenner v. City Council (1958) 164
Cal. App. 2d 490, 498 (331 P.2d 176)]; see also Damiani v. Albert (1957) 48 Cal.
2d 15, 18 [306 P.2d 780]; In re Joseph E. (1981) 124 Cal. App. 3d 653, 657 [177
Cal. Rptr. 546].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -9   In the
trial court Lois argued only that termination of spousal support "would be at
least at this point very respectfully an abuse of discretion . . . ."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    DISPOSITION

   The order immediately terminating the court's jurisdiction to extend spousal
support beyond June 1, 1994, is reversed. Lois shall have 60 days  after
remittitur issues to petition the court to show good cause why jurisdiction over
spousal support should continue beyond June 1, 1994. In all other respects, the
order is affirmed. Each party shall bear his and her respective costs on appeal.

   Huffman, J., and Froehlich, J., concurred.


                               6 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             In re the Marriage of JEANNETTE PRIETSCH and J. BRYANT
             CALHOUN.  JEANNETTE PRIETSCH, Appellant, v. J. BRYANT
                              CALHOUN, Respondent

                                  No. A031666

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                 Division Five

            190 Cal. App. 3d 645; 235 Cal. Rptr. 587; 1987 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1530


                                 March 24, 1987

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of San Mateo County, No. 225723, Harlan K.
Veal, Judge.

COUNSEL: Kathryn Carey, Jerry Y. Fong and Carey & Carey for Appellant.

Frank Evans for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by King, J., with Low, P.J., concurring.  Separate dissenting
opinion by Haning, J.

OPINION BY: KING

OPINION

     In this case we hold that after a lengthy marriage it is reversible error
(1) to modify and terminate spousal support when the income and expenses of the
supporting spouse have not changed since the prior order and the needs of the
supported spouse continue to outweigh her ability to support herself; (2) to
order a substantive stepdown of future spousal support when no evidence has been
presented and no determination made by the court that the supported spouse will
become more able to meet her financial needs in the future; or, (3) even if the
evidence could somehow support a termination of spousal support nine years in
the future, for the trial court to give the supporting spouse, without the
consent of the supported spouse, the option to pay a lump-sum amount equal to
the present value of future payments and obtain an immediate termination of the
court's jurisdiction over the issue of future spousal support.

   Jeannette Prietsch appeals from an order granting J. Bryant Calhoun's motion
to modify and terminate spousal support. She contends the court committed
reversible error (1) by ordering a termination of jurisdiction over spousal
support nine years in the future, or after payment by Calhoun of a lump-sum
amount equal to the present value of the future payments, whichever occurred
first; and (2) by automatically decreasing the amount of support payments on an
annual basis over a nine-year period.  We modify the order to correct for legal
error and affirm as modified.

   I

   Facts

   The parties were married for 24 years from 1956 until 1980 and have two adult
children.  During the marriage Calhoun entered and completed medical school.  He
is an opthalmologist.  In 1956, Prietsch received a bachelor's degree in English
literature.  From 1966 to 1969, she worked as a systems analyst for Proctor &
Gamble.  In 1971, she earned a master's degree in science and mathematics, and
in 1976 she earned a master's degree in theoretical statistics.  She also
finished her course work for a doctoral degree, but did not complete her thesis.
Shortly after separation, she moved to Stockholm, Sweden, and found a job as a
computer programmer.  In 1982, she began work as a systems analyst for Stockholm
Localtrafik (a public transportation system) at a salary of SKR 114.000
(approximately $ 19,000 in 1982).

   The interlocutory judgment of dissolution, entered July 1950, ordered Calhoun
to pay Prietsch spousal support of $ 1,500 per month for five months, then $
1,200 per month thereafter, pursuant to stipulation.  In  November 1982, after
Prietsch began work as a systems analyst, spousal support was reduced to $ 600
per month by a stipulated order.  Neither order provided for a termination of
spousal support, except upon the death or remarriage of Prietsch.  In March
1984, Calhoun filed the present motion to modify and terminate spousal support.
Prietsch responded with a motion to increase spousal support to $ 2,000 per
month.  For the first time, the parties were unable to reach a stipulated
resolution of this difficult issue.

   After a contested hearing in August 1984, the trial court in its order filed
December 6, 1984, found Prietsch's needs "far outweighed" her ability to be
self-supporting, and Calhoun's financial responsibilities were "well within
manageable limits." No reduction in Calhoun's income was found to  have occurred
since the prior order. As a result of these findings, the court increased
Prietsch's spousal support to $ 900 per month beginning January 1985.   (See fn.
1.) However, the court also ordered a substantive stepdown 1 which automatically
reduced the support amount by $ 100 a month on an annual basis, terminating
spousal support "absolutely and forever" after the payment due December 1, 1993.
The court also provided Calhoun with an optional plan where, by paying Prietsch
prior to December 31, 1984, a cash payment equal to the discounted present value
of the future payments ordered, "spousal support would forthwith and forever
terminate."

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   A
substantive stepdown of spousal support is one where the court orders a future
decrease in amount, often, as here, by reducing monthly payments on an annual
basis.  A substantive stepdown is to be distinguished from a jurisdictional
stepdown where spousal support is ordered paid for a period of time after which
no payment is required but the court retains jurisdiction over future spousal
support (sometimes by ordering that payments are reduced at a future date to a
token amount such as $ 1 a month).  For a more complete discussion see Adams and
Sevitch, California Family Law Practice (7th ed.) sections N.61-68.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Calhoun exercised the lump-sum payment option provided by the order in a
timely manner.  The parties entered into a stipulation placing the money in a
trust account with monthly payments paid therefrom to Prietsch, pending the
resolution of this appeal.

   II

   Modification of Spousal Support

   Although Prietsch requested a modification of spousal support to $ 2,000 per
month,  she does not contest on appeal the increase ordered from $ 600 to $ 900
per month.  She does contest the court's order for a substantive stepdown, a
lump-sum payment, and for termination.

     Civil Code section 4801, subdivision (a), 2 provides that "[any] order  for
support of the other party may be modified or revoked as the court may deem
necessary." Thus, the court has broad discretion in awarding or modifying an
award of spousal support, but that discretion is not unlimited.  ( In re
Marriage of Melton (1980) 107 Cal.App.3d 559, 564 [165 Cal.Rptr. 753].) The
court is without authority to modify an order for spousal support unless there
has been a material change of circumstances subsequent to the last prior order.
( In re Marriage of Kuppinger (1975) 48 Cal.App.3d 628, 633 [120 Cal.Rptr. 654]
.) The court may not be arbitrary; it must exercise its discretion along legal
lines, taking into consideration the applicable circumstances of the parties set
forth in section 4801, subdivision (a), especially reasonable needs and their
financial abilities.  "A fortiori, 'change' must be based on facts affecting
need and ability to pay; a modification based on other considerations is an
abuse of discretion." (Hogoboom & King, Cal. Practice Guide: Family Law 1
(Rutter 1986) § 17:40, italics omitted.)  In order to modify the prior order the
trial court had to find changes in circumstances had occurred.  The November
1982 order was made over two years after Prietsch had moved to Sweden and after
she had begun the job she presently holds, so these are not changes in
circumstances.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   All
statutory references will be to the Civil Code unless otherwise indicated.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   However, the court did find circumstances had changed since the original
order, but the changes it found justified increasing Prietsch's support rather
than decreasing or terminating it.  Although Prietsch has significant education
and employable skills and is not a typical "displaced homemaker," at the time of
the modification hearing the court found she was not able to provide for her own
reasonable needs, even with the $ 600 a month which Calhoun had been paying for
spousal support under the then existing order.  The court's increase of spousal
support was recognition of that fact.  The court found "a significant
differential in the parties' earning ability and financial needs," and that
"[Prietsch's] needs continue to far outweigh her ability  to earn either by
direct employment or by reasonable return on investment of her separate
property." Prietsch was found to live "in nominal quarters" below "the style" to
which the parties "had become accustomed during the course of the marriage,"
while Calhoun lived "in substantially better quarters' than those which the
parties "had been accustomed to during the course of their marriage." His
quarters were "basically provided by [Calhoun's] new wife." Finally, the court
found Calhoun's income "had not appreciably declined" and his claim of
anticipated reduction of income was found to be "speculative."

   Thus, the court's findings fully support the increase in spousal support for
Prietsch from $ 600 to $ 900.   However, for reasons which are unexplained , and
in direct contradiction to the findings contained in the court's order, the
court ordered the substantive stepdown and the termination of spousal support
described above.  Absent any factual determination which  would support a
reduction and termination of spousal support, and faced with the court's factual
determination supporting an increase, we have no alternative, as we next
discuss, but to modify those portions of the order providing for a substantive
stepdown and for termination of jurisdiction over future spousal support.

     Our role as an appellate court is not that of factfinder; that is the role
of the trial court.  We cannot concern ourselves with unreported discussions in
chambers or any other claims or matters which are not a part of the record on
appeal.  Our role is to determine from the record before us whether the findings
of the trial court support the order it made.

   III

   The Substantive Stepdown in Spousal Support

     Prietsch contends the court's order automatically decreasing support
payments is based on speculative expectations rather than on reasonable
inferences drawn from the evidence presented; thus the court abused its
discretion when it ordered a substantive stepdown in spousal support.

     Although the court has broad discretion in ordering or modifying an order
of spousal support, "orders for changes in support to take effect in the future
must be based upon reasonable inferences to be drawn from the evidence, not mere
hopes or speculative expectations." ( In re Marriage of Rosan (1972) 24
Cal.App.3d 885, 896 [101 Cal.Rptr. 295].) "Orders automatically decreasing in
amount at specified intervals cannot be based on mere supposition as to what the
supported party's future circumstances might be.  Evidence in the record must
support a reasonable inference that needs will be less with each step-down and
that the spouse can realistically be self-supporting at the time nominal
payments are set to begin." (Hogoboom & King, Cal. Practice Guide: Family Law 1,
supra, § 6:141.) 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   We do not
mean to suggest it would always be an abuse of discretion to order a substantive
stepdown of spousal support. After a short-term marriage, where no order for
long term or "permanent" support would be appropriate, such an order might be an
appropriate vehicle for assisting an economically disadvantaged spouse to make
an orderly and less traumatic transition to self-supporting status.  In those
medium and long-term marriages where the evidence justifies spousal support with
the likelihood the supported spouse will become self-sufficient by a future
date, a "Richmond" order ( In re Marriage of Richmond (1980) 105 Cal.App.3d 352
[164 Cal.Rptr. 381]) is preferable to an open-ended order for spousal support.
We discuss the nature and use of a "Richmond" order in Part IV of this opinion.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The court here found changes in circumstances had occurred since the prior
order, but the changes found by the court justified increasing Prietsch's award
rather than decreasing it.  What evidence is there, then, to indicate  that
Prietsch's financial situation will significantly improve over the next nine
years?  Calhoun argues the evidence presented at the modification hearing
sufficiently supports the court's order.  First, Calhoun argues Prietsch has
unreasonably refused to seek higher paying employment  which is available in the
San Francisco area.

     When evidence exists that the supported spouse has unreasonably delayed or
refused to seek employment consistent with her or his ability, that factor may
be taken into account by the trial court in fixing the amount of support in
modification proceedings.  ( In re Marriage of Rosan, supra, 24 Cal.App.3d at p.
896.) Likewise, termination of support can be ordered where the supported spouse
has failed to exercise diligence in seeking employment.  ( In re Marriage of
Sheridan (1983) 140 Cal.App.3d 742 [189 Cal.Rptr. 622].)

     Here the court declined to make a finding that Prietsch willfully refused
to obtain gainful employment in her profession either in the United States or in
Sweden.  On the other hand, the court apparently agreed with Calhoun's argument
when it issued its decision to decrease and terminate support.  The court stated
at various points in the hearing, "She has chosen a level of remuneration which
she probably could have gotten much more remuneration if she stayed here in the
United States.  . . .  All I know is the general level of salaries for people in
her position is quite high in this area, has been for years.  . . .  She is
probably capable of supporting herself to that degree [as when she was married]
if she were here in the Bay Area." These statements indicate the trial court
overlooked the basic rule that Calhoun, in order to obtain a modification and
termination of spousal support, had to show a change of circumstances had
occurred since the prior order. At that time Prietsch had been in Sweden for two
years and had just begun her job as a systems analyst for Stockholm Localtrafik
-- the same job with the same employer she had at the time of the modification
hearing.  Thus the fact she was working in Sweden instead of the United States
was irrelevant since it was not a change in circumstance since the prior order
was made.

   The court's apparent consideration of this argument was also erroneous
because no evidence in the record supports it.  Although Calhoun's counsel
repeatedly argued at the modification hearing that Prietsch could make more
money in the San Francisco Bay Area than she currently earns in Sweden, he
presented no evidence to establish the truth of this assertion.  In fact, the
only evidence presented to the court concerning Prietsch's willingness to work
was outdated, but suggested Prietsch was working close to capacity.  A 1982
report from an employment analyst hired by Calhoun stated, "Mrs. Prietsch stands
out as a hard working person, looking for job satisfaction.  Her analytical mind
makes her well suited for systems work.  Her logic and verbal ability make her
statements very convincing."

     The salary level available to Prietsch in the San Francisco Bay Area is not
a proper subject for judicial notice since it is not a matter of common
knowledge (Evid. Code, § 452, subd. (g)) nor is such information indisputable.
(Evid. Code, § 452, subd. (h).) In any event, since she was working in the same
job in Sweden at the time of the prior order, this factor cannot constitute a
change of circumstances under section 4801, subdivision (a).

     Calhoun next contends the court could reasonably conclude Prietsch's
earning capacity would grow in Sweden by virtue of the length of time she lives
there.  Again, no evidence was presented to establish this fact.  Indeed, the
court's findings suggest just the opposite.  Since the 1982 support order,
Prietsch's needs had increased rather than decreased, despite living in housing
accommodations of lesser quality than enjoyed by the parties during marriage.
Without supporting evidence, any attempt to predict Prietsch's financial
circumstances through 1993 is total speculation. Prietsch may or may not advance
in her chosen field.  The Swedish economy may or may not be able to support
systems analysts with Prietsch's credentials.

   Calhoun also refers to the favorable rate of currency exchange between Sweden
and the United States as justification for the court's order.  Although evidence
on this  issue might constitute a change in circumstances which could justify a
decrease in spousal support, there was no evidence this favorable rate of
exchange would continue in the future.  Indeed, common experience, including the
present fall of the dollar on world currency markets, demonstrates how
speculative this factor is when considered over a period 10 years into the
future.  Thus, it cannot support an order for a substantive stepdown in spousal
support.

     Calhoun challenges Prietsch's financial assistance to her parents and
argues her travel expenses are extravagant.  Both of these factors are
irrelevant to our evaluation of the lower court's order.  The court found
Prietsch's "needs far outweigh her ability to earn." Drawing all inferences in
support of the trial court's decision, we must assume the court was referring to
Prietsch's reasonable needs, as well as her reasonable ability to earn.  Thus it
makes no difference for the purpose of Calhoun's argument whether the court
included or excluded these particular expenses in its final total of Prietsch's
reasonable needs: if the court found these expenses to be reasonable, then it
made a finding of fact which we cannot disturb on appeal, and if it found these
expenses to be extravagant then we must assume it excluded the figures from its
determination of Prietsch's reasonable needs.  Additionally, the trial court
sustained a relevance objection to testimony about the money Prietsch sends to
her parents monthly and to testimony about the money she unsuccessfully invested
in her parents' business.  Thus, it is unlikely the court even considered these
expenses in arriving at its decision.

     Finally, Calhoun argues the court could reasonably infer that Prietsch's
standard of living will improve in the future.  Such inferences must be based on
evidence in the record.  ( In re Marriage of Rosan, supra, 24 Cal.App.3d at p.
896.) Orders modifying spousal support should not "be based on speculation
concerning future earnings and employment.  Such decisions should instead be
deferred until the realized facts demonstrate whether further support is
warranted." ( In re Marriage of Stenquist (1978) 21 Cal.3d 779, 790 [148
Cal.Rptr. 9, 582 P.2d 96].) A trial court acting on a motion for modification of
spousal support cannot engage in speculation as to what might possibly be, but
is not reasonably certain to occur.  Calhoun's reference to Prietsch's expected
future inheritance from her parents upon their deaths is not only unsupported by
the evidence,  but was correctly labeled by the court as "conjectural." If and
when she receives the inheritance it may properly be considered in making a
modification or termination of spousal support, but could not support a
substantive stepdown.

     Additionally, Prietsch's educational background is not a "changed
circumstance" which warrants a decrease in support.  At the time of the prior
order, she had the same amount of education which she now possesses.  It has not
provided her with financial self-sufficiency in the time that has passed since
then.  Thus, it cannot justify the substantive stepdown provision without
additional evidence indicating Prietsch will be moving closer to being able to
completely support herself, or has been less than diligent in finding suitable
employment.

     The critical deficiency with Calhoun's argument and, to the extent the
court was swayed by it, the court's order for a substantive stepdown, is that
neither has any support in the court's findings or the evidence.  In sum, the
trial court abused its discretion when it ordered a substantive stepdown in
Prietsch's spousal support over a nine-year period without any foundation in the
evidence that the relevant factors (see § 4801, subd. (a)) will improve
significantly during that time.

   IV

   Termination of Jurisdiction Over Spousal Support

   Prietsch's final contention is that the trial court applied the wrong legal
standard when it automatically terminated jurisdiction over spousal support at
the end of  nine years or, at Calhoun's option, upon a lump-sum payment of the
present value of the total support obligation called for by the modified order.

     "A trial court should not terminate jurisdiction to extend a future support
order after a lengthy marriage unless the record clearly indicates that  the
supported spouse will be able to adequately meet his or her financial needs at
the time selected for termination of jurisdiction.  In making its decision
concerning the retention of jurisdiction, the court must rely only on the
evidence in the record and the reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom.  It
must not engage in speculation. If the record does not contain evidence of the
supported spouse's ability to meet his or her future needs, the court should not
'burn its bridges' and fail to retain jurisdiction." ( In re Marriage of
Morrison (1978) 20 Cal.3d 437, 453 [143 Cal.Rptr. 139, 573 P.2d 41], italics
added.)

   "It is possible that difficulties not contemplated at this time will
frustrate even a good faith attempt by the wife to become wholly or partially
self-supporting. . . .  [After] a lengthy marriage a retention of jurisdiction
to modify spousal support should be the norm and . . . the burden of
justification is on the party seeking termination." ( In re Marriage of Dennis
(1973) 35 Cal.App.3d 279, 285 [110 Cal.Rptr. 619].)

     Prietsch and Calhoun were married for 24 years and, like the parties in
Morrison, are in their early 50's.  As previously discussed, the court found
Prietsch's needs continue to far outweigh her ability to support herself, there
was a substantial difference in the earning ability of the parties, and Calhoun
had substantial ability to continue paying support to Prietsch.  Based on these
facts, the court increased the amount of spousal support to be paid by Calhoun
from $ 600 a month to $ 900 a month beginning in 1985.  Under Morrison and
Dennis, these facts required the court to retain jurisdiction indefinitely over
the issue of future spousal support. However, in contradiction of these rules,
the court ordered that after the payment due December 1, 1993, or upon Calhoun's
timely exercise of the option to pay a lump sum representing payment of the
present value of the future payments which were ordered, spousal support and the
court's jurisdiction to extend or modify it would immediately terminate
"absolutely and forever."

   The court was familiar with Morrison, but its explanation reveals a
disagreement with and a refusal to follow the rule of law established in
Morrison.  The court did erroneously burn its bridges.

   First, the court recognized Prietsch's challenge to the termination of
jurisdiction raised a pure issue of law, and it even recited the California
Supreme Court's ruling in Morrison. 4 However, the court chose to disregard the
Morrison rule and decide the case based on its own understanding of the
legislative policy behind the Family Law Act modifications of 1969. 5

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   The
following exchange took place between the court and Prietsch's attorney: [para.
] "The Court: Good point.  It is a question of law, am I properly applying [
Civil Code section] 4801 and the cases which have determined it?  That is what
you are saying.  Am, I properly applying -- I am sorry, I forget the name of the
case.  It may be the Edwards case, where, in essence, I think it was really
dicta, but maybe it was a ruling that the court should always retain
jurisdiction in the situation of a lengthy marriage. [para. ] "Ms. Carey: That
is Morrison, your Honor.  [para. ] "The Court: Morrison.  Thank you.  It was a
ruling, as I recall it, wasn't just dicta.  Didn't they say that expressly?
[para. ] "Ms. Carey: Yes, they did.  They held that."
5   The court stated, "And I must indicate to you, Ms. Carey [Prietsch's
attorney], that my fundamental approach to this matter was based upon what I
understood to be the legislative policy when all of these changes [in the Family
Law Act] started occurring.  . . .  So, I guess my problem is what I conceive of
the fundamental legislative philosophy in adopting this entire matrimonial set
of statutes."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Prietsch's attorney pointed out to the court that "Morrison, a Supreme Court
case, went on for five pages on why the legislature didn't mean just what you
are saying." The court responded, agreeing that "Morrison and the others keep
saying  that isn't what the legislature meant." (Italics added.)

   The court obviously recognized, but disagreed with, Morrison's clear holding
that termination of jurisdiction over spousal support after lengthy marriages
should not occur without proof the supported spouse can provide for his or her
own reasonable needs.  The Morrison court's review of the Family Law Act's
legislative history revealed, "[The] [1969 Assembly Committee on Judiciary]
report does not in any way suggest that when the supported spouse is unemployed
or is earning only a small salary, a court should set a jurisdictional
termination date based on the mere hope that this will induce that spouse to
become self-supporting. Nor does it suggest that a court is justified in setting
a jurisdictional termination date simply to relieve the supporting spouse of a
long-term obligation.  . . .  [There] is nothing in this report (or any other
legislative history) to indicate that the Family Law Act was intended to be
'some sort of mandate by the Legislature to the courts to relieve [the
supporting spouse in every case] of any long, continuing obligation for spousal
support.'" ( In re Marriage of Morrison, supra, 20 Cal.3d at p. 452, quoting In
re Marriage of Rosan, supra, 24 Cal.App.3d at p. 897, italics added.)

   The trial court applied its personal view of the sociological origins of the
Family Law Act without any support in the record and in direct contradiction to
controlling case law.   "Courts exercising inferior jurisdiction must accept the
law declared by courts of superior jurisdiction.  It is not their function to
attempt to overrule decisions of a higher court." ( Auto Equity Sales, Inc. v.
Superior Court (1962) 57 Cal.2d 450, 455 [20 Cal.Rptr. 321, 369 P.2d 937].)
Thus, the trial court was not free to ignore our Supreme Court's ruling and
interpretation of legislative intent, regardless of personal beliefs.

     There certainly are cases where it is appropriate for the court to
terminate jurisdiction over spousal support, even though there has been a
lengthy marriage, although, based upon the court's own factual findings, this
is not such a case.  Even Morrison recognized retention of jurisdiction was not
always required after a lengthy marriage. "These standards will not require a
trial court to retain jurisdiction in every case involving a lengthy marriage.
In some instances the record will indicate that both spouses are employed, an
increasingly prevalent situation today, or that there are sufficient assets
available to enable each to provide for his or her needs.  In that event, no
support or support for only a limited time, without a retention of jurisdiction,
would be appropriate.  (§§ 4801, subd. (a), 4806.) Where jurisdiction has been
retained in the original order, future modification hearings may well reveal
that the supported spouse has found adequate employment, has delayed seeking
employment, or has refused available employment.  At that time, the court may
appropriately consider such factors in deciding whether or not to modify its
original order.  (See, e.g., In re Marriage of Rosan, supra, 24 Cal.App.3d at p.
896; In re Marriage of Lopez, supra, 38 Cal.App.3d at p. 116.)" ( In re Marriage
of Morrison, supra, 20 Cal.3d at p. 453.)

   Ever since Morrison, the family law bench and bar, and subsequent appellate
court decisions, have exhibited confusion over what constituted a "lengthy
marriage" as that term was used in Morrison.  This confusion has arisen because
of the significance and weight Morrison placed upon the fact of the length of
marriage.

   However, as the Morrison decision pointed out, "At the time of the
interlocutory judgment in this case, Civil Code section 4801, subdivision (a),
provided in pertinent part: '[The] court may order a party to pay for the
support of the other party any amount, and for such period of time, as the court
may deem just and reasonable having regard for the circumstances of the
respective parties,  including the duration of the marriage, and the ability of
the supported  spouse to engage in gainful employment without interfering with
the interests of the children of the parties in the custody of such spouse.
(Stats. 1971, ch. 1675, § 3, p. 3602.)'" ( In re Marriage of Morrison, supra, 20
Cal.3d at p. 442, fns. omitted.)  The Legislature has subsequently amended
section 4801 on several occasions.  It now contains eight circumstances to be
considered when determining the issue of spousal support, two of which remain
the same as in Morrison.  Thus, the court must now consider each circumstance
which is applicable to a given case, not just the length of the marriage.

   These circumstances should be considered in light of legislative intent
expressed in the Assembly Judiciary Committee report in approving the Family Law
Act. "This report indicates that in those cases in which the supported spouse is
working, the amount and duration of support, if any, should reflect this fact.
The report also sets forth the Legislature's intent that  courts should
encourage supported spouses to seek employment.  However, the report does not in
any way suggest that when the supported spouse is unemployed or is earning only
a small salary, a court should set a jurisdictional termination date based on
the mere hope that this will induce that spouse to become self-supporting." ( In
re Marriage of Morrison, supra, 20 Cal.3d at p. 452.) Indeed, our Supreme Court
in Morrison recognized that "[limiting] the duration of support so that both
parties can develop their own lives, free from obligations to each other, is a
commendable goal." (Ibid.)

   Thus, when spousal support is ordered and the duration and a termination date
are contemplated, the trial court should not make its decision solely upon the
duration of the marriage, but must consider each of those circumstances set
forth in section 4801, subdivision (a), which are applicable to the case.  The
duration of the marriage, although only one of eight circumstances listed in
section 4801, subdivision (a), is one, unlike some of the others, which must be
considered by the court in every case where spousal support is at issue.  No
bright line can be drawn to clearly distinguish a short-term marriage from a
medium-term marriage, or when the length of the marriage is so long that it is
not medium term, but is a lengthy marriage. In part, this is because the
duration of the marriage must not only be considered in conjunction with the
other applicable circumstances from section 4801, subdivision (a), but also in
conjunction with what Morrison found to be a "commendable goal," that the
duration of spousal support be limited so that both parties, where possible, can
develop their own lives, free from obligations to each other.

     Since there can be no bright line, can guidelines be fashioned as to how
duration of the marriage should be considered by trial courts?  In short-term
marriages the duration of the marriage, considered alone, will usually militate
against any but short-term spousal support with a fixed termination date. In
short-term marriages spousal support will most usually be ordered where the
needs of minor children or the employment circumstances of the supported spouse
require spousal support until the supported spouse can readjust to single
status.  In medium-term marriages where spousal support is ordered, the duration
of the marriage is of greater significance, but by itself does not preclude the
exercise of the court's discretion by fixing a date for the termination of
jurisdiction over spousal support. The longer the marriage the more likely it is
that it will constitute an abuse of discretion for the court to fix a date for
termination of jurisdiction over the issue of future spousal support without a
clear showing that it is reasonably probable the supported spouse will be
self-sufficient by the termination date.

   We emphasize that the circumstance of the duration of the marriage is only
one of the eight circumstances the Legislature has required the court  to
consider pursuant to section 4801, subdivision (a), when making an order for
spousal support. Some of these circumstances may not be applicable  to the case
at issue.  Others may be found by the court to be of greater importance in the
case or may impact on the circumstance of the duration of the marriage. For
example, the duration-of-the-marriage circumstance may have to be considered in
conjunction with the circumstance of the age or health of the parties before a
proper exercise of discretion to fix a termination date for jurisdiction over
spousal support would pass appellate muster.  Even assuming good health, the
circumstance of a 10-year marriage might militate against a fixed date at which
time jurisdiction over spousal support would terminate if the parties were in
their 60's, but militate in favor of a termination date if the parties were 30
years of age.

     With regard to fixing a date for the termination of jurisdiction over
spousal support, one court has observed "[We] have found no case declaring it to
be an abuse of discretion not to terminate jurisdiction." ( In re Marriage of
Wright (1976) 60 Cal.App.3d 253, 257 [131 Cal.Rptr. 870].) However, for a trial
judge to not fix a termination date because of concern about reversal, when he
or she believes one is appropriate under the circumstances, is not only a
failure to follow the law, it is a failure to follow the legislative scheme
contemplated by section 4801 which has the goal, where possible, of allowing the
parties to develop their lives free of obligations to each other.  Having
conducted the trial, the trial judge knows much more about the parties and what
constitutes an appropriate duration for spousal support than will ever be known
by a later judge called upon to decide a motion for termination of jurisdiction
on a busy domestic relations law and motion calendar.

   For this reason the trial judge must not be reluctant and, indeed, has a duty
to fix a termination date for spousal support where justified, after considering
the circumstances set forth in section 4801, subdivision (a), which are
applicable to the case, and the reasonable inferences to be drawn from the
evidence.  Likewise there should be no reluctance to have the duration for
spousal support open-ended where the evidence and the section 4801, subdivision
(a), circumstances in the case justify it.  If the trial judge believes a
termination date is appropriate but is concerned that future changes in
circumstances might require an extension, the proper approach is to fix a
termination date and reserve jurisdiction until that date to consider a motion
to modify the termination date.

     If the trial judge makes what all too often is the typical order, that is,
spousal support of a specified amount payable with no termination date, the
judge hearing a motion to terminate years later may conclude that the trial
judge really intended that spousal support should not end except upon  the death
of the parties or the remarriage of the supported spouse. If that is not what
the trial judge intends, he or she owes a duty to the parties, and to the
colleague who will hear a future motion to terminate jurisdiction, to say so in
ordering spousal support. Both the parties and any judge hearing future motions
are entitled to know the intentions of the trial judge in ordering spousal
support.

     Where the duration of the marriage is too great to be short-term, whether
it is a medium or long-term marriage, if the court is presented with evidence
justifying an open-ended order for spousal support, there should not be any
termination date fixed.  On the other hand, if the evidence, considering the
applicable circumstances under section 4801, subdivision (a), justifies spousal
support for a fixed term with jurisdiction to then end, the court should not be
reluctant to make such an order, especially in a medium-term marriage. If the
court feels the evidence justifies an order terminating jurisdiction at a future
date, but is concerned about unforeseeable circumstances which might arise prior
to that date, the proper approach would be to issue the kind of order approved
by In re Marriage of Richmond (1980) 105 Cal.App.3d 352 [164 Cal.Rptr. 381];
what has become known as a "Richmond" order.

   A "Richmond" order is one which sets spousal support for a fixed period based
upon evidence that the supported spouse will be self-supporting by the end of
the period.  Most typically, as in Richmond, this evidence comes from the
testimony of the supported spouse whose post-dissolution game plan contemplates
a point in time at which he or she will be self-sufficient. It may be the result
of completing future education or training, at which time full-time employment
should produce the income necessary to meet the reasonable needs of the
supported spouse.

     In order to avoid the Morrison prohibition against the trial court burning
its bridges by fixing a definite date in the future at which time jurisdiction
over spousal support will terminate, the court in a "Richmond" order retains
jurisdiction to modify both the amount and term for jurisdiction over spousal
support conditioned upon the supported spouse, prior to the date set for
termination of jurisdiction, filing a motion and showing good cause why the
order should be modified either as to amount or term of jurisdiction, or both.

     The effect of a "Richmond" order is to tell each spouse that the supported
spouse has a specified period of time to become self-supporting, after which the
obligation of the supporting spouse will cease.  The effect may be of greater
psychological importance, than legal.  However, if things do not work out as
contemplated, the supported spouse can, upon a showing of good  cause, request a
change in the original order as to amount or as to the term for jurisdiction
over the issue of spousal support. A "Richmond" order psychologically prepares
the supported spouse for the time when he or she must be self-supporting. It
also places the burden of showing good cause for a change in the order upon the
one who is most able to exercise the control necessary to meet the expectations
the trial judge had in making the order.

   We believe that a "Richmond" order is the most appropriate form of order for
spousal support in all cases except (1) where spousal support is either not
ordered, or is ordered for a fixed term of short duration, (2) in the most
lengthy marriages where the circumstances justify truly "permanent" spousal
support, or (3) where the supported spouse does not possess the capacity to
become self-sufficient.

   We reemphasize,  however, that the duration of the marriage is only one of
the circumstances section 4801, subdivision (a), requires be considered by the
court in fixing a termination date for jurisdiction over spousal support.

     Finally, we reach the issue of the trial court having ordered that Calhoun
would have the option of obtaining an immediate termination of the court's
jurisdiction over future spousal support by paying in one lump-sum the present
value of the future spousal support payments which were ordered.  We start our
discussion of this issue by noting that Calhoun can cite no authority for the
propriety of such an order after a long-term marriage, because there is none.
We cannot foresee any circumstances where such an order would not constitute an
abuse of discretion. Even if this insurmountable hurdle could be overcome, we
would have to reverse the trial court here because the findings which were made
do not support such an order and no evidence was presented to support it.  In
making the order the court engaged in the kind of speculation about the future
which Morrison and Dennis prohibit.

   Even if there had been evidence to support the substantive stepdown, it would
have been based upon a showing that Prietsch would, each year, have an increased
ability to provide for her own support.  If this assumption failed, Prietsch
would be able to return to court and seek a modification. By unilaterally giving
Calhoun the ability to terminate the court's jurisdiction, the court prevented
Prietsch from exercising her right to seek a modification based upon a change of
circumstances.  What if, before the final payment ordered December 31, 1993,
Prietsch's health failed or her employment ceased through no fault of her own
and she could not obtain other employment because of her age?  In the words of
Morrison, the court should not burn its bridges by terminating  spousal support
when not justified by the evidence.  We do not suggest that the trial court's
idea of how to resolve the contested  issue of spousal support in the instant
case would be an inappropriate suggestion for a judge to make in a settlement
conference.  However, then it would resolve the issue only with the agreement of
both parties.  That is a far cry from forcing it upon a party over objection
after a contested hearing.

     In the instant case the trial court committed reversible error when it
failed to retain jurisdiction over future spousal support after this 24-year
marriage when there was no finding, nor any evidence to support a finding that
Prietsch would be able to meet her financial needs at the time selected for
termination of jurisdiction over spousal support.  Even if the order terminating
jurisdiction nine years in the future could be upheld, it was reversible error
to unilaterally permit Calhoun to accelerate the termination date by payment of
the present value of the payments ordered.

   V

   The order is modified to provide that J. Bryant Calhoun shall pay to
Jeannette Prietsch the sum of $ 900 per month in spousal support commencing on
January 1, 1985, and continuing until the death of either party, Jeannette
Prietsch's remarriage, or further order of court, whichever shall first occur.
Jeannette Priestch shall recover her costs on appeal, including reasonable
attorney fees to be determined by the trial court.  (Cal. Rules of Court, rule
26.)

DISSENT BY: HANING

DISSENT

   HANING, J. I respectfully dissent.  The trial court has broad discretion in
setting spousal support. ( In re Marriage of Morrison (1978) 20 Cal.3d 437, 454
[143 Cal.Rptr.  139, 573 P.2d 41]; In re Marriage of Slater (1979) 100
Cal.App.3d 241, 249 [160 Cal.Rptr. 686]; Civ. Code, § 4801.) Thus, in reviewing
a spousal support order pursuant to a claim of error, our standard is whether
the trial court abused its discretion.  In Morrison, our Supreme Court held that
trial courts should not terminate jurisdiction over spousal support following
dissolution of a lengthy marriage "unless the record clearly indicates that the
supported spouse will be able to adequately meet his or her financial needs at
the time selected for termination of jurisdiction." (20 Cal.3d at p. 453.) The
Supreme Court did not require that jurisdiction always be maintained, but merely
announced standards for trial courts in making their determination.  (Ibid.) So
long as these standards are observed, trial courts are operating within their
discretion.

   There is some difficulty in reviewing the challenged support order herein due
to the manner in which the parties presented the case below, thereby  confusing
the reconciliation process between the evidence, the findings and the resulting
order.  To begin with, the reporter's transcript contains numerous references to
depositions, both as to deposition testimony and stipulations which were entered
into at the time the depositions were taken.  The parties and the trial court
were obviously familiar with the content of the depositions, and relied thereon.
However, they were not made part of the record before us.  In addition, certain
proceedings transpired in chambers which are unreported, but during which
various representations were apparently made, and upon which the trial court
relied, without objection and with the apparent concurrence of both parties, in
rendering its order.

   The trial court found that "substantial changes of circumstances" occurred
for both parties.  It then found a "significant differential" between the
earning ability and financial needs of the parties and that Ms. Prietsch's needs
outweighed her ability to earn through employment or through a reasonable return
on investment of her separate property.

   The record supports the trial court's finding concerning a reasonable return
on investment  of Ms. Prietsch's separate property.  Although she had a
substantial sum on deposit, she was saving it to purchase a home for herself and
the trial court could have deemed this to be a reasonable allocation of that
resource.  It is also undisputed that Dr. Calhoun earns substantially more than
Ms. Prietsch.  However, in construing the court's finding concerning the change
of circumstances and Ms. Prietsch's earning ability, I interpret the trial court
somewhat differently than the majority.

   During the hearing below, it was not seriously disputed that Ms. Prietsch was
capable of earning a higher salary. However, she refused to work in private
industry and, for personal political reasons, also refused to work for any
agency or entity which was involved with the "defense" industry.  In addition,
although her reasons for doing so are undisclosed, it was stressed that she had
chosen to relocate her permanent home in a country where she could not speak,
read nor write the national language.  As a result, she had to undergo a
substantial period of acclimation in order to maximize her earning potential.
By the time of the hearing at issue she had apparently overcome most of the
difficulties she encountered upon her initial move to Sweden.  As a consequence,
I read the trial court's reference to her change in circumstances to refer to
her substantial adjustment to the Swedish employment market, and its reference
to her ability to meet her needs to reflect its concern with her then present
earning capacity, rather than a finding that she is unable to earn more in the
near future.  Given this interpretation, it cannot be said that a stepdown order
is entirely inappropriate.

   My interpretation of the findings is further bolstered by the fact that Ms.
Prietsch did not argue to the trial court that a stepdown was unsupported.
Rather, she argued solely that it was improper to terminate jurisdiction over
support after a marriage of this length.  Her argument as to insufficiency of
the evidence came after the fact of the order.

   Reading the trial court's comments in context, it appears to me that it
understood the law and its obligations.  It contrasted the instant case with
Morrison, which involved a 54-year-old woman ending a 28-year marriage with a
health problem, no work history or job skills, and capable of earning only $ 100
per month.  The trial court in the instant case noted the obvious difference
between the supported spouse in Morrison and Ms. Prietsch: "But here we have a
very unusual situation where [Ms. Prietsch] has incredible educational
capability of supporting herself, capable of supporting herself in Sweden or
here.  Not capable of supporting herself in Sweden to the same degree of
standard of living as the parties enjoyed when they were married.  She is
probably capable of supporting herself to that degree if she were here in the
Bay Area.  [para. ] I cannot conceive of, with her education and her present age
and her abilities, why in the course of time, . . . . [she] couldn't increase
her income, increase her standard of living to a point very close to what she
enjoyed as Dr. Calhoun's wife." (See, e.g., Civ. Code, § 4801, subd. (a)(6).)

   The trial court's observations are supported by substantial evidence.  Ms.
Prietsch's contribution to the support of her parents and her average monthly
air fare to the United States to visit them exceeded the amount of support she
was then receiving.  The fact that her parents were then in their mid-eighties
supports a finding that her contribution to their support and her travel
expenses will not be required by the time spousal support was ordered to end.
She also anticipated purchasing a home in the near future.  Given the fact that
she had become reasonably fluent in Swedish, thereby increasing her earning
ability, and that she would soon be able to purchase a home and move out of her
small apartment, the trial court could also find that her income and lifestyle
were subject to imminent improvement.  I finally note that in spite of her
request for a support increase, Ms. Prietsch was able to contribute to the
support of another individual described only as a "friend," to  make charitable
and political contributions, and to save a portion of her salary.

   Finally, and most significantly, Ms. Prietsch's political commitments have
led her to decline employment which is substantially more remunerative.  No
matter how laudable her beliefs, her former spouse cannot be made to bear the
price.  She should bear the consequences of her own voluntary actions.  If, for
example, she deemed it appropriate to simply abandon her employment in order to
devote her full time, without pay, to the advancement of a political cause, can
she seek an increase in support? By the same token, if she now wishes to leave
Sweden and settle in Tokyo, must Dr. Calhoun  be compelled to increase or extend
his support while she becomes fluent in Japanese?  If she decides to contribute
to the support of additional "friends," must he also be expected to defray these
expenses?  I think not, and the trial court can properly consider all these
factors in making its order.  (Civ. Code § 4801.)

   Another problem I have with the majority's disposition is that it fails to
consider that the trial court's order regarding the amount of monthly support is
related to its overall scheme.  If the trial court cannot terminate support and
jurisdiction under its present timetable, it might have exercised its discretion
in some other fashion.  That discretion does not lie with us, and we should not
be establishing timetables or monthly allotments for support.  I emphasize that,
based on the trial record and the manner in which the case was argued before us,
it appears that the parties and the trial court were operating under different
assumptions and a different understanding of the facts than the majority's
interpretation.  They certainly agreed below that the trial court could rely
upon and consider matters which they failed to place in the record.  But even as
to the evidence which is in the record before us, I conclude it is sufficiently
substantial to support the court's order.  If the majority's understanding is
incorrect, Dr. Calhoun should be entitled to commence a new hearing below and
lay out all the facts and clarify the findings.  Support orders are best
determined by the trial courts, rather than appellate tribunals.

   I conclude the record is sufficient to establish a complete termination of
support if the trial court felt it was appropriate to do so.  If support can be
terminated, the supported spouse cannot legitimately complain about a stepdown.
It appears here that the trial court was attempting to ease the transition to
self-sufficiency for Ms. Prietsch and, if so, the payoff portion of its order
should be upheld.  I concur with the majority that if the trial court determines
that it should retain jurisdiction for a period of time, it cannot permit the
supporting spouse to terminate jurisdiction by paying off the present value. To
do so would remove the court's ability to respond to a change of circumstances
within the original time period.  However, I do not agree that lump-sum payments
are improper per se, under all circumstances.

   In conclusion, I would affirm, or at least remand the matter for
clarification of findings and reconsideration under Morrison.


                               7 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In re the Marriage of JOYCE and WILLIAM VOMACKA.  WILLIAM
                VOMACKA, Appellant, v. JOYCE VOMACKA, Respondent

                                 S.F. No. 24672

                          Supreme Court of California

          36 Cal. 3d 459; 683 P.2d 248; 204 Cal. Rptr. 568; 1984 Cal.
                                   LEXIS 198


                                 July 16, 1984

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Contra Costa County, No. 192461, James H.
Libbey, Temporary Judge. *

*   Pursuant to Constitution, article VI, section 21.

COUNSEL: Robert Vatuone, J. C. Borgman, Mark J. Eggleston and K. Randy Moore for
Appellant.

Hyde & Brewer and R. Kent Brewer for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Reynoso, J., with Bird, C. J., Kaus and Grodin, JJ., and
Agretelis, J., + concurring.  Separate dissenting opinion by Mosk, J., with
Broussard, J., concurring.

+   Assigned by the Chairperson of the Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: REYNOSO

OPINION

      Does a trial court have jurisdiction to extend spousal support payments
past a date it has specified as the last opportunity the supported spouse may
request such   payments?  Specifically, we are asked to determine whether the
trial court in this case had jurisdiction to modify its interlocutory judgment
of dissolution of the parties' marriage to extend spousal support past September
1, 1984, pursuant to the following language of the interlocutory decree: "The
Court shall retain jurisdiction regarding spousal support until September 1,
1984, at which time [wife's] right to request spousal support from [husband]
shall terminate forever." For the reasons discussed below, we conclude that the
trial court did have jurisdiction to extend spousal support beyond the specified
date.

   I

   William and Joyce Vomacka, in a proceeding held on August 24, 1979, and with
the advice of counsel, stipulated in open court to the provisions and entry of
an interlocutory judgment of dissolution of marriage. The interlocutory decree,
filed by the court on October 11, 1979, divided their community property,
provided for the custody and support of their children, and awarded spousal
support as follows: "[William] shall pay to [Joyce], as and for spousal support,
the sum of Two Hundred Seventy-five Dollars ($ 275.00), . . . commencing
September 1, 1979 to continue each month thereafter until further order from the
Court, the death of either party, the  remarriage of [Joyce], or August 1, 1982,
whichever first occurs.  The Court shall retain jurisdiction regarding   spousal
support until September 1, 1984, at which time [Joyce's] right to request
spousal support from [William] shall terminate forever." (Italics added.)

   On June 29, 1982, Joyce obtained an order to show cause seeking, inter alia,
to modify the spousal support provision in the interlocutory decree. William
filed a responsive declaration on August 27, 1982, following a July 29, 1982
stipulation of the parties that William would pay Joyce support pending the
hearing, retroactive to August 1, 1982.  The matter was heard on September 3,
1982, before a second judge who filed his notice of intended decision on October
7, 1982.  That notice provided that William would be required to continue paying
Joyce spousal support, increased to $ 600 per month, ". . . until the death of
either party, remarriage of [Joyce], or until further order of the court." Since
this intended decision would permit Joyce to receive spousal support beyond the
date specified as her last opportunity to request such support, the notice of
intended decision made the following explanation: "To find from an agreement
that there is a termination of spousal support, the Court must find explicit
language of such termination. The alleged termination provision herein is not
sufficiently explicit to find such termination (purports to terminate
respondent's right to ask for additional support; does not address itself
explicitly to the termination of support).  Thus, the Court finds that there is
no absolute termination herein on September 1, 1984.  (See In re the Marriage of
Moore (1980) 113 Cal.App.3d 22.)"

   On March 3, 1983, the trial court issued its order modifying spousal support
and other provisions of the interlocutory decree. William appeals from that
portion of the order which states: "That paragraph 2 of the Interlocutory
Judgment of Dissolution of Marriage is modified to state: [para. ] [William]
shall pay to [Joyce], as and for spousal support, the sum of Six Hundred Dollars
($ 600.00) per month, . . . and, pursuant to the stipulation filed July 27,
1982, commencing August 1, 1982.  Said support shall continue until the death of
either party, remarriage of [Joyce], or until further order of the Court."
(Italics added.)

   II

     William contends that the trial court exceeded its jurisdiction in
modifying the interlocutory judgment to extend spousal support payments beyond
September 1, 1984.  He argues that this decision was contrary to the parties'
agreement and, therefore, in violation of Civil Code section   4811, subdivision
(b), 1 which permits the parties to agree that the provisions of  any agreement
or order for the support of either party shall not be subject to subsequent
modification or revocation by court order.  To uphold the trial court's
modification order, William asserts, would frustrate the policy of the law
favoring settlements and would generate the uncertainty for which section 4801,
subdivision (d), discussed below, was enacted to prevent.  Since the trial court
was without jurisdiction over the subject matter of spousal support after
September 1, 1984, William continues, its decision extending support past that
date violated constitutional due process standards.  William also argues that
the trial court's reliance on In re Marriage of Moore (1980) 113 Cal.App.3d 22
[169 Cal.Rptr. 619], is misplaced.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   All
further statutory references are to the Civil Code.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Joyce responds that the interlocutory decree permitted an extension of
spousal support beyond September 1, 1984, if requested before that date, and is
consistent with the parties' desire to see if Joyce could become
self-supporting. She argues that where, as here, an order regarding the period
of time for which a court can extend spousal support is vague, it is to be
construed in favor of the fundamental jurisdiction of the court to act.  She
therefore asserts that the modification order properly extends her support
beyond September 1, 1984, since she made a timely request for such modification
pursuant to the interlocutory decree.

   William's first argument that the trial court's modification order is
contrary to the parties' agreement, is based in part on his assertion that the
language of the interlocutory decree evidences a clear intent of the parties
that both the court's jurisdiction to extend spousal support, and Joyce's right
to request such support, terminate absolutely on September 1, 1984.  He
maintains that the concluding clause of the original decree's jurisdictional
provision -- "at which time respondent's right to request spousal support from
petitioner shall terminate forever" -- merely states an obvious consequence of
terminating the trial court's jurisdiction on September 1, 1984.  William claims
that by construing the interlocutory decree to permit the court to extend
spousal support beyond September 1, 1984, the trial court impermissibly departed
from the plain meaning of the parties' stipulated agreement and inserted a term
not found therein (citing Apra v. Aureguy (1961) 55 Cal.2d 827, 830 [13
Cal.Rptr. 177, 361 P.2d 897] [pronouncing general rule that "'courts are not
empowered under the guise of construction or explanation to depart from the
plain meaning of the writing and insert a term or limitation not found
therein.'" (Citation omitted.)]) He relies on the well-established legal
principle that "'in the absence of fraud or mistake, the intention of the
parties as expressed in the agreement is controlling'" (ibid.), and on "the
law's general policy favoring settlements" ( Fletcher v. A. J. Industries, Inc.
(1968) 266 Cal.App.2d 313, 325 [72 Cal.Rptr. 146]), particularly property and
family settlements ( Adams v. Adams (1947) 29 Cal.2d 621, 624 [177 P.2d 265];
McClure v. McClure  (1983)  100 Cal. 339, 343 [34 P. 822]). As discussed below,
William's argument is not supported by the record.

     In the lieu of a court award of spousal support, a property settlement
agreement providing for such support may be entered into by a husband and wife.
Such agreements are favored, subject to the scrutiny and approval of the court
and, if approved, will be incorporated into the interlocutory judgment. (6
Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (8th ed. 1974) Husband and Wife, § 189, p. 5057.)
Section 4811, subdivision (b) provides in pertinent part that such
court-approved spousal support agreements are subject to subsequent modification
by court order "except to the extent that any written agreement, or, if there is
no written agreement, any oral agreement entered into in open court between the
parties, specifically provides to the contrary." (Italics added.) 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Prior to
the 1967 amendment to former section 139 (Stats. 1967, ch. 133, § 2, p. 1165),
now section 4811, subdivision (b) (Stats. 1969, ch. 1608, § 8, p. 3336, as
amended), the determination whether a marital property agreement was modifiable
depended on the nature of the agreement.  (6 Witkin, supra, §§ 196-198, pp.
5065-5070; see also id. (1982 supp.) pp. 559-560.) If the agreement was an
"integrated" or nonseverable property settlement agreement, in which the parties
expressed their intention to reach a final division of their property, it was
not subject to modification unless the agreement so provided or the parties
consented.  (See, e.g., Dexter v. Dexter (1954) 42 Cal.2d 36 [265 P.2d 873];
Plumer v. Plumer (1957) 48 Cal.2d 820 [313 P.2d 549].) To do otherwise would
have been contrary to the express intention of the parties.  ( Dexter v. Dexter,
supra, 42 Cal.2d at p. 41.)

   An agreement was conclusively deemed integrated if it had the following
characteristics: "An agreement providing that the purpose of the parties is to
reach a final settlement of their rights and duties with respect to both
property and support, that they intend each provision to be in consideration for
each of the other provisions, and that they waive all rights arising out of the
marital relationship except those expressly set out in the agreement, will be
deemed conclusive evidence that the parties intended an integrated agreement.
[Citations omitted.]" ( Plumer v. Plumer, supra, 48 Cal.2d at p. 825.) In the
absence of one or more of these characteristic provisions, or where the
agreement was ambiguous, extrinsic evidence could be admitted to show that the
parties intended an integrated agreement.  (Ibid.) If the agreement was not
integrated, but "severable," the trial court had jurisdiction to modify its
provisions.  ( Id., at p. 824.)

   The 1967 amendment to former section 139 eliminated the necessity of the
trial court to examine each agreement to determine if it was integrated. As set
forth in present section 4811, subdivision (b), the statute provides that "[the]
provisions of any agreement for the support of either party shall be deemed to
be separate and severable from the provisions of the agreement relating to
property" and, as discussed ante, authorizes modification of the spousal support
provisions except to the extent that the parties have agreed to the contrary.

   The statute also eliminated the prior distinction between agreements which
were submitted to the court for approval to (1) have their validity established
in order to become res judicata in any subsequent action, or (2) merge the
agreement in the judgment, that is, to supersede the contractual obligation by
order of the court.  (6 Witkin, supra, § 192, p. 5061.) In this regard, the
statute provides that "[all] orders for the support of either party based on
such agreement shall be deemed law-imposed and shall be deemed made under the
power of the court to make such orders."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      Essentially, it is William's position that the modification order
impermissibly modified the parties' written spousal support agreement as set
forth in the interlocutory decree, as well as their oral agreement entered into
in open court that the court's jurisdiction regarding spousal support terminate
absolutely on September 1, 1984.  However, as the trial court properly
concluded, apparently in light of section 4811, subdivision (b), "to find from
an agreement that there is a termination of spousal support, the Court must find
explicit language of such termination. The alleged termination provision herein
is not sufficiently explicit to find such termination . . . ." (See In re
Marriage of Hufford (1984) 152 Cal.App.3d 825, 834-835 [199 Cal.Rptr. 726].)
Contrary to William's assertions, the modification order may be viewed
consistently with the language of the decree, and William has proffered no
evidence to negate this consistency. 3 Moreover, the record on appeal does not
contain a transcript of the trial court proceedings, presumably waived by the
parties, and therefore contains no reference to the oral statements of the
parties during any of the dissolution proceedings.    (Cf.  In re Marriage of
Wright (1976) 54 Cal.App.3d 1115 [126 Cal.Rptr. 894] [holding that § 4811, subd.
(b) precludes the admission of extrinsic evidence of the parties' intent that
their spousal support agreement be nonmodifiable, in the absence of a written
agreement to that effect or an oral agreement entered into in open court].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   We do not
find persuasive the fact that the stipulated interlocutory judgment
unambiguously reserved jurisdiction over two other matters, for in neither had
there been an original allocation of the asset.  The explicit wording of
reserved jurisdiction in these matters was thus easily and routinely phrased.

   Jurisdiction over these matters was reserved as follows: (1) "The court
reserves jurisdiction over [the family residence] to make any further orders
necessary to carry out this order." The order to which this provision refers was
a sale of the residence which permitted either party to purchase the interest of
the other or, if both parties sought to purchase the other's interest, an
auction.  No preliminary allocation was provided.

   (2) "The court shall retain jurisdiction over [William's] pension plan with
P.G.& E. per In re Brown." In re Marriage of Brown (1976) 15 Cal.3d 838 [126
Cal.Rptr. 633, 544 P.2d 561, 94 A.L.R.3d 164] provides that an unvested pension
right is a community asset.  Since William's pension had apparently not yet
matured, the agreement put off for a later determination what the precise
interests were to be.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    As there is no evidence of a written or oral agreement of the parties
prohibiting modification of the interlocutory decree, we reject William's
argument that the subject order violates the limitation on judicial
modifications set forth in section 4811, subdivision (b).  William's reliance on
Vasquez v. Vasquez (1952) 109 Cal.App.2d 280, 285 [240 P.2d 319] for the
principle that a trial court's actions are void when they exceed the court's
powers as defined by express statutory declaration, is therefore unfounded.  Nor
do we accept William's view that the instant case comes within the holding of In
re Marriage of Nicolaides (1974) 39 Cal.App.3d 192 [114 Cal.Rptr. 56], in which
the Court of Appeal reversed the trial court's order denying wife's motions to
conform the interlocutory and final judgments of dissolution to the terms of the
parties' marital property settlement agreement.   The parties' agreement in
Nicolaides, unlike that in the instant case, was intended to be intergraded (see
fn. 2, ante) and expressly precluded subsequent modification except under
circumstances which the parties had not satisfied.

   III

   We turn to the question whether,  assuming no agreement of the parties to the
contrary, the trial court had jurisdiction to extend spousal support beyond
September 1, 1984.  William asserts that the court's jurisdiction terminates
absolutely on that date.  He argues that jurisdiction to extend support must be
expressly retained by the trial court pursuant to section 4801, subdivision (d)
and that the trial court in the instant case did not meet this prerequisite.
Joyce responds that whether the trial court could extend spousal support beyond
September 1, 1984, is not clearly answered by the language of the order.  She
claims, nonetheless, that where an order regarding the period of time for which
a court can extend support is vague or ambiguous, it is to be construed in favor
of the fundamental jurisdiction of the court to act.  She also claims that
spousal support is a right incidental to marriage, the curtailment of which is
subject to strict interpretation.  As will appear, we agree with Joyce.

   Section 4801, subdivision (d) provides that "An order for payment of an
allowance for the support of one of the parties shall terminate at the end of
the period specified in the order and shall not be extended unless the court in
its original order retains jurisdiction." 4 This provision recodified in exact
language former section 139.7 which, as we discussed at length in In re Marriage
of Morrison (1978) 20 Cal.3d 437 [143 Cal.Rptr. 139, 573 P.2d 41], was enacted
to insure notice to the parties of a marital dissolution whether, and for what
period of time, a court retains jurisdiction to make subsequent orders extending
spousal support. ( Id., at p. 447.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   The
provision's reference to the "original order" has been interpreted to mean "the
latest order in point of time in which the court has made an allowance for the
support of either party." ( Maben v. Superior Court (1967) 255 Cal.App.2d 708,
712 [63 Cal.Rptr. 439] [interpreting former § 139.7]; In re Marriage of Keeva
(1977) 66 Cal.App.3d 512, 517 [136 Cal.Rptr. 82]; Lovitz v. Lovitz (1976) 65
Cal.App.3d 299, 303-304 [135 Cal.Rptr. 9].) Application of this rule to the
instant case merely confirms the necessity of examining the language of the
original interlocutory decree.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Prior to the enactment of former section 139.7 in 1965, 5 a trial court
retained jurisdiction   to extend the duration of spousal support at any time
during the payment period, and it was not necessary to so state in the court's
order.  However, the court had no jurisdiction to grant relief after the
specified payment period unless it expressly reserved such jurisdiction in its
order.  ( In re Marriage of Morrison, supra, 20 Cal.3d 437, 445.) The
Legislature intended that former section 139.7 would help eliminate the
confusion and frustrations, and subsequent litigation, which previously arose
when either spouse belatedly learned that while an order indicated on its face
that support payments were to be paid only until a specified date, those
payments could be extended indefinitely pursuant to an application for extension
filed prior to the specified date.  ( Id. at p. 447, fn. 6.) It was hoped that
the enactment of former section 139.7 would eliminate these misunderstandings by
requiring the trial court to "expressly indicate in its order if it wished to
retain jurisdiction" to make future extension orders.  ( Id., at p. 446.)
Thus, the purposes of present section 4801, subdivision (d) are to put the
supporting spouse on notice that the court has jurisdiction to extend the
spousal support payments ( id., at p. 446), and to inform the supported spouse
of the time within which he or she must petition for additional relief ( id., at
p. 447).

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   Former
section 139.7 (Stats. 1965, ch. 1109, § 1, p. 2755) was originally recodified as
former section 4801, subdivision (e) with the adoption of the Family Law Act in
1969 (Stats.  1969, ch. 1608, § 8, p. 3334) and renumbered to subdivision (d) in
1971 (Stats. 1971, ch.  1675, § 3, p. 3603).  ( In re Marriage of Morrison,
supra, at p. 449, fn. 8.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   We recognize that these goals are most effectively met when the court's order
retaining jurisdiction is stated as explicitly as possible and we encourage
trial courts to strive for this clarity.   Nonetheless, where an order is not
explicit but a retention of jurisdiction may reasonably be implied, several
policy reasons favor such an interpretation.

      First, orders providing for absolute termination of spousal support on a
specified date are disfavored and will be overturned as an abuse of discretion
"unless the record clearly indicates that the supported spouse will be able to
adequately meet his or her financial needs at the time selected for termination
of jurisdiction.  . . .  If the record does not contain evidence of the
supported spouse's ability to meet his or her future needs, the court should not
'burn its bridges' and fail to retain jurisdiction.  [Citation.]" 6 ( In re
Marriage of Morrison, supra, at p. 453.) This rule is particularly applicable to
lengthy marriages. (Ibid.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   Section
4801, subdivision (a) (amended after the Morrison trial court entered its
interlocutory judgment ( Morrison, supra, at p. 442, fn. 3)) sets forth several
factors to be considered by the court in determining the amount and duration of
spousal support. These are: "(1) The earning capacity of each spouse . . . .
[para. ] (2) The needs of each party.  [para. ] (3) The obligations and assets,
including separate property, of each.  [para. ] (4) The duration of the
marriage. [para. ] (5) The ability of the supported spouse to engage in gainful
employment without interfering with the interests of dependent children in the
custody of the spouse. [para. ] (6) The time required for the supported spouse
to acquire appropriate education, training, and employment.  [para. ] (7) The
age and health of the parties.  [para. ] (8) The standard of living of the
parties.  [para. ] (9) Any other factors which it deems just and equitable."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     In Morrison, we held that it was an abuse of discretion for the trial court
to divest itself of jurisdiction over spousal support after 11 years "without
any evidence in the record that the wife would be able to provide for herself at
that time." ( Id. at p. 454.) 7 In that case, we followed the reasoning of a
line of cases ( id., at p. 443) exemplified by In re Marriage of Rosan (1972) 24
Cal.App.3d 885 [101 Cal.Rptr. 295] and In re Marriage of Dennis (1973) 35,
Cal.App.3d 279 [110 Cal.Rptr. 619], 8 holding that a trial   court should, as a
general rule, reserve jurisdiction to extend spousal support where the marriage
has been a lengthy one, and that the party seeking to terminate jurisdiction has
the burden of showing that the financial needs of the supported spouse will be
satisfactorily met at the date proposed for such termination. (Id. at pp. 443,
452-453.) At the same time, we disapproved another line of cases, exemplified by
In re Marriage of Patrino (1973) 36 Cal.App.3d 186 [111 Cal.Rptr. 367] and In re
Marriage of Lopez (1974) 38 Cal.App.3d 93 [113 Cal.Rptr. 58], permitting a trial
court to terminate jurisdiction over spousal support after a lengthy marriage
even though there has been no showing that the supported spouse will be
self-supporting at the time selected for termination of jurisdiction.  (Id. at
p. 453.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   The
subject order in Morrison provided in relevant part that wife receive spousal
support in the amount of $ 400 a month "'for a period of eight years, thereafter
jurisdiction shall be reserved for three years, thereafter spousal support is to
terminate absolutely.' . . ." (20 Cal.3d at p. 441.)
8   In In re Marriage of Rosan, supra, 24 Cal.App.3d 885, the Court of Appeal
held that it was an abuse of discretion for the trial court to provide for
automatic termination of all spousal support at the end of 3 years, following a
marriage of 17 years.  While the court noted that the presumed goals of such
automatic terminations -- to encourage the supported spouse to seek employment
and avoid future modification proceedings -- are worthy, it held that
"nevertheless, orders for changes in support to take effect in the future must
be based upon reasonable inferences to be drawn from the evidence, not mere
hopes or speculative expectations.  [Citations.]" ( Id., at p. 896.)

   In In re Marriage of Dennis, supra, 35 Cal.App.3d 279, involving a marriage
of 25 years, the Court of Appeal found that it was an abuse of discretion for
the trial court to order automatic termination of jurisdiction after 4 years.
The court stated: "It is possible that difficulties not contemplated at this
time will frustrate even a good faith attempt by the wife to become wholly or
partially self-supporting. Rosan . . . certainly indicates that after a lengthy
marriage a retention of jurisdiction to modify spousal support should be the
norm and that the burden of justification is on the party seeking termination.
[para. ] That burden is not met here.  The court had no real assurance that at
the end of the four-year period the wife will be unable to show that in spite of
sincere efforts on her part, she cannot support herself adequately.  It was not
warranted in burning its bridges." ( Id., at p. 285.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      Although the record in the present case does not indicate the duration of
the parties' marriage, their children were aged 10 and 7 when the interlocutory
judgment was rendered.  Assuming the parties were married for a minimum of 11
years, their marriage was of sufficient length to bring them within the
considerations of self-support discussed in Morrison.  This factor precluded an
absolute termination of support without a determination that Joyce could
adequately meet her financial needs.  Moreover, William,  as the spouse seeking
termination of the spousal support, has not met his burden of proving that Joyce
will be self-supporting as of September 1, 1984.  (Id., at p. 443.)

     The policy against absolute termination of spousal is effected by a second
policy, as set forth in In re Marriage of Morre, supra, 113 Cal.App.3d 22, 28,
that where there is an ambiguity in the language of a marital property agreement
it must be decided in favor of the right to spousal support. William argues that
the trial court's reliance on Moore is misplaced and asserts that the case sets
precedent for concluding that Joyce waived any claim to spousal support after
September 1, 1984.

   In Moore, as in the present case, the parties entered into a stipulated
separation agreement which was incorporated into their interlocutory judgment of
dissolution of marriage. The agreement provided in relevant part that husband
would pay spousal support to wife for a period of two years.  The agreement made
no statement regarding retention of jurisdiction to extend the support.  The
Court of Appeal refused to find a waiver of wife's right to future support in
the absence of any express reference to an agreement not to extend the period of
such support.  ( Id., at p. 28.) In accordance with well established legal
principles pertaining to waiver, it held that the trial court abused its
discretion in finding wife knowingly waived her right to support.  The court
stated: "Waiver requires a voluntary act, knowingly done, with sufficient
awareness of the relevant circumstances and likely consequences.  [Citation.]
There   must be actual or constructive knowledge of the existence of the right
to which the person is entitled.  [Citation.] (2) The burden is on the party
claiming a waiver to prove it by evidence that does not leave the matter
doubtful or uncertain and the burden must be satisfied by clear and convincing
evidence that does not leave the matter to speculation.  [Citation.] This rule
particularly applies to cases involving a right favored in law such as, in this
case, the right to retain lawful property entitlements and support." ( Id., 113
Cal.App.3d at p. 27.)

   Referring to an opinion of this court ( City of Ukiah v. Fones (1966) 64
Cal.2d 104, 109-110 [48 Cal.Rptr. 865, 410 P.2d 369]) in which we quoted with
approval the language of Justice Spence in Estate of Coffin (1937) 22 Cal.App.2d
469, 471 [71 P.2d 295], the Moore court further noted that "'[it] is well
settled that the right to a family allowance is strongly favored in our law and
that it will not be held to have been waived or relinquished except where the
language relied upon clearly and explicitly manifests that intention.
[Citations.] . . .  "[Any] uncertainty in the language of the agreement will be
resolved in favor of the right." [Citation.]'" ( In re Marriage of Moore, supra,
113 Cal.App.3d at p. 28.) The Moore court further held  that the trial court
abused its discretion in alternatively concluding that wife was capable of
sufficiently providing for her own needs.

     Although many of the facts in Moore are distinguishable from the instant
case -- in Moore, neither party was represented by counsel and the wife had an
inadequate command of English -- William has not met his burden of showing that
Joyce waived any rights to support after September 1, 1984.  We thus reject
Williams' assertion that the trial court's reliance on Moore was misplaced,
since this reliance properly effected the Moore policy that any ambiguity in an
agreement between the parties be interpreted to favor the right to spousal
support.

     A third policy favoring modification of the instant decree to permit an
extension of spousal support beyond September 1, 1984, is that language in a
spousal support order suggesting that modification of its terms will be
permitted is routinely interpreted as a retention of the court's fundamental
jurisdiction to modify and, upon a proper factual showing, to extend the spousal
support provisions contained therein.

     In the instant case, the parties' interlocutory decree provided for its
future modification not only by permitting until September 1, 1984, for Joyce to
request support payments but also by stating that spousal support payments would
continue "until further order from the Court, the death of either party, the
remarriage of respondent, or August 1, 1982, whichever first occurs." (Italics
added.) It was pursuant to the first portion of this clause that Joyce properly
sought modification of the decree on June 29, 1982. 9 The interpretation of this
language to permit modification of the parties' interlocutory decree extending
spousal support payments beyond September 1, 1984, is supported by In re
Marriage of Keeva, supra, 66 Cal.App.3d 512. In that case, husband obtained a
modification of the parties' interlocutory decree reducing his spousal and child
support payments.  Such payments were made payable through November 15, 1975,
the date to which the matter was continued. 10 By subsequent orders of the
court, hearing was further continued until November 19, 1975, and then to
December 10, 1975.  On December 10, husband challenged the jurisdiction of  the
court to continue granting spousal support. He argued that the modification
order terminated the allowance for spousal support on November 15th, and that
the court did not explicitly retain jurisdiction as required by section 4801,
subdivision (d).

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -9   Had Joyce
not sought modification of the interlocutory decree before August 1, 1982, her
spousal support payments would have ceased on that date.  However, she
nonetheless could have sought modification of the decree to provide for a new
spousal support award, rather than an extension of the original award, pursuant
to the language of the decree retaining jurisdiction to hear Joyce's requests
for spousal support until September 1, 1984.
10   The modification order provided in relevant part: "'The respondent is
ordered to pay directly to petitioner . . . by way of spousal support $ 15.00
per week . . . continuing through Saturday 15th of November 1975 . . .  Matter
ordered continued to November 15, 1975 . . . .'" ( In re Marriage of Keeva,
supra, 66 Cal.App.3d at pp. 515-516, italics omitted.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The trial court rejected this challenge and awarded a continuation of
support.  The Court of Appeal affirmed.  Looking to the circumstances under
which the modification order was made, specifically that husband had been
terminated from his job, the court found that "[the] manifest purpose of the
extension was to cover the situation until husband's earning capacity improved.
[para. ] . . .  [The] simultaneous continuance of the matter to November 15,
1975, manifested the court's intent to deal further with the matter in light of
husband's earning capacity at that time and was inconsistent with an intent that
support terminate at such time." ( Id., at p. 518.) The court further reasoned
that "[the] continuance to November 19 implies that there would be something to
rule upon on that date.  If the effect of the court's failure to act on November
15 were loss of jurisdiction, the November 19 setting was a nullity.  It is thus
apparent that although the court did not use the words that it 'retains
jurisdiction,' there was no intent to limit the duration of the period of
payment for support." (Ibid.)

   Although in the instant case, the record does not indicate what circumstances
influenced the trial court's modification order providing for an indefinite
extension of spousal support payments, counsel for petitioner informed us at
oral argument that the payments were initially structured with a "jurisdictional
step-down to zero payment" to provide an incentive to petitioner to become
self-sufficient.  In the event petitioner failed to attain this goal, however,
the court reserved jurisdiction to make further support awards.  As in Keeva,
the instant trial court's retention of jurisdiction until September 1, 1984, to
hear Joyce's requests for spousal support implies that the court retained the
power to grant such requests.  If the court was without jurisdiction to award
spousal support past September 1, 1984, its retention of jurisdiction until that
date to hear Joyce's requests for support would be meaningless.  (See also
Dahlstet v. Dahlstet (1969) 272 Cal.App.2d 174, 180 [77 Cal.Rptr. 45], and
Lassiter v. Lassiter (1967) 256 Cal.App.2d 81, 82 [63 Cal.Rptr. 676].)
Accordingly, the court's retention of jurisdiction until September 1, 1984, to
modify the spousal support provisions of the interlocutory decree necessarily
included a retention of its fundamental jurisdiction to extend spousal support
payments beyond that date.

   Both parties rely on In re Maxfield (1983) 142 Cal.App.3d 755 [191 Cal.Rptr.
267] to support their respective positions.  In Maxfield, the trial court
rendered an interlocutory judgment of dissolution of the parties' marriage,
stating in pertinent part that "jurisdiction to award spousal support  is
reserved for a period of two years commencing July 15, 1976." ( Id., at p. 760.)
Pursuant to a stipulation executed by the parties and their attorney, the court
modified the interlocutory judgment on July 11, 1978, to permit spousal support
payments to continue past July 15, 1978.  Husband complied with the support
provisions of the modification until December 1979 when he informed wife that he
considered the modification void and nonbinding.  He asserted that under the
original interlocutory judgment the court divested itself of jurisdiction after
two years and thus lacked jurisdiction to extend spousal support past the
two-year period.  Wife sought a contempt sanction to enforce the decree as
modified. After hearing testimony, the trial court terminated the contempt
hearing and vacated the order of modification on the ground that the order was
entered in reliance upon the parties' stipulation and not upon a showing of
changed   circumstances, which is ordinarily a prerequisite for a modification
of spousal support. ( Id., at p. 759.)

   The Court of Appeal reversed, holding that the stipulated modification was
res judicata and could not be collaterally attacked. 11 The court stated in
dictum that even if collateral attack were permitted, the trial court did not
exceed its jurisdiction when it extended spousal support beyond July 15, 1978.
The court stated that "[the] 1976 decree . . . did not provide that all spousal
support obligations 'terminate absolutely' upon a certain date [citation];
instead, it reserved 'jurisdiction to award spousal support' until July 15,
1978.  The court thereby provided that its authority to take new judicial action
concerning spousal support would expire on that date.  It did not purport to
limit the nature of relief it could grant provided it acted within that
jurisdictional period." ( Id., at pp. 762-763.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -11   The
Maxfield court concluded that a finding of changed circumstances need not be
made where the parties, with the advice of counsel, have stipulated to the terms
of the modification. The stipulated modification thus became res judicata when
no party appealed or made a timely motion to set it aside.  The court further
noted that the claimed error did not render the order void since the defect, if
any, "is merely a nonjurisdictional mistake of law and the order remains immune
from collateral attack." (142 Cal.App.3d at p. 759.)

   The Maxfield court then rejected husband's alternative contention that it
should affirm the order vacating the modification because the trial court lacked
jurisdiction to extend spousal support beyond July 15, 1978.  The Court of
Appeal concluded that husband was barred from collaterally attacking the 1978
modification on the ground that the trial court had fundamental jurisdiction
over the parties and subject matter and because wife had detrimentally relied
upon the validity and finality of the stipulated modification.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Although William acknowledges that Maxfield and the instant case address an
identical issue, namely, whether the trial court reserved jurisdiction to extend
spousal support beyond the last date it was permitted to act, William seeks to
distinguish Maxfield on two grounds.  First, William argues that the Maxfield
court's conclusion that the trial court had jurisdiction to extend spousal
support beyond the specified date was based on the meaning of "award." This
argument is without merit.  The Maxfield court interpreted  the word "award," as
used in the interlocutory judgment, to "include[] the concept of extension of
support.  A court 'awards' spousal support through a discrete judicial act; the
'award' is consummated upon the entry of the order or judgment although the
obligations and entitlements established in that order may continue for a
substantial period thereafter." ( Id., at p. 763.) This interpretation of
"jurisdiction to award spousal support" is properly juxtaposed with the instant
interlocutory decree's retention of "jurisdiction regarding spousal support" and
is virtually identical to Joyce's "right to request spousal support." In both
Maxfield and the instant case, wife was already receiving support at the time
these orders were modified. Thus, the language of the instant interlocutory
decree, like the Maxfield retention of "jurisdiction to award spousal support,"
necessarily "includes the concept of extension of support." ( Id., at p. 763.)
This power resides in the fundamental jurisdiction of the court, which includes
personal jurisdiction over the parties and subject matter jurisdiction over
spousal support. ( Id., at p. 761.)

   The second distinction William seeks to make is that Maxfield makes mandatory
its admonition that "[it] is preferable that a reservation of jurisdiction
unambiguously indicate that the authority to extend support beyond the period
originally provided is among the powers retained.  (See In re Marriage of
Richmond (1980) 105 Cal.App.3d 352 [164 Cal.Rptr. 381].)" (Id., at p. 763.)
However, as previously discussed, this clearly stated preference for clarity
does not preclude interpreting an ambiguous spousal support order to permit an
extension of such support.  Contrary to William's assertions, this policy was
recognized by the Maxfield court in its reference to Richmond as an example of
preferable, not mandatory, draftsmanship. 12

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -12   The
additional case law relied upon by William is inapposite.  Faught v. Faught
(1973) 30 Cal.App.3d 875 [106 Cal.Rptr. 751] merely reiterates the rule set
forth in section 4801 subdivision (d), that a court lacks authority to extend
the period of spousal support if its original order did not expressly retain
such jurisdiction.  However, the case is unhelpful in interpreting or applying
that rule because the opinion does not set forth the wording of the separate
maintenance decree. Faught only sets forth the conclusion of the Court of Appeal
that "[the] decree did not retain jurisdiction in the court to extend the period
of spousal support." ( Id., at p. 878.)

    Maben v. Superior Court, supra, 255 Cal.App.2d 708, also cited by William
for the rule that an express reservation of jurisdiction over spousal support is
a condition of the court's continuing jurisdiction, is factually distinguishable
from the instant case.  In Maben, the second modification of the original
spousal support award (that is, the latest spousal support order [see fn. 4,
ante]) was made after the enactment of former section 139.7 and provided in
pertinent part that spousal support should "[continue] for 11 months thereafter
at which time alimony shall terminate." ( Id., at p. 710.) Unlike the instant
case, the request for extension of spousal support was properly denied because
brought after the expiration of this 11-month period, that is, after the court's
jurisdiction had clearly ceased.

    Lovitz v. Lovitz, supra, 65 Cal.App.3d 299, is even more inapposite.  The
Court of Appeal in Lovitz held that the trial court order providing for absolute
termination of spousal support upon a specified date could not be upheld in
light of the judicial policy encouraging trial courts' retention of jurisdiction
over spousal support until it is clearly evident that the supported spouse is
presently able to assume his or her own support.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     In conclusion, where jurisdiction to award, or grant requests for, spousal
support is reserved until a specified date the court has fundamental
jurisdiction until that date to take new action concerning such support.  Such
new judicial action may include an extension of spousal support beyond the last
date the court can act.  We thus reject William's final contention that the
trial court did not retain jurisdiction over the subject matter of spousal
support past September 1, 1984, hence its extension of such support past that
date violated constitutional due process standards.

   IV

   We must analyze the language of the instant interlocutory decree in
accordance with the policies herein discussed: disfavoring the absolute
termination of spousal support without a determination that the supported spouse
can become self-supporting; interpreting ambiguous spousal support agreements
and orders in favor of support; and the fundamental jurisdiction of trial courts
to modify existing spousal support orders to extend support payments past the
last date they can act.  These policies dictate the following interpretation of
the instant interlocutory decree: The trial court retained jurisdiction until
September 1, 1984, to hear requests by Joyce that the court award or extend her
spousal support. Failing such request, the court's jurisdiction to award or
extend such spousal support would terminate on that date.  However, since Joyce
requested an extension of her support before the September 1, 1984, deadline,
the court had fundamental jurisdiction to grant her request and such
jurisdiction permitted an extension of Joyce's support beyond September 1, 1984.

   As the trial court had jurisdiction to modify its interlocutory judgment of
dissolution of the parties' marriage to extend spousal support beyond September
1, 1984, we affirm the trial court's modification order.

DISSENT BY: MOSK

DISSENT

   MOSK, J. I dissent.

   By looking at the clause involved here in isolation, one could by a strained
interpretation of a perceived ambiguity reach the conclusion urged by the wife
and accepted by the majority.

   However, if one examines the entire written agreement, the apparent intent of
the parties assumes a different dimension.    With respect to the sale of the
family residence, the agreement provides: "[the] court reserves jurisdiction
over this asset to make any further orders necessary to carry out this order.
No time limitation.  With respect to husband's retirement, it provides: "[the]
court shall retain jurisdiction over [husband's] pension plan with P.G. & E. per
In re Brown." No time limitation.  The only temporal specification is in the
alimony clause.

   Had the parties intended the court to retain jurisdiction to award spousal
support to continue beyond the prescribed date limitation of September 1, 1984,
it would have been a simple matter to employ language similar to that used in
connection with the family residence and husband's pension.  That it was not
done strongly suggests a different intent.

   The decree did not retain jurisdiction in the court to extend the period of
spousal support, and under the statute ( Civ. Code, § 4801, subd. (d)) the court
lacked authority to grant wife's request.  ( Faught v. Faught (1973) 30
Cal.App.3d 875, 878 [106 Cal.Rptr. 751].) I conclude, as did a unanimous Court
of Appeal, that where as here the written agreement signed by the parties and
their counsel and stipulated to in open court did not expressly reserve
jurisdiction to award spousal support that would extend beyond September 1,
1984, the trial court erred in purporting to modify the interlocutory judgment
to provide such support.  The modification is particularly egregious in that the
support order is now completely unlimited as to time, subject only to the death
of either party, the remarriage of the wife, or further order of the court.  (
Lovitz v. Lovitz (1976) 65 Cal.App.3d 299, 303 [135 Cal.Rptr. 9]; Maben v.
Superior Court (1967) 255 Cal.App.2d 708, 712 [63 Cal.Rptr. 439].)

   I would reverse the order.


                               8 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of GLENDA HILL and EDWARD JOHN CESNALIS.
           GLENDA HILL CESNALIS, Respondent, v. EDWARD JOHN CESNALIS,
                                   Appellant.

                                  No. C040828.

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, THIRD APPELLATE DISTRICT

            106 Cal. App. 4th 1267; 131 Cal. Rptr. 2d 436; 2003 Cal.
          App. LEXIS 386; 2003 Cal. Daily Op. Service 2285; 2003 Daily
                                Journal DAR 2870


                            March 12, 2003, Decided
                             March 12, 2003, Filed

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:
Modified and rehearing denied by  In re Marriage of Cesnalis, 2003 Cal. App.
LEXIS 498 (Cal. App. 3d Dist., Apr. 7, 2003)
Review denied by  In re Marriage of Cesnalis, 2003 Cal. LEXIS 3972 (Cal., June
18, 2003)

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Mono County.
No. 13084. Lee E. Cooper, Jr., Judge. (Retired judge of the Ventura Sup. Ct.
assigned by the Chief Justice pursuant to art. VI, § 6 of the Cal. Const.)

COUNSEL: Lampi, Gephart & Silverman, Randall L. Gephart and Claudia Silverman
for Appellant.

Law Offices of Charles E. Schneider and Charles E. Schneider for Respondent.

JUDGES: (Opinion by Davis, Acting P. J., with Raye and Callahan, JJ.,
concurring.)

OPINION BY: DAVIS

OPINION

     DAVIS, Acting P. J.--

   This appeal arises from the trial court's postjudgment order denying the
motion of appellant Edward John Cesnalis (Edward)  to terminate spousal support.
The court found that Edward and his former wife, Glenda Hill Cesnalis (Glenda),
had agreed in writing that Glenda's remarriage would not terminate her spousal
support, and therefore Edward had waived his rights under Family Code section
4337 (section 4337). Under section 4337, spousal support terminates by law upon
the supported spouse's remarriage unless the parties have agreed otherwise in
writing. The trial court also found that Edward's removal of language from the
relevant written agreement--at Glenda's insistence--that would have expressly
terminated spousal support upon her remarriage estopped him from claiming that
her remarriage terminated support.

   We uphold the trial court's findings that Edward waived section 4337
regarding remarriage, and that Edward was estopped from claiming that spousal
support ended when Glenda remarried; accordingly, we affirm.

   Background

   Edward and Glenda were married on November 30, 1992. A little over seven
years later, they separated and Glenda filed for divorce. Edward's counsel
drafted a stipulated judgment for dissolution of marriage (Stipulated Judgment).
Shortly thereafter, the two parties and their attorneys met to discuss the
draft.

   At this meeting, Glenda demanded that paragraph 4 of the Stipulated Judgment,
pertaining to spousal support (Paragraph 4), be modified. As originally drafted,
Paragraph 4 stated in relevant part: "4. SPOUSAL SUPPORT. Husband shall pay
spousal support in the amount of $ 4,000.00 per month, ... beginning October 1,
2000, and continuing until either party's death, the remarriage of Wife, or
September 30, 2003, whichever occurs first, at which point spousal support will
terminate absolutely. The duration of spousal support will not be modifiable
under any circumstances, and the termination date stated herein is absolute, and
no court shall have jurisdiction over the issue of spousal support, regardless
of whether any motion is made on, before or after September 30, 2003. The
parties stipulate that the marriage was one of short duration, and otherwise
have bargained carefully for the termination of support contained herein."

   Glenda insisted that the words "the remarriage of Wife" be removed from the
list of terminating events in Paragraph 4.

   Edward removed the remarriage language. Edward also added other language
reiterating the three-year duration of support and moved the starting and ending
dates of support back a month. Paragraph 4 now stated in relevant part: "4.
SPOUSAL SUPPORT. Husband shall pay spousal support in the amount of $ 4,000.00
per month for a period of three years, ... beginning November 1, 2000, and
continuing until either party's death, or October 30, 2003, whichever occurs
first, at which point spousal support will terminate absolutely. The duration of
spousal support will not be modifiable under any circumstances, and the
termination date stated herein is absolute, and no court shall have jurisdiction
over the issue of spousal support, regardless of whether any motion is made on,
before or after October 30, 2003. The parties stipulate that the marriage was
one of short duration, and otherwise have bargained carefully for the
termination of support contained herein." (Italics added.)

   The parties then agreed to the Stipulated Judgment with this redrafted
Paragraph 4, and the court entered the judgment on October 25, 2000.

   Glenda remarried on August 6, 2001. Upon learning of Glenda's remarriage,
Edward moved unsuccessfully to terminate spousal support. This appeal ensued.

   Discussion

   There are two issues on appeal. First, did the trial court properly find that
the parties agreed in writing that Glenda's remarriage would not terminate
spousal support, and therefore that Edward had waived section 4337? Second, did
the trial court properly find that Edward was estopped from claiming that
Glenda's remarriage terminated spousal support? We find that the trial court
ruled correctly as to both issues and will affirm the order.

   1. Written Waiver of Section 4337

    Section 4337 states: "Except as otherwise agreed by the parties in writing,
the obligation of a party under an order for the support of the other party
terminates upon the death of either party or the remarriage of the other party."
The issue here is whether Paragraph 4 evidences an agreement between the parties
to waive section 4337.

    Two prominent, relatively recent decisions set forth the basic principles
governing how a written agreement may waive the remarriage termination provision
of section 4337: In re Marriage of Glasser (1986) 181 Cal. App. 3d 149 [226 Cal.
Rptr. 229] (Glasser) (construing section 4337's substantively identical
predecessor, Civil Code section 4801, subd. (b)); andIn re Marriage of Thornton
(2002) 95 Cal.App.4th 251 [115 Cal. Rptr. 2d 380] (Thornton). Those principles
are as follows.

    No particular words are required to waive section 4337 and make spousal
support continue upon remarriage, but silence will not do. (Glasser, supra, 181
Cal. App. 3d at p. 151; see also Thornton, supra, 95 Cal.App.4th at p. 254.)
There must be a written agreement on the issue or the subject. (See Glasser,
supra, 181 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 151-153; Thornton, supra, 95 Cal.App.4th at p.
254; see also  In re Marriage of Sherman (1984) 162 Cal. App. 3d 1132, 1137 [208
Cal. Rptr. 832] (Sherman).)

   Section 4337's remarriage termination is not waived simply because the
written agreement fails to include remarriage among the terminating events that
are expressly mentioned. (Thornton, supra, 95 Cal.App.4th at p. 257.)

   Nor is section 4337 overcome if the written agreement simply makes the
spousal support provision "nonmodifiable" in general. (Glasser, supra, 181 Cal.
App. 3d at p. 151; Thornton, supra, 95 Cal.App.4th at p. 254.) This is because
"termination" and "modification" are distinct concepts describing different ways
to alter a support obligation. (Thornton, supra, 95 Cal.App.4th at p. 254; In re
Marriage of Benjamins (1994) 26 Cal.App.4th 423, 433 [31 Cal. Rptr. 2d 313].)

   Thornton provides that a written agreement to waive section 4337's
terminating provisions must be "specific and express." (Thornton, supra, 95
Cal.App.4th at p. 254.) Nevertheless, as noted, no particular words are
required, and extrinsic evidence is admissible to resolve whether a written
agreement has waived the section 4337 remarriage termination provision. (
Thornton, supra, 95 Cal.App.4th at p. 254; Glasser, supra, 181 Cal. App. 3d at
p. 153; see alsoEmanuel v. Emanuel (1975) 50 Cal. App. 3d 56, 59 [123 Cal. Rptr.
249] (Emanuel); Steele v. Langmuir (1976) 65 Cal. App. 3d 459, 462-463 [135 Cal.
Rptr. 426] (Steele); Sherman, supra, 162 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 1137-1138; Lucas v.
Elliott (1992) 3 Cal.App.4th 888, 893-894 [4 Cal. Rptr. 2d 746] (Lucas).) Before
such extrinsic evidence is properly admitted, however, there must be language in
the written agreement reasonably susceptible to interpretation as a declaration
of an intent that support continue beyond remarriage. (Glasser, supra, 181 Cal.
App. 3d at p. 153; Emanuel, supra, 50 Cal. App. 3d at p. 59; Steele, supra, 65
Cal. App. 3d at p. 463; Sherman, supra, 162 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 1137-1138.)

   The party seeking to overcome a section 4337 remarriage termination bears the
burden of proving, by clear and convincing evidence, the requisite written
agreement. ( Thornton, supra, 95 Cal.App.4th at p. 257  .)

    In applying these principles, the decisions display a dichotomy. On one side
are those decisions, such as Glasser and Thornton, that do not find  their
written agreements susceptible to the admission of extrinsic evidence or
sufficient to waive section 4337; on the other side are those decisions that do,
such as Steele and Sherman. The written agreements in Glasser and Thornton
stated, in boilerplate fashion, that spousal support payments were to be made
over a designated term, and added, generally, that spousal support was
nonmodifiable. (Glasser, supra, 181 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 150-151; Thornton,
supra, 95 Cal.App.4th at p. 253.) The agreements in Steele and Sherman, while
they contained similar boilerplate, were more tailored in critical ways. In
Steele, the agreement provided that spousal support would continue until death,
remarriage or the expiration of 20 years, and was "to be deemed non-modifiable,
regardless of any change of circumstances, except for the contingencies
contained herein." (Steele, supra, 65 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 461-462.) And in
Sherman, the agreement stated that " 'the amount of support, the method of
payment and the terms and conditions of termination of support, all as
[previously specified], shall not be modifiable by the parties or by any court
on any ground.' " (Sherman, supra, 162 Cal. App. 3d at p. 1135, italics
omitted.) As we shall explain, the written agreement here comes down on the
Steele and Sherman side of things.  1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   As noted
above, we refer to Steele and Sherman only with respect to the specific wording
of their spousal support provisions. We realize that these two cases also
involved the now outdated concept of integrating spousal support and property
division provisions rather than having spousal support provisions remain
independent. (See Glasser, supra, 181 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 151-152; In re
Marriage of Nicolaides (1974) 39 Cal. App. 3d 192 [114 Cal. Rptr. 56]; Rheuban
v. Rheuban (1965) 238 Cal.App.2d 552 [47 Cal. Rptr. 884].) The integration
concept is irrelevant here.

   Moreover, as we explain, the process by which Edward and Glenda drafted
Paragraph 4 involved some unique facts on the issue of remarriage. These facts
distinguish this case from the general concerns regarding the clarity required
for retaining spousal support jurisdiction expressed in In re Marriage of
Vomacka (1984) 36 Cal.3d 459 [204 Cal. Rptr. 568, 683 P.2d 248]. This is not a
Vomacka case.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Paragraph 4 of the Stipulated Judgment is the relevant written agreement
here. It is more specific than the spousal support agreements in Glasser and
Thornton. The specificity is centered on the duration of support and the limited
circumstances that can end it. Under the wording of Paragraph 4, Edward "shall
pay spousal support ... for a period of three years ... beginning November 1,
2000, and continuing until either party's death, or October 30, 2003, whichever
occurs first, at which point spousal support will terminate absolutely." For
good measure, Paragraph 4 adds that "[t]he duration of spousal support will not
be modifiable under any circumstances, and the termination date stated herein is
absolute[.]"

   In applying the previously stated principles on how a written agreement may
waive section 4337, we find the following with respect to Paragraph 4. The
paragraph does not specifically mention remarriage. But it does say that the
only way spousal support can end before the three-year duration elapses is if
one of the parties dies. Paragraph 4 reiterates that the three-year duration
cannot be changed under any other circumstances; it is no stretch to say that a
supported spouse's remarriage would generally be considered one of the most
prominent of such circumstances. Viewed in this light, Paragraph 4 cannot be
said to be altogether silent on remarriage as a terminating event.

   The spousal support provisions here, as in Glasser, Thornton, Steele and
Sherman, all mention nonmodifiability. However, the nonmodifiability provisions
in Glasser and Thornton are broad and apply to the spousal support provisions
generally. The nonmodifiability provision of Paragraph 4, by contrast, is
expressly limited to the three-year "duration of spousal support" which "will
not be modifiable under any circumstances" and which will end only if the three
years are up or one of the parties dies. (Italics added.) This is similar to the
more tailored nonmodifiability provision in Steele. (Steele, supra, 65 Cal. App.
3d at pp. 462, 465-466 [husband's support obligation was nonmodifiable
"regardless of any change of circumstances, except for the contingencies"
specified].) With this focus on a definitive three-year duration, the
"nonmodifiability" provision in Paragraph 4, in contrast to such provisions in
Glasser and Thornton, relates more to termination than to modification.

   On the issue of extrinsic evidence, the preceding analysis of Paragraph 4's
language demonstrates that the paragraph is reasonably susceptible to
interpretation as a declaration of an intent that support continue beyond
remarriage. Because of this reasonable susceptibility, the trial court properly
admitted extrinsic evidence on the meaning of Paragraph 4 regarding remarriage.
(Glasser, supra, 181 Cal. App. 3d at p. 153; Steele, supra, 65 Cal. App. 3d at
pp. 462-463; Sherman, supra, 162 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 1137-1138.) The issue here
regarding the admissibility of extrinsic evidence resembles the one before the
court in Steele, supra, 65 Cal. App. 3d 459. In Steele, the written support
agreement stated in part that husband's support of wife would "continue until
the death, remarriage, or expiration of twenty (20) years ... ." (Id. at pp.
461-462.) The appellate court concluded that extrinsic evidence was properly
admissible to show this provision meant only the wife's death or remarriage;
this was because the placement of the ambiguous term "death" next to the term
"remarriage" reasonably suggested this meaning. (Id. at pp. 462-463.)

   The extrinsic evidence admitted here showed the following. As originally
drafted by Edward's counsel, Paragraph 4 specified that Glenda's remarriage
("the remarriage of Wife") would terminate spousal support. Glenda refused to
agree to the Stipulated Judgment unless this language was removed from Paragraph
4. Edward removed the language and Glenda signed the Stipulated Judgment.
Another significant distinction between the two drafts of Paragraph 4 is that
the redrafted Paragraph 4 reiterated, in clear terms, that Edward would pay
spousal support "for a period of three years."

   There is a conflict in the record as to what was said after Glenda demanded
that the remarriage language be removed from Paragraph 4. Edward asserts in a
declaration that after Glenda made this demand, his counsel stated that the
removal would have no legal effect "because spousal support terminates upon
remarriage, regardless of whether the agreement so states." According to
Edward's declaration, Glenda's counsel then stated, " 'that may be correct, but
[Glenda] wants it out anyway,' or words to that effect." Glenda's counsel
maintains in a declaration, however, that he never expressly or impliedly agreed
that the removal of the remarriage language would have no legal effect. Glenda's
counsel declared, "Notwithstanding declarations by any other persons, at no time
did I assent to, or even imply assent to, the notion that spousal support would
terminate on remarriage or for any other reason." Glenda's counsel added, "I
made it clear throughout settlement negotiations that the spousal support
payment was set in stone"; "[r]emarriage is a change of circumstances [and] the
[Stipulated Judgment] says [spousal] support is not modifiable under any
circumstances. Period." (Italics in original.)

   The trial court pointed out that had Glenda and her counsel believed that
removing the remarriage language from Paragraph 4 would have no legal effect, it
would have been nonsensical to bargain for it. Based on its analysis, the trial
court chose to discount Edward's account.

   The trial court was free to make the credibility calls on the conflicting
evidence. The trial court reasonably determined that Glenda would not agree to
the Stipulated Judgment if the remarriage termination language was not removed,
and that the removal of that language from Paragraph 4, in light of the language
that remained, was clear and convincing evidence that the parties had agreed in
writing that Glenda's remarriage would not terminate spousal support.
Consequently, substantial evidence supports the trial court's determination that
Edward waived section 4337's remarriage termination provision.

   One final note on section 4337. Thornton does state at one point: "If the
parties wish to make a written agreement to waive the remarriage provision of
section 4337, they must at a minimum expressly state that the supported spouse's
remarriage will not terminate spousal support." (Thornton, supra, 95 Cal.App.4th
at p. 257, italics added.)

   We believe this statement goes beyond the requirements of section 4337. Taken
literally, this statement would mean that particular words are required to waive
section 4337, and that extrinsic evidence has no relevance in resolving whether
a written agreement has waived the section 4337 remarriage provision. Section
4337 does not go so far as to require a written agreement expressly stating that
the supported spouse's remarriage will not terminate spousal support. (See
Steele, supra, 65 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 465-466.) As evidenced by this case, as
well as by other decisions including Steele, Sherman, and Lucas, parties can
"otherwise agree[] ... in writing" to waive a section 4337 termination provision
without such an express statement. (§ 4337.)

   We conclude the record supports the trial court's finding that the parties
had agreed in writing that Glenda's remarriage would not terminate spousal
support, and therefore Edward had waived section 4337.

   2. Estoppel

    The trial court also found that Edward was estopped from claiming that
Glenda's remarriage terminated spousal support. We conclude the evidence is
sufficient to support this finding as well.

   The record shows that Glenda insisted that Edward remove the words "the
remarriage of Wife" from Paragraph 4 as an event terminating spousal support, or
she would not agree to the Stipulated Judgment. Edward removed the challenged
phrase to obtain Glenda's agreement. Edward also added language to the redrafted
Paragraph 4 reiterating his obligation to pay spousal support "for a period of
three years." Finally, Glenda settled for what she believed was less than her
share of certain assets in signing the Stipulated Judgment with the redrafted
Paragraph 4.

   "Whenever a party has, by his own statement or conduct, intentionally and
deliberately led another to believe a particular thing true and to act upon such
belief, he is not, in any litigation arising out of such statement or conduct,
permitted to contradict it." (Evid. Code, § 623.) Substantial evidence shows
that Edward deliberately led Glenda to believe that her remarriage would not
terminate her spousal support by acceding to her demand that he remove her
remarriage as a terminating event in Paragraph 4, knowing that she would not
otherwise sign the Stipulated Judgment. Based on Edward's removal of the
remarriage language, Glenda signed the Stipulated Judgment believing that her
remarriage would not terminate her spousal support. Glenda reasonably and
detrimentally relied upon the removal of the remarriage language, and upon the
addition of the more definitive language pertaining to duration. (Lange v. TIG
Ins. Co. (1998) 68 Cal.App.4th 1179, 1185 [81 Cal. Rptr. 2d 39].)

   Thus, the record supports the trial court's finding that Glenda met her
burden of establishing estoppel. (See Thornton, supra, 95 Cal.App.4th at pp.
254-255.) Substantial evidence supports the finding that Edward was estopped
from claiming that spousal support terminated upon Glenda's remarriage. (Evid.
Code, § 623.)

   Disposition

   The order is affirmed.

   Raye, J., and Callahan, J., concurred.

   A petition for a rehearing was denied April 7, 2003, and the opinion was
modified to read as printed above. Appellant's petition for review by the
Supreme Court was denied June 18, 2003.


                               9 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            In re the Marriage of RAYMOND C. and KATHLEEN D. McCANN.
             RAYMOND C. McCANN, Respondent, v. KATHLEEN D. McCANN,
                                   Appellant.

                                  No. G013966.

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FOURTH APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION THREE

           41 Cal. App. 4th 978; 48 Cal. Rptr. 2d 864; 1996 Cal. App.
           LEXIS 12; 96 Cal. Daily Op. Service 209; 96 Daily Journal
                                    DAR 289


                            January 8, 1996, Decided

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Review Denied April 11, 1996, Reported at: 1996 Cal.
LEXIS 2128.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Orange County, No. D325789, Ronald Weiss,
Temporary Judge.  *

*   Pursuant to California Constitution, article VI, section 21.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports

(1a) (1b) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69--Modification of Spousal
Support--Change of Circumstances--Factors Considered--Increase in Child Support
Payments--As Factor Supporting Reduction of Spousal Support--Parties' Intent
Behind Original Support Order.  --In a proceeding to modify spousal support
payable by a husband to his former wife, the trial court did not err in
considering the husband's increase in child support payments under the Statewide
Uniform Guidelines (Civ. Code, former § 4720 et seq., now Fam. Code, § 4050 et
seq.), as a factor indicating a change in circumstances supporting the reduction
of spousal support from $ 1,150 to $ 600 monthly. The record supported the
finding of a change in circumstances supporting a modification of spousal
support, based on the parties' intent behind the original support order. The
marital settlement agreement, which was incorporated into the original support
order, required the husband to pay $ 2,300 per month in support, one half
designated as child support and the other half as spousal support, so that the
wife and children would be able to remain in the family home. Since the
subsequent enactment of the Statewide Uniform Guidelines dramatically increased
the husband's child support obligation, a change the parties had not
contemplated when they executed the agreement, the trial court's ruling gave
effect to the intent and expectations of the parties' original agreement.
Further, the wife had refinanced the house, thereby reducing her monthly
mortgage payment by $ 300, and had collaterally benefited by receiving nearly $
700 more each month in nontaxable income while having her monthly taxable income
reduced by $ 550. Thus, even with the spousal support reduction, the wife
received a net increase of $ 132 per month in spousal support.

(2) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69--Modification of Spousal Support--
Change of Circumstances--Factors Considered--Appellate Review of Modification
Orders.  --Modification of spousal support, even if the prior amount is
established by agreement, requires a material change of circumstances following
the last order. Change of circumstances means a reduction or increase in the
supporting spouse's ability to pay and/or an increase or decrease in the
supported spouse's needs and includes all factors affecting need and the ability
to pay. Appellate review of orders modifying spousal support is governed by an
abuse of discretion standard, and such an abuse occurs when a court modifies a
support order without substantial evidence of a material change of
circumstances.

(3) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69--Modification of Spousal Support--
Change of Circumstances--Factors Considered--Increase in Child Support Payments
--Standard of Living During Marriage.  --In an action by a wife seeking an
increase in child support from her former husband based on the newly enacted
Statewide Uniform Guidelines (Civ. Code, former § 4720 et seq., now Fam. Code, §
4050 et seq.), the trial court properly considered the husband's increase in
child support payments under the guidelines as a factor indicating a change in
circumstances supporting the reduction of spousal support from $ 1,150 to $ 600
monthly. Although a change in the law concerning the parties' property rights
will not sustain a modification of spousal support, property rights are treated
differently than support issues, and this case involved an increase in child
support mandated by the guidelines, not a division of property interests.
Further, spousal support must bear some relationship to the parties' standard of
living during the marriage (former Civ. Code, § 4801, subd. (a), now Fam. Code,
§ 4330). Pursuant to a marital settlement agreement, which was incorporated into
the original support order, the parties had agreed to an overall support level
that would permit the wife and children to continue living in the same home.
Since the parties had equally divided the agreed upon figure between child and
spousal support, the original spousal support award far exceeded the amount the
wife would have been entitled to receive based on the parties' income during
marriage. Thus, the wife's request for an increase in child support based on the
guidelines upset this calculation. Finally, even though the husband's ability to
pay support had increased since their marriage was dissolved, that fact alone
did not bar a reduction in spousal support, since limiting increases in spousal
support to the supported spouse's living standards during the marriage holds the
supported spouse to those expectations, and the wife's standard of living had
not changed from what it was during the marriage.

   [See 11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (9th ed. 1990) Husband and Wife, § 263A.]

COUNSEL: Heston & Heston and Richard G. Heston for Appellant.

George M. Kornievsky for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Rylaarsdam, J., with Sills, P. J., and Wallin, J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: RYLAARSDAM, J.

OPINION

     RYLAARSDAM, J.

   Kathleen D. McCann (wife) appeals from an order reducing her monthly spousal
support from $ 1,150 to $ 600. The primary question presented is whether the
trial court erred by considering Raymond C. McCann's (husband) increase in child
support payments under the Statewide Uniform Guidelines (former Civ. Code, §
4720 et seq., now Fam. Code, § 4050 et seq.) as a factor supporting the
reduction of spousal support.

   STATEMENT OF FACTS

   During most of their 16-year marriage, husband served as an officer in the
United States Army. His highest annual salary was slightly over $ 38,000. Wife
worked sporadically during the marriage. The parties separated while living in
Virginia. Thereafter, both moved to California, where they jointly purchased a
residence using the proceeds from the sale of their Virginia home. Wife and the
parties' two children live in the residence. Both parties found jobs.

   In November 1991, a judgment was entered dissolving the marriage. The
judgment incorporated a marital settlement agreement (MSA) which, in part,
awarded the family residence to wife, and required husband to pay $ 2,300 per
month in support, one half was designated as child support and the other half as
spousal support. Husband testified the parties agreed to the $ 2,300 figure
because it was the amount wife and children needed to continue living  in the
family home. When the parties signed the MSA, husband's annual salary was $
92,500 and wife's was approximately $ 22,800.

   In July 1992, wife sought an increase in child support based primarily on the
then newly enacted Statewide Uniform Guidelines. In response, husband sought a
reduction of the spousal support order. When the matters were heard, husband and
wife's annual salaries had increased to over $ 102,000 and $ 26,000
respectively. Husband had remarried and his second wife worked, making
approximately $ 48,000 per year.

   The trial court increased husband's monthly child support obligation to $
1,832. Concerning spousal support, the trial court found husband's net
disposable monthly income was $ 3,845, after deducting child support. Wife's net
monthly income and the increased child support award gave her a net monthly
disposable income of $ 3,593 without spousal support. Her monthly expenses
amounted to $ 3,669, not including a prospective alternative childcare
arrangement she was considering that would cost an additional $ 400 per month.
Based on the parties' intent behind the original support order, the child
support increase and the standard of living enjoyed by the parties during their
marriage, the trial court reduced spousal support to $ 600.

   DISCUSSION

     Wife contends the record fails to support the trial court's finding of a
change in circumstances supporting a modification of spousal support.
Alternatively, she claims the spousal support reduction violates equal
protection because it has a disparate impact on the parties' children.

     Modification of spousal support, even if the prior amount is established by
agreement, requires a material change of circumstances since the last order. (
In re Marriage of Biderman (1992) 5 Cal. App. 4th 409, 412 [6 Cal. Rptr. 2d 791]
; In re Marriage of Aninger (1990) 220 Cal. App. 3d 230, 238 [269 Cal. Rptr.
388]; In re Marriage of Norvall (1987) 192 Cal. App. 3d 1047, 1060 [237 Cal.
Rptr. 770]; In re Marriage of Kuppinger (1975) 48 Cal. App. 3d 628, 633 [120
Cal. Rptr. 654].) Change of circumstances means a reduction or increase in the
supporting spouse's ability to pay and/or an increase or decrease in the
supported spouse's needs. ( In re Marriage of Hoffmeister (1984) 161 Cal. App.
3d 1163, 1173 [208 Cal. Rptr. 345]; In re Marriage of Cobb (1977) 68 Cal. App.
3d 855, 860-861 [137 Cal. Rptr. 670].) It includes all factors affecting need
and the ability to pay. ( In re Marriage of Gavron (1988) 203 Cal. App. 3d 705,
710  [250 Cal. Rptr. 148].) Appellate review of orders modifying spousal support
is governed by an abuse of discretion  standard, and such an abuse occurs when a
court modifies a support order without substantial evidence of a material change
of circumstances. (In re Marriage   of Biderman, supra, 5 Cal. App. 4th at p.
412; In re Marriage of Smith (1990) 225 Cal. App. 3d 469, 480 [274 Cal. Rptr.
911]; In re Marriage of Aninger, supra, 220 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 237-238.)

     The record supports the trial court's decision. Contrary to wife's claim,
there was evidence on how the parties calculated the original monthly support
level. Husband testified $ 2,300 per month was the amount they concluded wife
and children would need to remain in the home jointly acquired after separating.
The subsequent enactment of the Statewide Uniform Guidelines dramatically
increased husband's child support obligation, a change the parties had not
contemplated when they executed the MSA. Thus, the trial court's ruling gave
effect to the intent and expectations of the parties' original agreement. (In re
Marriage of Aninger, supra, 220 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 238-239.)

   Wife also testified she had refinanced the house, thereby reducing her
monthly mortgage payment by $ 300. Furthermore, she collaterally benefited by
receiving nearly $ 700 more each month in nontaxable income while having her
monthly taxable income reduced by $ 550. Even with the spousal support
reduction, wife received a net increase of $ 132 per month in support from
husband. Although wife was considering a more costly childcare arrangement, the
trial court noted, the proposed arrangement would only increase wife's monthly
expenses to slightly over $ 4,000 while her monthly disposable income even with
the reduced spousal support amounted to almost $ 4,200.

     Wife contends husband's increased child support obligation is not a proper
factor to consider in modifying spousal support. While a change in the law
concerning the parties' property rights will not sustain a modification of
spousal support (In re Marriage of Cobb, supra, 68 Cal. App. 3d at p. 860),
property rights are treated differently than support issues. ( Tarvin v. Tarvin
(1986) 187 Cal. App. 3d 56, 60 [232 Cal. Rptr. 13]; In re Marriage of Farrell
(1985) 171 Cal. App. 3d 695, 702 [217 Cal. Rptr. 397]; see also In re Marriage
of Brown (1976) 15 Cal. 3d 838, 848 [126 Cal. Rptr. 633, 544 P.2d 561, 94
A.L.R.3d 164].) The present case involves an increase in child support mandated
by the Statewide Uniform Guidelines, not a division of property interests. It
has been suggested that, since the new guidelines frequently leave the payor
spouse with little income to pay spousal support, the Legislature may have
intended to employ the guidelines to "equalize the standards of living of the
parents making spousal support unnecessary,  except in high income cases." ( In
re Marriage of Fini (1994) 26 Cal. App. 4th 1033, 1043, fn. 11 [31 Cal. Rptr. 2d
749]; see also In re Marriage of Carter (1994) 26 Cal. App. 4th 1024, 1030 [33
Cal. Rptr. 2d 1].)

   Furthermore, wife's argument fails to recognize the circumstances of this
case. Spousal support must bear some relationship to the parties' standard of
living during the marriage. (Former Civ. Code, § 4801, subd. (a), now Fam. Code,
§ 4330; In re Marriage of Hoffmeister (1987) 191 Cal. App. 3d 351, 363 [236 Cal.
Rptr. 543].) Here, the parties agreed to an overall support level which would
permit wife and children to continue living in the same home. Since they equally
divided the agreed-upon figure between child and spousal support, the original
spousal support award far exceeded the amount wife would have been entitled to
receive based on the parties' income during marriage. Wife's request for an
increase in child support based on the Statewide Uniform Guidelines upset this
calculation.

   Without any citation to the record, wife claims the trial court erroneously
deducted husband's current spousal support payment in calculating his net
disposable income for child support. This contention misstates the record. The
trial judge gave an on-the-record explanation of how he calculated husband's
modified child support obligation and there was no mention of a deduction for
the spousal support husband was paying to wife.

   Wife next suggests the trial court's ruling is erroneous because husband's
ability  to pay support has increased since their marriage was dissolved. But
this fact alone will not bar a reduction in spousal support if the circumstances
of the case otherwise permit. "Adults who separate and dissolve their marriage
do so with eyes open, each choosing a separate course and appreciating the
possibility that the other will go on to attain a far more comfortable standard
of living. Limiting increases in spousal support to the supported spouse's
living standards during marriage justifiably holds the supported spouse to those
expectations." ( In re Marriage of Catalano (1988) 204 Cal. App. 3d 543, 551
[251 Cal. Rptr. 370].) Wife admitted her standard of living in California had
not changed from what it was in Virginia.

   Finally, wife contends the spousal support modification reduced custodial
household income and thus constituted a violation of the children's right to
equal protection of the law. We disagree. As noted, husband's combined support
for wife and the children increased from $ 2,300 to $ 2,432. His modified child
support obligation is based on his current income. This amount would remain the
same regardless of whether his spousal support was increased, decreased,
unmodified or eliminated.

    The judgment is affirmed. Husband shall recover his costs on appeal.

   Sills, P. J., and Wallin, J., concurred.

   Appellant's petition for review by the Supreme Court was denied April 11,
1996.


                              10 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            In re the Marriage of CHRISTINE B. and KEVIN D. FREITAS.
             CHRISTINE B. FREITAS, Respondent, v. KEVIN D. FREITAS,
                                   Appellant.

                                    D060281

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FOURTH APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION ONE

            209 Cal. App. 4th 1059; 147 Cal. Rptr. 3d 453; 2012 Cal.
                                App. LEXIS 1039


                         October 3, 2012, Opinion Filed

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY: Review denied by In re Freitas, 2012 Cal. LEXIS 11851 (Cal.,
Dec. 19, 2012)

PRIOR-HISTORY:
   APPEAL from orders of the Superior Court of San Diego County, No. D521936,
Lisa C. Schall, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(4) Dissolution of Marriage § 38--Pendente Lite Orders--Spousal Support--
Termination--History of Domestic Violence--Changed Circumstances.--The trial
court did not abuse its discretion in terminating a temporary spousal support
award to a husband in light of his prior domestic violence conviction, despite
the absence of changed circumstances.

   [Kirkland et al., Cal. Family Law Practice and Procedure (2012) ch. 51, §
51.24; Cal. Forms of Pleading and Practice (2012) ch. 225, Dissolution of
Marriage: Spousal Support, § 225.94; 11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (10th ed.
2005) Husband and Wife, §§ 198, 207, 278.]

COUNSEL: Law Office of Marc E. Angelucci, Marc Etienne Angelucci; Men's Legal
Center and Craig Candelore for Appellant.

Schmitt Family Law and Melissa J. Schmitt for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Aaron, J., with Huffman, Acting P. J., and Irion, J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: Aaron

OPINION

    AARON, J.--

I.

INTRODUCTION

   Kevin D. Freitas (Kevin) appeals from several pendente lite orders of the
trial court in a marital dissolution action brought by his wife, Christine B.
Freitas (Christine). In April 2010, Christine filed a petition to dissolve the
marriage. At an October 2010 hearing, the trial court entered a temporary
spousal support award in favor of Kevin, and a temporary child support award in
favor of Christine. At that same hearing, the court ruled that it would reserve
jurisdiction over whether to amend the support awards, and that Kevin could
submit additional evidence pertaining to Christine's income  for the period of
September and October 2010. In June 2011, the trial court determined that in
light of this court's January 2011 opinion in In re Marriage of Gruen (2011) 191
Cal.App.4th 627 [120 Cal. Rptr. 3d 184] (Gruen), it lacked jurisdiction to amend
the support awards for the months of September and October 2010. In Gruen, this
court concluded that a trial court lacked jurisdiction to retroactively modify a
pendente lite support order to any date earlier than the date on which a proper
pleading seeking modification of such order is filed. (Id. at p. 631.) Also in
June 2011, the trial court terminated the temporary spousal support award,
effective July 1, 2011, pursuant to Family Code section 4325, in light of
Kevin's 2006 domestic violence conviction.1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Unless
otherwise specified, all subsequent statutory references are to the Family Code.
Generally speaking, section 4325 establishes "a rebuttable presumption that an
award of spousal support not be made to a spouse who has been convicted of
intraspousal domestic violence." (In re Marriage of Cauley (2006) 138
Cal.App.4th 1100, 1102 [41 Cal. Rptr. 3d 902] (Cauley).)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   On appeal, Kevin contends that the trial court erred in terminating the
temporary spousal support award on the basis of his prior domestic violence
conviction. Kevin maintains that because the court was aware of the conviction
at the time it entered the original temporary spousal support award, the changed
circumstances rule2 precluded modification of the award  based on this
conviction. Kevin also contends that the trial court erred in concluding that
Gruen barred the court from reconsidering the support awards because, unlike in
Gruen, the trial court in this case specifically reserved jurisdiction to make
such a determination.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   The
changed circumstances rule is a principle of family law that provides that
courts generally will not revise a prior order absent a material change of
circumstances. (Gruen, supra, 191 Cal.App.4th at p. 638.) The rule has been
applied in many contexts, including child custody (e.g., In re Marriage of
Burgess (1996) 13 Cal.4th 25, 38 [51 Cal. Rptr. 2d 444, 913 P.2d 473]), child
support (e.g., In re Marriage of Cryer (2011) 198 Cal.App.4th 1039, 1054 [131
Cal. Rptr. 3d 424]), and spousal support (e.g., Gruen, supra, at p. 638).
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   We conclude that the changed circumstances rule did not prevent the trial
court from terminating the temporary spousal support award based upon the
court's application of section 4325 to Kevin's domestic violence conviction. We
further conclude that the trial court erred in its determination that Gruen
precluded amendment of the original support awards. The error was harmless with
respect to the spousal support award, but remand is necessary with respect to
the child support award. Accordingly, we affirm the trial court's order
terminating spousal support effective July 1, 2011. We reverse the trial court's
order concluding that it lacked jurisdiction to amend the pendente lite child
support award for September and October 2010, and remand the matter to permit
the trial court to determine whether to amend its child support award for those
months based upon Kevin's presentation of additional evidence pertaining to
Christine's income.

II.

FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

   Christine and Kevin married in October 1992, and separated in March 2010.
They have two children together, N.F., born in April 1996, and L.F., born in
February 2001. In April 2010, Christine filed a petition for dissolution of the
marriage.

   In August 2010, Kevin filed an application for an order to show cause (OSC)
seeking child support, spousal support and other relief. Christine filed a
responsive declaration in which she requested that the court award no spousal
support. In her declaration, Christine stated that Kevin had a "history of
perpetrating domestic violence against [her]," and noted that in October 2006,
Kevin suffered a conviction for committing a battery against her. Christine also
stated that Kevin "assaulted" her in March 2010, and noted that the trial court
had entered a domestic violence restraining order against Kevin in July 2010.

   On October 6, 2010, the trial court held a hearing on the OSC. At the
conclusion of the hearing, the trial court awarded Kevin $800 a month in
temporary spousal support and awarded Christine $7 a month in temporary child
support. The court ruled that both awards were effective as of August 1, 2010.
The court also noted that Kevin's counsel had contended that Christine had
misrepresented her income and expenses. The trial court rejected this
contention, stating, "I don't believe she misrepresented." However, the court
reserved jurisdiction with respect to whether to amend the child and spousal
support awards for the months of September and October 2010 and indicated that
Kevin would have the opportunity to present evidence pertaining to Christine's
income, stating: "So this is my order. I'm going to be making an order today
going with  [Christine's counsel's] income and expense representation, with a
reservation to reconsider this finding on what her income is with a timeline
attached to it. This is not an indefinite timeline. But I'm going to give you so
much time to bring [it] back to this court, upon review of this issue of what
her actual income was during this time, September, October of 2010. [¶] And if
you can produce discovery that you want to lodge with the court that shows
[Christine's counsel's] representations were inaccurate, incomplete, and not
satisfactory in that regard, then I will retroactively amend my order of today
to give your client those benefits." The court stated that Kevin's counsel had
until January 4, 2011, to file additional evidence demonstrating that
Christine's income had been higher during the months of September and October
2010 than represented in her income and expense declaration. The court also
directed Kevin's counsel to prepare a final order after hearing.

   On January 3, 2011, Kevin filed an ex parte application to extend the time
within which the court could consider the issue of Christine's income for "the
time period of September and October 2010," until 60 days after the resolution
of various discovery disputes. The trial court granted the application.

   On February 10, Kevin filed an application for an OSC to modify the existing
child and spousal support awards. In his application, Kevin stated that his
request was based on the fact that he had lost his job on January 25.

   The court held a hearing on March 23. At the outset of the hearing, the trial
court noted that at the October 6 hearing, it had "reserved over a determination
of [Christine's] income for the time period of October and September 2010."
However, the trial court stated that it now believed it did not have
jurisdiction to consider this issue in light of this court's January 2011
decision in Gruen. The court reasoned, "[M]y read of [Gruen] is that once an
order is entered, you cannot modify it or do any retroactive modification. You
have to file a new OSC." The court indicated that it would permit the parties to
file briefs addressing the effect, if any, of Gruen on whether the court could
amend the October 2010 child and spousal support awards.

   Also at the March 23 hearing, the court considered Kevin's February 2011 OSC
to modify the existing child support and spousal support awards. The court
stated that it would increase the spousal support award to $1,100 a month
effective April 1, on an interim basis, in light of Kevin's job loss, and
further stated that it would not make any changes to its prior child support
award. The court specified that the spousal support award was "a temporary
interim order," pending a further hearing on Kevin's OSC to be held on June 1.

   In May 2011, Christine filed a responsive declaration to Kevin's February
2011 OSC. In her declaration, Christine requested that spousal support be set at
$0. In support of her request, Christine stated, "This marriage ended after
years of domestic violence ... ." Christine added, "The spousal support merely
enables [Kevin] to continue to harass me and punish me."3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Kevin
failed to include Christine's declaration in the record on appeal. On our own
motion, we order that the record on appeal be augmented with the superior court
file. (Cal. Rules of Court, rule 8.155(a)(1)(A).)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   On June 1, the trial court continued the hearing on Kevin's February 2011 OSC
and entered a minute order that states, "Parties to address applicability of
[Family Code section] 4325 factors[.] All issues from March hearing to be
addressed ... ."

    On June 6, 2011, the trial court entered an order entitled, "Findings and
Order After Hearing," pertaining to matters raised at the October 6, 2010
hearing. The court determined Christine's income and awarded child and spousal
support as stated at the hearing. The order also specifically referred to the
court's reservation of jurisdiction to reexamine Christine's income, stating:

   "RE: COURT RESERVES OVER [CHRISTINE'S] INCOME DETERMINATION

   "4. The court reserves over the determination of [Christine's] income and
findings as of the hearing of October 6, 2010 ... for a period of 90 day[s] or
January 4, 2011.

   "5. [Kevin's] counsel has until January 4, 2011 to appear ex parte to
calendar a review hearing from the court to address the court's reservation over
[Christine's] income and court findings regarding [the] same."

   On June 28, the court held a hearing. At the hearing, the court heard
argument on the effect of Gruen on this case. After hearing argument, the court
ruled that under Gruen, it lacked jurisdiction to "go back" and reassess
Christine's income for the period of September and October 2010. The court
further stated, "So, I'm not going to go back and re-address her income
variations, if they do exist, for that time period."

   With respect to Kevin's February 2011 request to modify the support awards in
light of the loss of his job, the court reduced Christine's child support award
from $7 a month to $6, effective July 1. With respect to spousal support, the
court stated that it had asked the parties to address the effect of section 4325
on this case. After hearing argument from both counsel concerning this issue,
the court stated that it would take the issue under submission and would draft a
written order concerning spousal support.

   On June 30, the court entered a written order terminating temporary spousal
support, effective the following day, July 1. In its order, the court took
judicial notice of several case files that documented the domestic violence that
Kevin had inflicted on Christine throughout their relationship. The court
summarized that history as follows.4 In October 2006, Kevin pled guilty to a
violation of Penal Code sections 242 and 243, subdivision (e)(1).5 A trial court
issued a criminal protective order in connection with the  conviction that
expired in October 2009. The trial court further noted that it had presided over
a July 2010 hearing on Christine's request for a restraining order against
Kevin. According to the court, the evidence presented at the hearing
"established by a preponderance of the evidence that [Kevin] had been physically
and emotionally abusive toward [Christine]." The court noted that it had granted
Christine a two-year restraining order against Kevin at the conclusion of the
July 2010 hearing.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   These
files are not contained in the appellate record. However, Kevin does not dispute
the trial court's summary of their contents.
5   Penal Code section 242 defines the crime of battery, and Penal Code section
243 specifies the punishment for that crime.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The trial court also noted that Kevin had not provided any facts that were
not known at the time of the July 2010 hearing and that "no additional facts
were presented to rebut the presumption set forth in [section] 4325." The court
continued: "Therefore, the Court finds that [Kevin] suffered the criminal
conviction for an act of domestic violence against his spouse within [five]
years prior to the filing of the dissolution. That [Kevin] was again physically
violent and abusive towards his spouse, [Christine,] [seven]  months after the
expiration of the criminal protective order. That he has failed to rebut the
presumption as stated in [section 4325]. The court denies the request to award
any temporary spousal support. The support is hereby set at zero, effective July
1, 2011."

   On July 8, Kevin filed a motion to reconsider or vacate the court's June 28
and June 30 orders. The trial court denied Kevin's motion that same day.

   Kevin filed a timely notice of appeal from the court's June 6, June 28, June
30, and July 8, 2011 orders.6

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   Kevin's
claims on appeal focus on the court's June 30 order terminating spousal support
and the court's June 28 order concluding that it lacked jurisdiction to amend
the child and spousal support awards for the months of September and October
2010.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

III.

DISCUSSION

A. The trial court did not abuse its discretion in terminating Kevin's spousal
support award pursuant to section 4325 based on his domestic violence conviction

   Kevin claims that the trial court erred in terminating the spousal support
award because there were no changed circumstances that warranted the
termination.7 We apply the abuse of discretion standard of review to Kevin's
claim. (See, e.g., In re Marriage of Samson (2011) 197 Cal.App.4th 23, 28-29
[127 Cal. Rptr. 3d 857].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   Kevin
also contends that the trial court lacked jurisdiction to terminate the spousal
support award on June 30, 2011, because there "was no pending OSC" and
"[n]either party filed a new OSC or motion after the March 23, 2011 order." We
reject this claim. As noted in part II., ante, at the March 23 hearing, the
court continued the hearing on Kevin's February 2011 OSC. Thus, the record is
clear that there was in fact a pending OSC at the time the court terminated
Kevin's spousal support on June 30.

   Kevin also contends that the trial court abused its discretion in declining
to modify the child support award in light of the January 25, 2011 termination
of his employment. However, as noted in part II., ante, on June 28, 2011, the
trial court did modify the child support award in light of Kevin's job loss, by
reducing Christine's child support award from $7 a month to $6, effective July
1. To the extent that Kevin contends that the court should have reduced his
child support obligation at the March 23 hearing, he fails to present any
argument that the court was required to implement such a de minimis change on an
interim basis prior to the continued hearing on Kevin's February 2011 OSC to
modify the child and spousal support awards in June 2011.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

1. Governing law

a. Temporary spousal support awards and domestic violence

   "Pending a marriage dissolution ... the court ... may order either spouse to
pay 'any amount that is necessary' for the other spouse's support, consistent
with the requirements of sections 4320, subdivisions (i) and (m), and 4325. (§
3600.)"8 (In re Marriage of Wittgrove (2004) 120 Cal.App.4th 1317, 1326 [16 Cal.
Rptr. 3d 489], fn. omitted (Wittgrove).) Section 4320, subdivision (i), requires
the trial court to consider "[d]ocumented evidence of any history of domestic
violence" when ordering spousal support. Section 4320, subdivision (m),
provides, "The criminal conviction of an abusive spouse shall be considered in
making a reduction or elimination of a spousal support award in accordance with
Section 4325."

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -8   In 2001,
the Legislature amended section 3600 to require that a trial court consider any
documented history of domestic violence when making a temporary spousal support
award. (In re Marriage of MacManus (2010) 182 Cal.App.4th 330, 336 [105 Cal.
Rptr. 3d 785] (MacManus).) "In 2002, [section 3600] was amended to clarify that
the trial court need consider only the history of domestic violence, not all the
factors in section 4320." (MacManus, supra, at p. 336, fn. 5.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Section 4325 provides:

   "(a) In any proceeding for dissolution of marriage where there is a criminal
conviction for an act of domestic violence perpetrated by one spouse against the
other spouse entered by the court within five years prior to the filing of the
dissolution proceeding, or at any time thereafter, there shall be a rebuttable
presumption affecting the burden of proof that any award of temporary or
permanent spousal support to the abusive spouse otherwise awardable pursuant to
the standards of this part should not be made.

   "(b) The court may consider documented evidence of a convicted spouse's
history as a victim of domestic violence, as defined in Section 6211,
perpetrated by the other spouse, or any other factors the court deems just and
equitable, as conditions for rebutting this presumption.

   "(c) The rebuttable presumption created in this section may be rebutted by a
preponderance of the evidence."

   In Cauley, supra, 138 Cal.App.4th at pages 1106-1107, the Court of Appeal
held that the strong public policy against domestic violence embodied in section
4325 rendered unenforceable a provision in a marital settlement agreement that
precluded modification or termination of the spousal support provided for in the
agreement. The Cauley court reasoned in part: "Though there is a strong public
policy in favor of enforcing the spousal support provisions of the parties'
settlement agreement and appellant would forfeit a substantial amount of spousal
support if there were no enforcement, the parties could not have reasonably
expected that respondent would finance his own abuse by appellant. Balanced
against these factors, we note that there is a significant public policy against
domestic violence. As was noted in the analysis from the Assembly Judiciary
Committee, 'granting spousal support to a convicted abuser is unconscionable and
constitutes unjust enrichment. ... [S]pousal support orders in such domestic
violence cases potentially force victims of abuse to remain dangerously
entangled in the abuser's web of violence and intimidation.' (Assem. Com. on
Judiciary, 3d reading analysis of Sen. Bill No. 1221 (2001-2002 Reg. Sess.) as
amended Aug. 23, 2001, p. 3.) Refusal to enforce the spousal support provision
will further this policy against domestic violence, because appellant will have
fewer financial resources to continue her harassment of respondent." (Cauley,
supra, at p. 1106.)

b. The changed circumstances rule

   " 'As a general rule, courts will not revise a child support order unless
there has been a "material change of circumstances." ...' [Citation.] The
majority view is that the same general rule applies to temporary spousal support
. [Citation.]" (Gruen, supra, 191 Cal.App.4th at p. 638; but see In re Marriage
of Murray (2002) 101 Cal.App.4th 581, 597, fn. 11 [124 Cal. Rptr. 2d 342] (
Murray) ["several cases ... hold no such showing is necessary. (See, e.g., Sande
v. Sande (1969) 276 Cal.App.2d 324, 329 [80 Cal. Rptr. 826]; Zinke v. Zinke
(1963) 212 Cal.App.2d 379, 382-384 [28 Cal. Rptr. 7]; Rosenthal v. Rosenthal
(1961) 197 Cal.App.2d 289, 306-307, 309-311 [17 Cal. Rptr. 186].)"].)

    "[T]he reason for the change of circumstances rule is to preclude
relitigation of the same facts." (In re Marriage of Baker (1992) 3 Cal.App.4th
491, 501 [4 Cal. Rptr. 2d 553] (Baker).) As the court in In re Marriage of Smith
(1990) 225 Cal.App.3d 469, 480 [274 Cal. Rptr. 911], explained: "A motion for
modification of spousal support may only be granted if there has been a material
change of circumstances since the last order. [Citation.] Otherwise,
dissolution cases would have no finality and unhappy former spouses could bring
repeated actions for modification with no burden of showing a justification to
change the order. Litigants ' "are entitled to attempt, with some degree of
certainty, to reorder their finances and life style [sic] in reliance upon the
finality of the decree." ' [Citation.] Absent a change of circumstances, a
motion for modification is nothing more than an impermissible collateral attack
on a prior final order. [Citation.]"

   One rationale for applying the changed circumstances rule to temporary
spousal support orders is that such orders "share the 'finality' attribute of a
spousal support judgment in that they are immediately appealable as 'collateral
final orders.' " (Hogoboom & King, Cal. Practice Guide: Family Law (The Rutter
Group 2012) ¶ 17:139, p. 17-35 (rev. # 1, 2011) (hereafter Hogoboom & King); see
Murray, supra, 101 Cal.App.4th at p. 597 [stating rationale for applying changed
circumstances rule to temporary spousal support orders, but noting conflict in
case law as to whether rule applies in this context and not deciding the
issue].)

   The changed circumstances rule is not to be applied mechanistically or
without exception. (See Baker, supra, 3 Cal.App.4th at p. 501 ["However, there
can be cases where there [has] been no change of circumstances yet it would be
just and equitable to modify an existing order."]; Montenegro v. Diaz (2001) 26
Cal.4th 249, 259 [109 Cal. Rptr. 2d 575, 27 P.3d 289] ["we agree that the
changed circumstance rule should be flexible ..."]; Goto v. Goto (1959) 52
Cal.2d 118, 123 [338 P.2d 450] [" 'We do not wish to be understood as holding
that "the change of circumstance" rule is an absolutely iron-clad rule and that
there can be no possible exception to it. ...' [Citation.]"].)

   For example, in In re Marriage of Stanton (2010) 190 Cal.App.4th 547 [118
Cal. Rptr. 3d 249] (Stanton), this court concluded that the changed
circumstances rule did not prevent a husband's collateral attack on the trial
court's award of temporary child and spousal support, given the " 'unusual
circumstances' " present in that case. (Id. at p. 554.) The husband moved to
modify the trial court's temporary child and spousal support orders on the
ground that federal law preempted the trial court's consideration of certain of
the husband's military allowances for purposes of determining his income
available for support. (Id. at pp. 552-553.) The trial court denied the motion
on the ground that federal law did not preempt its consideration of the
allowances. (Id. at p. 553.)

   On appeal, the San Diego County Department of Child Support Services (the
Department), acting as an intervener to defend the trial court's orders,
contended that this court should affirm the orders on the "sole ground [the
husband] presented no changed factual circumstance justifying a modification of
support." (Stanton, supra, 190 Cal.App.4th at p. 553.) The Department reasoned
that the federal preemption issue had arisen at the time the trial court entered
the initial  support orders, which were now final. (Ibid.) The Stanton court
concluded that it was proper for the trial court to consider the husband's
preemption claim at the modification hearing, notwithstanding that the factual
predicate for that claim had arisen at the initial hearing establishing support.
(Id. at pp. 554-555.) In support of this conclusion, the Stanton court noted
that the trial court had addressed the merits of the preemption issue at the
modification hearing, and that the husband had asserted that he failed to raise
the issue at the initial spousal support hearing because he thought that
proceeding was going to be only a "review hearing." (Id. at p. 554.)

2. Application

   At the outset, we assume for purposes of this decision that the changed
circumstances rule generally applies to temporary spousal support orders,
notwithstanding the conflicting case law on this issue. (See Gruen, supra, 191
Cal.App.4th at p. 638.) Further, we acknowledge that the trial court terminated
Kevin's temporary spousal support based on circumstances that arose prior to the
court's initial October 2010 temporary spousal support award, namely, Kevin's
2006 domestic violence conviction. However, for the reasons that follow, we
conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in terminating the
temporary spousal support award despite the absence of changed circumstances,
given the " 'unusual circumstances' " of this case. (Stanton, supra, 190
Cal.App.4th at p. 554.)

   To begin with, it is undisputed that Kevin suffered a qualifying domestic
violence conviction pursuant to section 4325, and that there is no indication in
the record that the trial court considered section 4325 at any time prior to
June 1, 2011, when the court asked the parties to be prepared to address the
applicability of the statute at the next hearing. Further, it is clear from the
trial court's June 30, 2011 order that, if the court had considered section 4325
at the October 2010 hearing, it would have found the statutory presumption
unrebutted, and would have refused to award Kevin any temporary spousal support.
9 We are aware of no case in which the changed circumstances rule has been
applied to require a trial court to leave in place a spousal support  order that
the court would not have entered in the first place if it had properly
considered and applied the law in entering the original support order.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -9   This is
clear from the fact that the court's June 30, 2011 order terminating spousal
support was based on the same set of facts as existed as of the time of the
October 2010 hearing awarding such support. The court terminated spousal support
based on Kevin's 2006 battery conviction and the fact that "no additional facts
were presented to rebut the presumption set forth in [section 4325]." The court
also stated, "[Kevin] has not provided any information that wand applied the law
in entering theas not already known and considered at the time of [the July 2010
domestic violence temporary restraining order] trial."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In addition, the circumstance upon which the trial court terminated temporary
spousal support, i.e., Kevin's domestic violence conviction, is one that the
Legislature has identified in section 4325 as warranting special attention. The
Cauley court summarized the public policy underlying the statute by stating, "
Section 4325 embodies a legislative determination that victims of domestic
violence not be required to finance their own abuse." (Cauley, supra, 138
Cal.App.4th at p. 1107.) Indeed, domestic violence is the only issue that the
Legislature has expressly mandated that a trial court consider in determining
whether to award temporary spousal support. (See § 3600 [providing that during
pendency of marital dissolution action a court may order "the husband or wife to
pay any amount that is necessary for the support of the wife or husband,
consistent with the requirements of subdivisions (i) and (m) of Section 4320 and
Section 4325" (italics added)].)10 In contrast to an award of permanent spousal
support under sections 4330 and 4320, an award of temporary support does not
require consideration of numerous statutory factors. The fact that the
Legislature has singled out domestic violence as a critical factor that a court
must consider in determining whether to award temporary spousal support bolsters
the conclusion that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in belatedly
applying the statute to terminate Kevin's award of spousal support.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -10
Subdivisions (i) and (m) of section 4320 and section 4325 all pertain to
domestic violence. (See pt. III.A.1., ante.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   As noted above, the chief reason for the changed circumstances rule is to
"preclude relitigation of the same facts." (Baker, supra, 3 Cal.App.4th at p.
501, italics added.) In this case, the potential applicability of section 4325
was never litigated prior to June 2011. (See Stanton, supra, 190 Cal.App.4th at
p. 554 [declining to apply changed circumstances rule where merits of issue were
addressed for the first time at hearing on petition to modify temporary spousal
support].) Further, courts have stated that the changed circumstances rule is
necessary to prevent a party from bringing "an impermissible collateral attack
on a prior final order." (Smith, supra, 225 Cal.App.3d at p. 480 [changed
circumstances rule is needed to prevent "unhappy former spouses [from]
bring[ing] repeated actions for modification with no burden of showing a
justification to change the order"].) In this case, no party attempted to raise
a collateral attack on the prior order. Rather, the trial court raised the issue
of the potential applicability of section 4325 sua sponte in its June 1 order.11
Thus, the chief rationale for the changed circumstances rule, i.e., to  prevent
parties from relitigating issues that the court has previously addressed, has no
applicability in this case.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -11   Kevin
states in his brief that the section 4325 issue "was raised by the court without
any party mentioning it."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   We reject Kevin's primary argument for applying the changed circumstances
rule in this case, namely, that "even if the trial court had not considered the
domestic violence ... when it made the October 6, 2010 order, Christine could
have appealed the order, but she did not." While some courts have suggested that
the fact that temporary spousal support orders are appealable supports the
conclusion that the changed circumstances rule should apply to such orders (
Stanton, supra, 190 Cal.App.4th at p. 554; Murray, supra, 101 Cal.App.4th at p.
597 [dicta]; see Hogoboom & King, supra, ¶ 17:139, p. 17-35)--that rationale has
little applicability in this case. That is because the court terminated the
award on June 30--less than a month after it entered the June 6 order awarding
such support. Thus, the time for Christine to appeal the trial court's original
spousal support award had not expired prior to the court's termination of that
award.12

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -12   The
trial court directed Kevin's counsel to prepare an order after the October 6,
2010 hearing, and the minute order from the October 6 hearing expressly states
as much. The trial court entered the order after the October 6 hearing, on June
6, 2011. Under these circumstances, it is clear that the October 6, 2010 minute
order was not appealable. (See County of Alameda v. Johnson (1994) 28
Cal.App.4th 259, 261, fn. 1 [33 Cal. Rptr. 2d 483].)

   The June 6 order constituted a final and appealable temporary spousal support
order (see In re Marriage of Skelley (1976) 18 Cal.3d 365, 368 [134 Cal. Rptr.
197, 556 P.2d 297] (Skelley)), with one exception. As is discussed in greater
detail in part III.B., post, since the June 6 order left open the possibility
that the trial court might amend the spousal support award for the months of
September and October 2010 based on a reconsideration of Christine's income, the
June 6 order also was not appealable as to those months. (In re Marriage of Van
Sickle (1977) 68 Cal.App.3d 728, 735 [137 Cal. Rptr. 568] (Van Sickle)
[collateral order exception to the one final judgment rule permitting
interlocutory appeals in marriage dissolution cases applies "only if a decision
thereon determines finally the rights of the parties in relation to the
collateral matter, leaving no further judicial acts to be done by the court in
regard to that matter"].) It was not until June 28, 2011, when the trial court
ruled that Gruen precluded it from amending its original support awards, that
the trial court entered a final appealable temporary spousal support order with
respect to the months of September and October 2010. The court entered an order
terminating temporary spousal support just two days later, on June 30.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Finally, Kevin argues that the trial court's "sudden termination" of
temporary  spousal support constituted an abuse of discretion because it upset
his settled expectations that he would receive the amount that the court had
previously ordered. We acknowledge that courts have occasionally referred to a
reliance-based justification for the changed circumstances rule. (See Smith,
supra, 225 Cal.App.3d at p. 480 ["Litigants ' "are entitled to attempt, with
some degree of certainty, to reorder their finances and life style [sic] in
reliance upon the finality of the decree." ' [Citation.]"].) However, the
reliance justification to which the Smith court alluded is far from compelling
in this case. The trial court's pendente lite order awarding Kevin temporary
spousal support had become final less than a month before the court   terminated
the order, and was apparently entered without any consideration of the strong
public policy against domestic violence embodied in section 4325. We conclude
that the trial court did not abuse its broad discretion in determining that
compliance with the Legislature's mandate that "victims of domestic violence not
be required to finance their own abuse" (Cauley, supra, 138 Cal.App.4th at p.
1107) outweighed any interest that Kevin might have in receiving continued
temporary spousal support.

   Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in
terminating Kevin's temporary spousal support award.

B. The trial court erred in concluding that it was precluded from amending the
original child and spousal support awards, under Gruen

   Kevin contends that the trial court erred in concluding at the June 28
hearing that it lacked jurisdiction to reconsider Christine's income during the
months of September and October 2010 for purposes of awarding pendente lite
child and spousal support. Specifically, Kevin maintains that the trial court
erred in concluding that Gruen precluded it from reconsidering Christine's
income for these months because, unlike in Gruen, the trial court in this case
specifically reserved jurisdiction to make such a determination. Kevin's
contention raises a question of law, which we review de novo. (Gruen, supra, 191
Cal.App.4th at p. 637 [applying de novo standard of review to "purely legal
questions" raised on appeal].)

1. Governing law

   In Gruen, supra, 191 Cal.App.4th 627, this court concluded that the trial
court had erred in retroactively modifying a pendente lite child and spousal
support order. In that case, a husband filed for dissolution of his marriage and
applied for an OSC concerning child and spousal support, among other matters. (
Id. at p. 632.) On August 1, 2008, the trial court entered an order directing
the husband to pay his wife $40,000 per month in temporary support. Also on
August 1, the court appointed an expert to assist the court "in determining
[husband's] income available for support." (Id. at p. 633.) On August 21, the
husband asked the court to take his OSC off calendar insofar as it pertained to
support. (Ibid.) In February 2009, the husband filed a motion for "retroactive
reimbursement," in which he sought a "reduction in his support obligation,
retroactive to August 1, 2008," based on the expert's draft report concerning
his income. (Id. at pp. 633-634.) In June 2009, the trial court considered the
expert's final report and retroactively reduced the temporary support award,
effective August 1, 2008. (Id. at pp. 635-636.)

   In concluding that the trial court had erred in retroactively modifying its
August 1, 2008 order, the Gruen court noted that the August 1 order was
"final" and "immediately operative and directly appealable." (Gruen, supra, 191
Cal.App.4th at p. 639.) The Gruen court further stated that the trial court was
mistaken in thinking that it could "retroactively modify a temporary order." (
Ibid.; see id. at p. 638, quoting Murray, supra, 101 Cal.App.4th at p. 595 ["a
'court may not retroactively modify a prior order for temporary spousal support'
"] and quoting § 3603 ["An order made pursuant to this chapter [(i.e., for
pendente lite child or spousal support)] may be modified or terminated at any
time except as to an amount that accrued before the date of the filing of the
notice of motion or order to show cause to modify or terminate." (italics
added)].)

   The Gruen court also concluded that even prospective modification of the
order was improper under the circumstances of that case, stating, "[E]ven to the
extent the modifications of the August 1, 2008 order were prospective, they
exceeded the court's jurisdiction since they were not based on any pending
motion or OSC for modification." (Gruen, supra, 191 Cal.App.4th at p. 640.) In
reaching this conclusion, the Gruen court noted that the husband had taken his
original OSC off calendar and had never filed a motion to modify the August 1
support order. (Id. at pp. 640-641.)

2. Application

   Gruen is premised on two basic principles, neither of which precludes
amendment of the trial court's original spousal support award in this case. The
original support award at issue in Gruen was "final" and "directly appealable."
(Gruen, supra, 191 Cal.App.4th at p. 639.) The Gruen court relied on this
finality in concluding that the trial court lacked jurisdiction to retroactively
modify the original spousal support order at issue in that case. (Ibid.; see
Murray, supra, 101 Cal.App.4th at p. 595 [stating that court could not
retroactively modify a prior order for temporary spousal support because the
order "'is not merely a procedural ruling made during the course of the action
that the court may reconsider at any time before final judgment [citations], but
is directly appealable as a final judgment independently of the main action.
[Citation.]' "].)

    In contrast, in this case, the trial court expressly reserved jurisdiction
to amend its original support awards as to September and October 2010 based on
further consideration of evidence pertaining to Christine's income. Thus, unlike
in Gruen, in the present case, the parties' clear expectation was that the
original support awards were not final as to these months. (Cf. Gruen, supra,
191 Cal.App.4th at p. 639 ["[The wife] was entitled to rely on the amount of
temporary support ordered without the threat of having to repay or credit [the
husband] with any portion of accrued support."].) The trial court's original
child and spousal support awards in this case were not fully  dispositive of the
rights of the parties with respect to the amount of support to be awarded for
September and October 2010, and therefore did not constitute final support
orders as to those months. (See id. at pp. 637-638 ["'When a court renders an
interlocutory order collateral to the main issue, dispositive of the rights of
the parties in relation to the collateral matter, and directing payment of money
or performance of an act, direct appeal may be taken.'" (italics added)], citing
Skelley, supra, 18 Cal.3d at p. 368; see also Van Sickle, supra, 68 Cal.App.3d
at p. 737 ["to hold that interim and preliminary rulings or decisions affecting
severable and collateral matters arising in connection with the dissolution of a
marriage are appealable ... would pave the way to a piecemeal disposition of
such severable and collateral issues in contradiction of the very rationale upon
which the 'one final judgment' rule is predicated"].) Further, neither Gruen,
nor the authority upon which Gruen is based, precludes a trial court from
reserving jurisdiction to amend a nonfinal order based on the anticipated
presentation of additional evidence.

   In addition, the Gruen court concluded that the trial court lacked
jurisdiction to modify the original support order at issue in that case because
the husband had taken his original OSC off calendar and there was no pending
motion to modify the support order. (Gruen, supra, 191 Cal.App.4th at p. 640.)
In contrast, in this case, the trial court specifically reserved jurisdiction
over Kevin's August 2010 OSC seeking child and spousal support at the October
2010 spousal support hearing, and at no time did Kevin take his August 2010 OSC
off calendar. The trial court in this case thus continued to have jurisdiction
to render a final order on Kevin's August 2010 OSC. The trial court was mistaken
in concluding otherwise.

   Notwithstanding the trial court's error in concluding that it lacked
jurisdiction to amend the support awards for the months of September and October
2010, it is clear that any such error was harmless with respect to spousal
support. We concluded in part III.A., ante, that the trial court's order
terminating spousal support made clear that the court would not have awarded
Kevin any spousal support if the court had considered section 4325 at the
October 2010 hearing as required, and that the changed circumstances rule did
not prohibit the court from subsequently terminating spousal support based on
the court's belated consideration of the statute. In this part, we concluded
that the trial court's original spousal support award was not final with respect
to the amounts of spousal support to be awarded for the months of September and
October 2010. Under these circumstances, there is no basis for concluding that
the trial court would (or even could) have exercised its discretion to award
additional spousal support beyond that which it awarded originally in October
2010 without due consideration  of section 4325. Accordingly, we conclude that
the trial court committed harmless error in determining that Gruen precluded it
from amending the original spousal support order to award Kevin additional
temporary spousal support.

   With respect to child support, the court originally awarded Christine $7 a
month of pendente lite child support for the months of September and October
2010. On remand, the trial court may consider whether to amend the child support
award for these months based on Kevin's presentation of additional evidence
pertaining to Christine's income.13

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -13   We
recognize that in light of the likely de minimis nature of any potential
adjustment in Kevin's child support obligations for September and October 2010
(as noted above, Christine was originally awarded just $7 a month in child
support for these months), Kevin may choose not to pursue this matter further.
In that event, the trial court shall enter a final order stating that Christine
is to be awarded $7 a month for the months of September and October 2010.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

IV.

DISPOSITION

   The trial court's June 30, 2011 order terminating spousal support effective
July 1, 2011 is affirmed. The trial court's June 28, 2011 order is reversed
insofar as the court concluded that it lacked jurisdiction to amend the pendente
lite child support award for September and October 2010. The court may consider
on remand whether to amend the child support award for September and October
2010 based on Kevin's presentation of additional evidence pertaining to
Christine's income. Each party to bear his or her own costs on appeal.

   Huffman, Acting P. J., and Irion, J., concurred.

   Appellant's petition for review by the Supreme Court was denied December 19,
2012, S206560.


                              11 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of NANCY L. and LEE B. HARBACH.  NANCY L.
               HARBACH, Respondent, v. LEE B. HARBACH, Appellant

                                  No. D004649

           Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District,
                                  Division One

            195 Cal. App. 3d 629; 240 Cal. Rptr. 698; 1987 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2220


                               September 17, 1987

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of San Diego County, No. D159539, Alpha L.
Montgomery, Sr., Judge.

COUNSEL: L. Hunter Tracht for Appellant.

Sharron Voorhees for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Butler, J., with Todd, J., concurring.  Separate dissenting
opinion by Wiener, Acting P. J.

OPINION BY: BUTLER

OPINION

     Lee Brett Harbach and Nancy Lynn Harbach married August 17, 1974, separated
November 18, 1980, and their marriage was dissolved by an interlocutory decree
entered August 3, 1982.  The decree provided for support of the three children
of the marriage, division of property and the usual terms attendant upon
divorce.  The decree required Lee to pay $ 2,000 monthly spousal support "until
July 14, 1984 at which time [his] obligation to pay spousal support . . . shall
cease and terminate."

   Lee and Nancy then stipulated to and the court ordered on December 29, 1982,
a modification of the decree dividing and awarding community property, modifying
child support and revising spousal support requirements.  Paragraph 7 of the
modified decree required Lee to pay Nancy $ 2,000 monthly spousal support "until
the death of either party, [her] remarriage, or December 31,  1986, whichever
first shall occur." Paragraph 7 then recites the payment of spousal support "is
premised" upon the expectation Nancy would obtain an advanced degree, set out
her academic obligations to enroll for at least nine credit hours for each
semester, required a report to  Lee about her progress and provided that her
failure to take the minimum hours would be a change of circumstance, entitling
Lee to move for support modification. Paragraph 7 concludes: "Other than as set
forth in this paragraph, spousal support shall be non-modifiable both as to term
and amount."

    January 28, 1986, before the termination of Lee's spousal support obligation
as modified to December 31, 1986, Nancy petitioned the court for a further
modification of the decree as to child custody, child support, spousal support,
medical and psychological expenses, babysitting costs and tutoring costs.  Nancy
requested an extension of the termination date extended to December 31, 1986, by
the modification, noting that extension was premised on the expectation she
would have received her graduate degree. 1 She pointed out an internship of
3,000 hours was required to secure her certificate as a family and child
counselor, saying: "Although I have been continuously pursuing training as a
counselor since I began school, the requirement of an internship was not known
to [Lee] or me at the time we stipulated to the spousal support issue.  The
internship is an essential part of my education and ability to be employed.  In
spite of the fact that [Lee] and I stipulated to the non-modifiability of the
termination date for spousal support, I request the Court extend the payments
through the duration of my internship. At that time, I will be employable and
able to support myself."

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   The court
found Nancy would receive her degree as of April 30, 1987, and noted Lee's
concession the December 31, 1986, termination date was based on the expectation
the degree would be awarded by that date.  The court rejected Nancy's request to
extend spousal support over the 3,000 hours of internship.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Lee filed a declaration in response and an order to show cause to modify and
terminate the stipulated spousal support for Nancy's failure to prove enrollment
for a graduate degree, and to reinstate the original decree entered August 3,
1982, which called for spousal support termination on July 15, 1984.

   The court extended the term of spousal support: "1.  The term of spousal
support shall be extended from the termination date of December 31, 1986 to
April 30, 1987, so as to allow [Nancy] to matriculate with her Masters Degree in
psychology." The court ordered Lee to pay Nancy's attorney $ 4,000 toward her
attorney fees, denied Lee's request to rescind the December 29, 1982,
modification and made further orders not relevant here.

   Lee appeals, contending the decree as modified December 29, 1982, was
nonmodifiable thereafter and the court had no jurisdiction to extend support
beyond December 31, 1986.  He also argues abuse of discretion in awarding
attorney fees.

   I

   Paragraph 7 of the modified decree purports to provide a one-way street for
modification or termination by Lee upon the happening of events: "[Lee's]
payment of spousal support for the period July 15, 1984, through December 31,
1986, is premised upon the expectation that [Nancy] will be attending an
accredited college and/or graduate school to obtain an advanced degree. [Nancy],
between such dates, shall be required to attend and take 9 credit hours per
semester (fall & spring) unless prevented from doing so by the physical illness
of herself or any of the minor children of the parties in her custody or other
justifiable cause.  [Nancy] shall be required, during such prescribed period, to
inform [Lee] whenever she is not enrolled nor taking at least 9 credit hours
during any semester. In addition, [Nancy] shall be required to submit to [Lee]
at the end of each semester proof in writing that she attended and took at least
9 credit hours during that semester. Failure to enroll or take a minimum of 9
credit hours per semester at an accredited college or graduate school shall be a
presumed change of circumstances which will entitle [Lee] to move the court for
a modification of spousal support, and the court retains jurisdiction to modify
or terminate spousal support if no justifiable case exists for [Nancy's] taking
less than nine units or her non-enrollment during the prescribed period.  Other
than as set forth in this paragraph,  spousal support shall be non-modifiable
both as to term and amount." As we have seen, when Nancy moved to extend the
December 31, 1986, termination date, Lee responded by seeking modification and
termination for Nancy's failure to prove enrollment. The court denied Lee's
request.  The court thus found Lee did not establish any basis for modification
or termination for Nancy's failure to follow paragraph 7 requirements for
enrollment.

   We consider the effect of the final sentence of paragraph 7: "Other than as
set forth in this paragraph [retention of jurisdiction to modify or terminate if
Nancy takes less than nine units or fails to enroll], spousal support shall be
non-modifiable both as to term and amount."

   In In re Marriage of Foreman (1986) 183 Cal.App.3d 129 [228 Cal.Rptr. 4], we
considered the effect of an interlocutory judgment which incorporated a
settlement agreement with spousal support. There, $ 1,300 monthly spousal
support was payable until the wife remarried, died or a "'total of ten years,
whichever event first occurs.'" ( Id. at p. 131.) Thereafter, support reduced to
"'$ 1.00 per year for an additional one year, and then terminate.'"

    "'The said spousal support payments provided hereunder, shall not be
modifiable under any circumstances until June 30, 1977.  Thereafter, said
support payments may be modified by the court on a proper showing by either
party.'" (Ibid.) In the 11th year, wife requested modification and extension.
We affirmed an increase in the spousal support and denial of the extension
beyond the eleventh year.  We construed Civil Code 2 section 4801, subdivision
(d) as an express legislative limitation on the power of a court to modify under
section 4811.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   All
statutory references are to the Civil Code unless otherwise specified.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   "Assuming the language regarding jurisdiction to modify in section 4811
otherwise could be subject to that interpretation, the language in section 4801,
subdivision (d) is an express legislative limitation on that power, requiring
reservation of jurisdiction to be stated by specific language in the decree of
dissolution to extend the period of support.  Otherwise, there would be no
purpose for that section, because it always would be ineffective to prevent
extensions in light of the court's inherent power to modify pursuant to section
4811.  In order to make the statutory scheme rational, section 4811 must be
deemed to refer only to the power to modify the terms of the support order for
the time period designated in the original order of support, and the ability to
extend that period of time deemed legislatively limited by section 4801,
subdivision (d) to those situations where there has been an express reservation
of jurisdiction in the original decree." ( Id. at p. 134.)

   Nancy argues In re Marriage of Vomacka (1984) 36 Cal.3d 459 [204 Cal.Rptr.
568, 683 P.2d 248], and In re Marriage of Benson (1985) 171 Cal.App.3d 907 [217
Cal.Rptr. 589], both of which we discussed and distinguished in Foreman, are
applicable here.  The decree in Vomacka after awarding spousal support until
further order of the court, death of either party, the wife's remarriage, or
August 1, 1982, whichever first occurs, reserved jurisdiction in the court "'
regarding spousal support until September 1, 1984, at which time [wife's] right
to request spousal support from [husband] shall terminate forever.'" ( Id. at
pp. 461-462, their brackets and italics.) The court held the retention of
jurisdiction provision ambiguous and held the decree reserved jurisdiction in
the court to extend the period of spousal support, all as we discussed in
Foreman.

   The decree in Benson called for spousal support commencing June 1, 1977, and
"'continuing until the death of either party, [wife's] remarriage, until
modified by a court of competent jurisdiction or until the expiration of eight
(8) years, whichever first occurs.'" (171 Cal.App.3d at p. 910, their brackets
and italics.) The Court of Appeal, relying  on Vomacka, found the  reservation
of jurisdiction to modify the decree before the expiration of eight years
empowered the court to extend the spousal support term.

     Nancy contends the inclusion in paragraph 7 of Lee's right to request
modification or termination if she fails to enroll or carry nine units continues
jurisdiction in the court to extend the term to accomplish the premise on which
the modification rests, i.e., attainment of the graduate degree.

   This contention has merit.  The decree here, taken as a whole, contemplated
Nancy's attainment of an advanced degree. The timespan estimated by the parties
within which the degree could be obtained fell short by four months.  The court
made a finding Lee and Nancy both contemplated the degree would be awarded by
December 31, 1986.  In construing the modification decree, the court took into
account this mutual mistake of the parties and extended the spousal support by
four months to effectuate the intent of the parties.  Unlike Foreman,
jurisdiction was retained by the court to modify the decree in the event Nancy
failed to carry out her scholastic obligations.  That retained jurisdiction
supports the extension of the term to carry out the intent of the parties as
expressed in paragraph 7.  (See In re Marriage of Andreen (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d
667, 673 [143 Cal.Rptr. 94].)

   II

   Lee's attack on the $ 4,000 award of attorney fees is meritless.  The award
was authorized by statute (§ 4370) and substantial evidence supports it.

   Order affirmed.

DISSENT BY: WIENER

DISSENT

   WIENER, Acting P. J. I dissent.  The majority rest their decision to affirm
the order extending Lee's obligation to pay spousal support on what they
describe as the parties' mutual mistake. They say, "In construing the
modification decree, the court took into account this mutual mistake of the
parties and extended the spousal support by four months to effectuate the intent
of the parties.  Unlike Foreman, jurisdiction was retained by the court to
modify the decree in the event Nancy failed to carry out her scholastic
obligations." (Maj. opn. ante.) Although the logic of this reasoning may be
compelling there is no legal or factual basis for its application.  Even Nancy
does not suggest the trial court's power to modify spousal support is tied to
the parties' mutual mistake as to when she was to obtain her graduate degree.
She argues the trial court's power to modify rests on two separate theories.
The first is based on Vomacka and its progeny.  The second is on a  unique
cost/benefit analysis where the error is not prejudicial because the cost to Lee
of four months additional support is insignificant compared to his benefits when
he no longer is obligated to pay spousal support.

   This latter argument asks us to not only ignore the law, but it turns the
rule of prejudicial error on its ear.  Our responsibility is to first determine
whether the trial court erred, and if so, whether that error is prejudicial.
Prejudice frequently will be determined from the nature of the error itself.
The case before us is illustrative.  Here, I believe the error is so
fundamental, i.e., the court acted in excess of its jurisdiction, its order is
necessarily prejudicial. And in any event even though the dollar has been
declining, I think $ 8,000 can hardly be viewed as de minimis.

   Obviously I believe In re Marriage of Foreman (1986) 183 Cal.App.3d 129 [228
Cal.Rptr. 4] controls this case and our obligation to follow precedent overrides
whatever personal view I or the other members of this panel may have as to the
fairness of what the trial court attempted to accomplish.

   Lee and Nancy negotiated a spousal support agreement which could be modified
only on certain conditions.  The parties said that except as to those conditions
"spousal support shall be non-modifiable as to term and amount." I believe their
intent is clear.  Their earlier dealings caused Lee to  have a jaundiced view of
his wife's good faith in pursuing her education.  He wanted to be assured that
if without good cause she failed to attend her scheduled classes he would be
able to either modify his spousal support obligation or terminate it entirely.
There is nothing in the law which invalidates this provision.  As a result of
the give and take of negotiations the parties can agree to limit the
circumstances in which spousal support can be modified. There is also nothing in
the law to preclude those circumstances from affecting only one of the parties
and not both.  A unilateral change of circumstances rather than bilateral is a
permissible bargain.

   Here the parties through their counsel agreed that Lee would be able to
modify spousal support for specified reasons.  The parties agreed that Nancy
would not have a comparable right.  The fact that I think I know the reasons why
Lee insisted on this bargain is unimportant.  What is important is that our
analysis of the trial court ruling must rest on the express language of the
agreement and not on our retrospective belief of what may be in the parties'
best interests.  Here the only interpretation of the agreement is that Nancy
gave up her right to modify spousal support in exchange for the promises
contained in their stipulation.  To affirm the trial court ruling the majority
not only overlook the text of the parties' stipulation, but reject the
reasonable inference that if the parties wanted Nancy to retain the right to
modify spousal support their agreement would have so provided.

    Even if I am wrong in my conclusion that Nancy did not have the right to
modify spousal support, I could not join the majority in this case.
Modification of spousal support orders rests on legal doctrine -- change of
circumstances.  Here there are none.  The only change of circumstances is the
parties' mutual mistake, an event which occurred before and not after the
spousal support order.  By definition the requisite change of circumstances must
involve events which follow the order sought to be modified.

   Moreover, there is nothing in this record to suggest the final date of
support, December 31, 1986, was anything other than a carefully negotiated term
which we must honor.  While Nancy may have erred in computing the termination
date of her educational quest, her unilateral error cannot be construed as a
mutual error and also a change of circumstances in the context of the trial.

   Appellate courts should be chary in remaking negotiated bargains based upon
personalized retrospective perception of past events.  Parties who negotiate
their contracts do so based on their prospective view of what they think is in
their best interest.  Whether a party's prospective view is accurate is inherent
in the risk associated with the negotiating process.  When a court remakes a
bargain at the request of one party for no other reason than that party's later
dissatisfaction with the agreement, a court not only diminishes the bargaining
process itself, but strays from the judicial restraint essential to a rational
judicial process.  Thus my concern in this case is not merely with an alleged $
8,000 error.  I am concerned because the majority have failed to respect the
integrity of the contract-making process and have decided this case on
subjective considerations which should be irrelevant to the dispute resolution
process.

   Because of my conclusion the court prejudicially erred in modifying the
spousal support order, I would also reverse the order for attorneys' fees.


                              12 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In re Marriage of CANDACE PENDLETON and BARRY I. FIREMAN.
              CANDACE PENDLETON, Respondent, v. BARRY I. FIREMAN,
                                   Appellant.

                                  No. S070018.

                          SUPREME COURT OF CALIFORNIA

          24 Cal. 4th 39; 5 P.3d 839; 99 Cal. Rptr. 2d 278; 2000 Cal.
            LEXIS 6116; 2000 Cal. Daily Op. Service 6993; 2000 Daily
                                Journal DAR 9275


                            August 21, 2000, Decided

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:      Rehearing Denied November 1, 2000, Reported at: 2000
Cal. LEXIS 8581.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Los Angeles County. Super. Ct. No. SD010709.
Keith M. Clemens, Commissioner.

   Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District, Division One. No.
B113293.

COUNSEL: Lascher & Lascher, Wendy C. Lascher; Wasser, Rosenson & Carter and John
Foley for Appellant.

Kolodny & Anteau, Ronald W. Anteau, Peter Hermes and James L. Keane for
Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Baxter, J., with Werdegar, Chin, Brown, JJ., and Hastings,
J., * concurring. Concurring opinion by Mosk, Acting C. J. (see p. 54).
Dissenting opinion by Kennard, J. (see p. 54).

*   Associate Justice of the Court of Appeal, Second Appellate District,
Division Four, assigned by the Chief Justice pursuant to article VI, section 6
of the California Constitution.

OPINION BY: BAXTER

OPINION

      BAXTER, J.

   We are asked to decide whether a premarital agreement in which the parties to
be married waive the right to spousal support in case of dissolution is
enforceable. 1 The Court of Appeal held that such agreements are enforceable. It
is not necessary to decide in this case whether all such agreements are
enforceable regardless of the circumstances of the parties at the time
enforcement is sought. We conclude that no policy of this state makes an
agreement like that entered into by the parties to this action per se
unenforceable, and affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   The right
to spousal support is statutory.  Family Code section 4330, subdivision (a),
provides: "In a judgment of dissolution of marriage or legal separation of the
parties, the court may order a party to pay for the support of the other party
an amount, for a period of time, that the court determines is just and
reasonable, based on the standard of living established during the marriage,
taking into consideration the circumstances as provided in Chapter 2 (commencing
with Section 4320)."

   Unless otherwise indicated, all statutory references herein are to the Family
Code.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

 I. BACKGROUND

   Candace Pendleton and Barry I. Fireman married on July 13, 1991. On July 1,
1991, they had executed a premarital agreement which provided, inter alia:
"[B]oth parties now and forever waive, in the event of a dissolution of the
marriage, all rights to any type of spousal support or child support from the
other; . . ." The  agreement acknowledged that each party had been represented
by independent counsel in the negotiation and preparation of the agreement, that
counsel had advised each of the meaning and legal consequences of the agreement,
and that each party had read and understood the agreement and its legal
consequences. Their respective counsel certified that this had been done and
that their clients understood the meaning and legal consequences of the
agreement and executed it freely and voluntarily.

    The couple separated in 1995, and on April 3, 1996, Candace filed a petition
for dissolution of the marriage and subsequently sought spousal support. Candace
acknowledged the existence of a premarital agreement in a declaration that
accompanied her request for spousal support, stating that she was then
investigating its validity. At the time the dissolution petition was filed, each
party had a net worth of approximately $ 2.5 million. Candace, who had two
children from a prior marriage, held a master's degree and was an aspiring
writer. Barry, who held a doctorate in pharmacology and a law degree, was a
businessman with ownership interests in numerous companies and business
ventures. Candace declared that her monthly gross income was $ 5,772, consisting
of $ 1,352 in Social Security benefits for two children from a prior marriage, $
2,000 from a brokerage account, and $ 2,420 in rental income. Her net monthly
income was $ 4,233.

   Barry sought to strike the pleading seeking support or to have a separate
trial on the validity of the prenuptial agreement. The court denied the motion
for separate trial, concluding that discovery on the issue of validity would
overlap that on other issues and would not result in saving time or litigation
costs. The court ruled that the waiver of spousal support was against public
policy  and thus was unenforceable, 2 noted that the couple had maintained a
lifestyle in the high $ 20,000 to $ 32,000 per month range, and ordered Barry to
pay temporary spousal support of $ 8,500 per month.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   The order
explained: "Assuming arguendo that the validity and enforceability of the waiver
of spousal support provision of the parties' prenuptial agreement can be tested
in a motion to strike, the court denied this motion on the ground that a waiver
of spousal support in a premarital agreement is void and unenforceable as
against California public policy. The court is persuaded that the legislative
history of the statute dealing with the permissible subjects of premarital
agreements indicated that the Legislature intended to omit a provision in the
California version of the Uniform Premarital Agreement Act (UPAA) that allowed
for a premarital waiver of spousal support.

   "The court is further persuaded that the pre-UPAA cases that hold that
premarital agreements that diminish or waive a party's obligation to pay spousal
support to the other party to the marriage are unenforceable as against public
policy and would continue to be so held after the passage of the UPAA.

   "At least one purpose of a policy that a spousal support waiver will be
unenforceable in this state is to protect the state, not just a party to the
marriage. A person's financial circumstances can change markedly from those
found just prior to that person's marriage. A valid premarital spousal support
waiver could produce spouses who at the time of their marriage have assets and
earning capacity to support themselves without spousal support, but by the time
of the dissolution of their marriages may be unable to support themselves and in
need of financial support. The state has an interest in having such needy
spouses supported by their spouses if possible. Just as the state has a serious
fiscal interest in not paying for support of children if there is a parent with
the capacity to support that parent's children, the state has a fiscal interest
in seeing that it not be forced to support needy former spouses if the non-needy
former spouse is able to contribute to the support of the needy former spouse
and if ordering the payment of such support is warranted, pursuant to the
principles of Family Code § 4320. Thus the same principles and policies that
underlie the public policy against permitting a binding waiver of child support
would apply to premarital waivers of spousal support."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     On Barry's appeal, the Court of Appeal reversed the order for temporary
spousal support. The Court of Appeal acknowledged that the Legislature had
deleted subdivision (a)(4) from section 3  of the Uniform Premarital Agreement
Act (Uniform Act) prior to adopting the act in 1985.  3 The omitted subdivision
would have expressly permitted the parties to a premarital agreement to contract
with respect to modification or elimination of spousal support. (See 9B West's
U. Laws Ann. (1987) U. Premarital Agreement Act (1983) § 3, pp. 373-374.) The
Court of Appeal concluded, however, that the Legislature intended to leave the
question of whether spousal support waivers in premarital agreements violate
public policy to the courts and that there was presently no authority governing
the public policy question. In reaching the latter conclusion, the court
reasoned that the question had not been reconsidered after the adoption of the
Family Law Act of 1969 (Civ. Code, former § 4000 et seq.), which repealed the
law permitting divorce only on a showing of fault, or in light of current law
that gives both spouses equal control over management and control of community
property ( Fam. Code, §§ 1100- 1103) and mandates equal division on dissolution
( Fam. Code, § 2550). In the view of the Court of Appeal, the current state of
family law is one that "should not per se prohibit premarital spousal support
waivers or limitations. All the protection the parties need is expressly
provided by the California [version of the Uniform] Act." The Court of Appeal
therefore remanded the matter to the trial court which, in the belief that such
waivers were per se unenforceable, had not determined whether this agreement was
enforceable under the rules set forth in section 1615 and the policies
underlying the Uniform Act and the California version thereof.  4

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   The
California version of the Uniform Act was enacted in 1985 as Civil Code section
5300 et seq., which was repealed in 1992, effective January 1, 1994, and
reenacted as part of the new Family Code section 1600 et seq. ( Fam. Code, §
1601.) The California version of section 3 of the Uniform Act is now Family Code
section 1612. (Stats. 1992, ch. 162, § 3, p. 464; id., § 10, p. 500.)
4   Section 1615: "(a) A premarital agreement is not enforceable if the party
against whom enforcement is sought proves either of the following:

   "(1) That party did not execute the agreement voluntarily.

   "(2) The agreement was unconscionable when it was executed and, before
execution of the agreement, all of the following applied to that party:

   "(A) That party was not provided a fair and reasonable disclosure of the
property or financial obligations of the other party.

   "(B) That party did not voluntarily and expressly waive, in writing, any
right to disclosure of the property or financial obligations of the other party
beyond the disclosure provided.

   "(C) That party did not have, or reasonably could not have had, an adequate
knowledge of the property or financial obligations of the other party.

   "(b) An issue of unconscionability of a premarital agreement shall be decided
by the court as a matter of law."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     II. DISCUSSION

    Article 2 of the California Uniform Premarital Agreement Act (§ 1610 et
seq.) governs premarital agreements. A premarital agreement is "an agreement
between prospective spouses made in contemplation of marriage and to be
effective upon marriage." (§ 1610, subd. (a).) Section 1612 specifies the
permissible objects of a premarital agreement:

   "(a) Parties to a premarital agreement may contract with respect to all of
the following:

   "(1) The rights and obligations of each of the parties in any of the property
of either or both of them whenever and wherever acquired or located.

   "(2) The right to buy, sell, use, transfer, exchange, abandon, lease,
consume, expend, assign, create a security interest in, mortgage, encumber,
dispose of, or otherwise manage and control property.

   "(3) The disposition of property upon separation, marital dissolution, death,
or the occurrence or nonoccurrence of any other event.

    "(4) The making of a will, trust, or other arrangement to carry out the
provisions of the agreement.

   "(5) The ownership rights in and disposition of the death benefit from a life
insurance policy.

   "(6) The choice of law governing the construction of the agreement.

   "(7) Any other matter, including their personal rights and obligations, not
in violation of public policy or a statute imposing a criminal penalty.

   "(b) The right of a child to support may not be adversely affected by a
premarital agreement."

   As noted, ante, the California version of the Uniform Act omits subdivision
(a)(4) of section 3 of the Uniform Act (subdivision (a)(4)). When first
introduced on March 7, 1985, Senate Bill No. 1143 (1985-1986 Reg. Sess.) (Senate
Bill 1143), the California version of the Uniform Act, included subdivision
(a)(4), and thus listed among the permissible subjects of a premarital agreement
"the modification or elimination of spousal support." The spousal support waiver
provision was deleted by amendment. (Assem.  Amend. to Sen. Bill No. 1143
(1985-1986 Reg. Sess.) Aug. 28, 1985.) The amendment of Senate Bill 1143 that
deleted subdivision (a)(4) simultaneously deleted a provision, subdivision (b)
of section 6 of the Uniform Act, which provided: "If a provision of a premarital
agreement modifies or eliminates spousal support and that modification or
elimination causes one party to the agreement to be eligible for support under a
program of public assistance at the time of separation or marital dissolution, a
court, notwithstanding the terms of the agreement, may require the other party
to provide support to the extent necessary to avoid that eligibility." (Sen.
Bill No. 1143 (1985-1986 Reg. Sess.) Mar. 7, 1985; Assem. Amend. to Sen. Bill
No. 1143 (1985-1986 Reg. Sess.) Aug. 28, 1985.) As enacted, Senate Bill 1143
became Civil Code former section 5315, now Family Code section 1612.

   The Court of Appeal held that neither the Legislature's deletion from the
legislation of express authorization for premarital waivers of spousal support,
nor past cases refusing to enforce waivers of spousal support, preclude such
waivers today. The court reasoned that the legislative history of section 1612
suggested that, in omitting subdivision (a)(4) of the Uniform Act, the
Legislature intended to leave the enforceability of spousal support waivers to
the courts. It found support for that conclusion in two reports by the Assembly
Subcommittee on Administration of Justice. The first was prepared for an August
19, 1985, hearing on Senate Bill 1143. Senate Bill 1143 repealed prior statutory
law governing premarital agreements and enacted the Uniform Act. In the first
report staff advised that California courts did not permit enforcement of
premarital agreements on spousal support and recommended deletion "to allow
California case law to continue to prevail on the issue of spousal support in
premarital agreements." (Assem. Subcom. on Admin. of Justice, Rep. on Sen. Bill
No. 1143 (1985-1986 Reg. Sess.) for Aug. 19, 1985, hearing, p. 3.)

   The second report, prepared after the amendment passed, stated that as a
result of the amendment "California case law would . . . prevail on the issue of
spousal support in premarital agreements. [P] There is a split in authority
among the states as to whether a premarital agreement may control on the issue
of spousal support. Some states, such as California, do not permit a premarital
agreement to control this issue. See In re Marriage of Dawley, 17 Cal. 3d 342
[131 Cal. Rptr. 3, 551 P.2d 323] (1976), in which the court notes that the
enforcement of provisions in premarital contracts to waive or limit spousal
support rights is barred because such provisions are considered promotive of
divorce." (Assem. Subcom. on Admin. of Justice, Rep. on Sen. Bill No. 1143
(1985-1986 Reg. Sess.) as amended Aug. 28, 1985, p. 3.) The Court of Appeal
understood this history to mean that the Legislature recognized that
enforceability of spousal support waivers is a question for the courts, not the
Legislature.

    At the time the California version of the Uniform Act was adopted, this
court had held that agreements waiving the right to spousal support were
unenforceable as being against public policy if the waiver would promote or
encourage dissolution. This court had held in In re Marriage of Higgason (1973)
10 Cal. 3d 476, 485 [110 Cal. Rptr. 897, 516 P.2d 289] (Higgason), speaking of
both spousal support and property division, that to be valid, premarital
agreements must be made "in contemplation that the marriage relation will
continue until the parties are separated by death. Contracts which facilitate
divorce or separation by providing for a settlement only in the event of such an
occurrence are void as against public policy. [Citations.] [P] Insofar as an
antenuptial agreement relates to the disposition of the property of the
respective parties, and does not seek to alter support obligations imposed by
law, it will be upheld." At issue in Higgason was an agreement in which both
husband and wife waived all interest in the property of the other party as well
as the right to support. The court concluded that a purported waiver was invalid
as against public policy insofar as the agreement sought to alter the wife's
statutory obligation to support the husband during marriage. The court also held
that the agreement did not preclude exercise of the court's discretionary power
to award postdissolution support.  (10 Cal. 3d at pp. 487-488.) Although the
basis for the latter holding is not made clear in the opinion, it appears to be
that married persons assume, by means of the marriage contract, an obligation
for support that continues throughout the lifetime of the parties regardless of
whether they live together or apart, and any agreement to waive that obligation
is also unenforceable.

   When the issue of enforceability of premarital agreements next arose in In re
Marriage of Dawley (1976) 17 Cal. 3d 342 [131 Cal. Rptr. 3, 551 P.2d 323] (
Dawley), where the parties had agreed before marriage that the earnings and
property acquired during marriage would be held as separate property, the court
concluded that Higgason had misstated the law in stating that premarital
agreements must be made in contemplation that the marriage would continue
throughout the lifetime of the parties and disapproved that Higgason dictum. (
Dawley, at p. 352.) We also explained that, apart from Higgason, "California
courts have uniformly held that contracts offend the state policy favoring
marriage only" if, objectively viewed, by its terms the contract promotes
dissolution of marriage. (Dawley, at p. 350.) We noted in Dawley that in two
cases ( Barham v. Barham (1949) 33 Cal. 2d 416 [202 P.2d 289] and Whiting v.
Whiting (1923) 62 Cal. App.. 157 [216 P. 92]) provisions in agreements that
waived or limited spousal support rights had been invalidated on the basis that
they promoted divorce,  while other provisions containing property divisions
were enforced; but Dawley did not endorse or otherwise approve those decisions.
( Dawley, supra, 17 Cal. 3d at p. 351.)  Notably, in Dawley we did not
distinguish premarital agreements governing property rights and those governing
spousal support. Our discussion of the enforceability of premarital agreements
in no way suggested that spousal support waivers were per se unenforceable. The
rule we stated was: "[A]n antenuptial agreement violates the state policy
favoring marriage only insofar as its terms encourage or promote dissolution." (
Id. at p. 352.) 5

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   Dawley
also observed that use of the term "facilitate" in past cases describing
unenforceable premarital agreements was misleading, since any such agreement
could be said to facilitate dissolution by making a dissolution proceeding
shorter and less expensive. Speaking in the context of a property agreement, we
said that "public policy does not render property agreements unenforceable
merely because such agreements simplify the division of marital property: it is
only when the agreement encourages or promotes dissolution that it offends the
public policy to foster and protect marriage." (Dawley, supra, 17 Cal. 3d at p.
350, fn. 5.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     The parties have not called our attention to any legislative history other
than the two legislative reports, the latter of which did not accurately state
the holding of this court in Dawley, 6 and neither of which adequately explains
the legislative purpose in omitting subdivision (a)(4). Two possible
interpretations of the Legislature's intent in omitting express authority for
premarital waivers of spousal support come to mind. The Legislature may have
intended to deny couples the right to enter into any premarital agreement
regarding spousal support by adopting what the committee report erroneously
described as the existing case law under which premarital waivers would be per
se unenforceable. Alternatively, the Legislature may have concluded that policy
governing spousal support agreements, having been established by the court in
the past, should continue to evolve in the court.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   Candace
asks the court to take judicial notice of copies of: (1) a letter dated August
14, 1985, to Assemblyman Lloyd G. Connelly, from the Family Law Section of the
State Bar of California opposing the inclusion in Senate Bill 1143 of
authorization for premarital waivers of spousal support; (2) a June 6, 1985,
letter to the same effect to Senator Robert Beverly; (3) various sections of the
New Jersey version of the Uniform Premarital Agreement Act ( N.J. Stat. Ann. §
37:2-31 et seq.); and (4) former section 159 of the Civil Code, as originally
enacted in 1872 and repealed in 1969 (replaced by Civ. Code, former § 4802; see
now Fam. Code, §§ 1620, 3580).

   The first two items, although bearing a Legislative Intent Service stamp, are
not certified copies and it is not apparent that either was considered by the
Legislature when Senate Bill 1143 was considered. There is no basis for an
assumption that such letters reflect legislative intent. Judicial notice may be
taken of the law of another state. ( Evid. Code, § 452, subd. (a).) However,
that law was not enacted until 1988 and thus is not relevant to legislative
intent in this state. We therefore deny the request for judicial notice.

   The position of the Women Lawyers' Association of Los Angeles was made clear
to the Legislature in the subcommittee report discussed herein which quoted
parts of it. That report listed the Family Law Section of the State Bar as a
supporter of Senate Bill 1143, a position that later changed, as reflected in
the referenced letter. The request for judicial notice of former section 159 of
the Civil Code is granted.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The public policy under which waivers of spousal support once were held
unenforceable was explained in Loveren v. Loveren (1895) 106 Cal. 509, 512  [39
P. 801], quoting Phillips v. Thorp (1883) 10 Or. 494, 496-497 [1883 WL 1110]: "
'The authorities are uniform in holding that any contract between the parties
having for its object the dissolution of the marriage contract, or facilitating
that result, such as an agreement by the defendant in a pending action for
divorce to withdraw his or her opposition and to make no defense, is void as
contra bonos mores'; and that courts 'will esteem it their duty to interfere,
upon their own motion, whenever it appears the dissolution is sought to be
effected by the connivance or collusion of the parties.' " 7 (See also Pereira
v. Pereira (1909) 156 Cal. 1, 5 [103 P. 488].) Another concern was that a man
should not be able to contract before marriage against the liability to his wife
that he would incur should he commit offenses against the wife during the
marriage. (See  Barham v. Barham, supra, 33 Cal. 2d at p. 428.) The rule those
decisions implemented found its origin in the common law, but the policy had
been declared by the Legislature in 1872 with the adoption of the Civil Code.
Former section 159 of the Civil Code then provided: "A husband and wife cannot,
by any contract with each other, alter their legal relations, except as to
property, . . . and except that they may agree to an immediate separation, and
may make provision  for the support of either of them and of their children
during such separation." 8

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   The
Oregon court was itself quoting Adams v. Adams (1878) 25 Minn. 72, 79.
8   At that time, the court was empowered to award support to a wife to whom a
divorce was granted and could also award maintenance even if the divorce was
denied. (Civ. Code, former §§ 136, 139, both enacted 1872 and repealed by Stats.
1969, ch. 1608, § 3, p. 3313.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Barry suggests, and we agree, that changes in the law governing the spousal
relation warrant reexamination of the assumptions and policy underlying the
refusal to enforce waivers of spousal support. We may not do so, however, if the
Legislature intends that section 1612 control the permissible subjects of a
premarital agreement and that public policy with respect to waiver of spousal
support no longer be governed by the common law subject to reconsideration and
development by the courts. (Cf.  Rodriguez v. Bethlehem Steel Corp. (1974) 12
Cal. 3d 382, 394 [115 Cal. Rptr. 765, 525 P.2d 669].)

     It is clear that the Legislature understood that the omission of
authorization for premarital waivers of spousal support in section 1612 would
leave the law as it was in 1985. The subcommittee reports reflect that
understanding. We do not agree with respondent and the dissent, however, that in
so doing the Legislature thereby abrogated the role of the courts in developing
the law governing premarital waivers of spousal support. We will not presume
that the Legislature intended that the law remain static. It would be
unreasonable to assume that the Legislature intended the common law of the 19th
century to govern the marital relationship in the 21st century. The  most
reasonable understanding of the Legislature's purpose when it omitted
subdivision (a)(4) is that it was satisfied with the evolution of the common law
governing premarital waivers of spousal support and intended to permit that
evolution to continue. Had the Legislature intended to forbid spousal support
waivers, it is logical to assume that it would have done so by expressly
including spousal support in subdivision (b) of section 1612, which reads: "The
right of a child to support may not be adversely affected by a premarital
agreement." We agree with the Court of Appeal, therefore, that the court is free
to reexamine the assumptions that underlie the common law rule that premarital
spousal support waivers promote dissolution and for that reason contravene
public policy.  Having done so, we also agree with the Court of Appeal that the
common law policy,  based on assumptions that dissolution of marriage is
contrary to public policy and that premarital waivers of spousal support may
promote dissolution, is anachronistic.

   Some 41 jurisdictions have already abandoned the common law restrictions on
premarital waivers of spousal support. In 21 jurisdictions, premarital waivers
of spousal support are authorized by statutes that either adopt all or
substantially all of the provisions of the Uniform Act. 9 One jurisdiction (New
York) had other statutory authorization for such waivers, 10 and in another 18
the right to enforce a premarital waiver of spousal  support exists pursuant to
judicial decision.  11

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -9   Arizona (
Ariz. Rev. Stat. § 25-203); Arkansas ( Ark. Code Ann. § 9-11-403); Connecticut (
Conn. Gen. Stat. Ann. § 46b-36d); Delaware ( Del. Code Ann. tit. 13, § 323),
District of Columbia ( D.C. Code Ann. § 30-143 (1981)); Hawaii ( Haw. Rev. Stat.
§ 572D-3); Idaho ( Idaho Code § 32-923); Illinois ( 750 Ill. Comp. Stat. 10/4);
Kansas ( Kan. Stat. Ann. § 23-804); Maine ( Me. Rev. Stat. Ann. tit. 19-A, § 604
); Montana ( Mont. Code Ann. § 40-2-605); Nebraska ( Neb. Rev. Stat. § 42-1004);
Nevada ( Nev. Rev. Stat. § 123A.050); New Jersey ( N.J. Stat. Ann. § 37:2-34);
North Carolina ( N.C. Gen. Stat. § 52B-4); North Dakota ( N.D. Cent. Code §
14-03.1-03); Oregon ( Or. Rev. Stat. § 108.710); Rhode Island ( R.I. Gen. Laws §
15-17-3); Texas ( Tex. Fam. Code Ann. § 4.003); Utah ( Utah Code Ann. § 30-8-4);
and Virginia ( Va. Code Ann. § 20-150). An Indiana statute is similar to the
Uniform Act. ( Ind. Code § 31-11-3-5.)
10   New York ( N.Y. Dom. Rel. Law § 236, pt. B, 3).
11   Alabama ( Ex parte Walters (Ala. 1991) 580 So.2d 1352, 1354 [enforceable if
" '[1] . . . the consideration was adequate and . . . the entire transaction was
fair, just and equitable from the other person's point of view, or [2] . . . the
agreement was freely and voluntarily entered into by the other party with
competent independent advice and full knowledge of her interest in the estate
and its approximate value' "]); Alaska ( Brooks v. Brooks (Alaska 1987) 733 P.2d
1044, 1050-1051 ["prenuptial agreements legally procured and ostensibly fair in
result are valid and can be enforced"]); Colorado ( Newman v. Newman (Colo.
1982) 653 P.2d. 728, 731-734 [parties have fiduciary relationship and must act
in good faith with high degree of fairness and disclosure of all material
circumstances]); Florida ( Snedaker v. Snedaker (Fla. Dist.Ct.App. 1995) 660
So.2d 1070, 1072 [agreement must be fair and reasonable; not necessary to
demonstrate disclosure or knowledge of extent of property]); Georgia ( Scherer
v. Scherer (1982) 249 Ga. 635, 640-641 [292 S.E.2d 662] [not enforceable if
unconscionable, procured through fraud, duress or mistake, or nondisclosure of
material facts, or changed circumstances make enforcement unfair and
unreasonable]); Kentucky ( Edwardson v. Edwardson (Ky. 1990) 798 S.W.2d 941, 946
[full disclosure required; will not be enforced if unconscionable at time
enforcement sought]); Louisiana ( McAlpine v. McAlpine (La. 1996) 679 So.2d 85,
93 [Civil Code provisions applicable to contracts generally apply]); Maryland (
Frey v. Frey (1984) 298 Md. 552 [471 A.2d 705] [enforceable if fair and
equitable in procurement and result, with full disclosure of assets and entered
into voluntarily with full knowledge of meaning and effect]); Minnesota ( Hill
v. Hill (Minn.Ct.App. 1984) 356 N.W.2d 49, 55 [court will review for
unconscionability at time enforcement sought]); Missouri ( Gould v. Rafaeli
(Mo.Ct.App. 1991) 822 S.W.2d 494, 497 [enforceable if " 'entered into freely,
fairly, knowingly, understandingly and in good faith and with full disclosure'
"]); New Hampshire ( MacFarlane v. Rich (1989) 132 N.H. 608, 613-614 [567 A.2d
585, 588] [enforceable if not obtained through fraud, duress, mistake,
misrepresentation, or nondisclosure of material fact, if not unconscionable, and
if circumstances have not changed]); Ohio ( Gross v. Gross (1984) 11 Ohio St.3d
99, 105 [464 N.E.2d 500, 506, 53 A.L.R.4th 139] [enforceable if entered into
freely without fraud, duress, coercion, or overreaching, with full disclosure or
knowledge and understanding of the party's property, and if terms do not promote
or encourage divorce]); Oklahoma ( Hudson v. Hudson (1960) 1960 Okla. 70 [350
P.2d 596]); Pennsylvania ( Simeone v. Simeone (1990) 525 Pa. 392 [581 A.2d 162]
[enforceable if just and reasonable]); South Carolina ( Gilley v. Gilley (1997)
327 S.C. 8 [488 S.E.2d 310, 312]); Tennessee ( Cary v. Cary (Tenn. 1996) 937
S.W. 2d 777 [enforceable if entered into freely and knowledgeably, with
disclosure, absent undue influence or overreaching, but not if spouse will
become public charge]); West Virginia ( Gant v. Gant (1985) 174 W.Va. 740 [329
S.E.2d 106, 112, 53 A.L.R.4th 1] [agreement must be entered into voluntarily and
knowledgeably]); and Wisconsin ( Hengel v. Hengel (1985) 122 Wis. 737 [365
N.W.2d 16]). South Dakota, like California, has adopted the Uniform Act without
section 3, subdivision (a)(4) and section 6, subdivision (b), and case law does
not permit enforcement. ( S.D. Codified Laws §§ 25-2-18, 25-2-24; Connolly v.
Connolly (S.D. 1978) 270 N.W.2d 44, 46).
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      The changes in public policy and the attitude toward marriage, already
reflected in Dawley, supra, 17 Cal. 3d 342, are made manifest by contrasting the
current statutory treatment of marriage and premarital agreements with an early
decision of the Oregon Supreme Court that reflects the 19th-century view of
public policy regarding marriage. "The welfare of society is so deeply
interested in the preservation of the marriage relation, and so fraught with
evil is regarded whatever is calculated to impair its usefulness, or designed to
terminate it, that it has long been the settled policy of the law to guard and
maintain it with a watchful vigilance. Although marriage, in the eye of the law,
is a civil contract, unlike any other civil contract, it cannot be rescinded or
annulled by consent of the parties to it. By mutual consent, if the parties are
of the proper age and capacity, the marriage relation may be created and receive
the sanction of the law, but it cannot dissolve or terminate it. That high
office can only be performed by a court of competent jurisdiction, for some
specified cause prescribed by law, upon proof taken in a suit for that purpose.
The good order and well being of society, as well as the laws of this state,
require this. And so strict and careful are courts in the administration of this
justice, out of regard for the public morals and the general welfare of society,
that they will esteem it their duty to interfere upon their own motions whenever
it appears the dissolution is sought to be  effected by the connivance or
collusion of the parties; and all contrivances or agreements, having for their
object the termination of the marriage contract, or designed to facilitate or
procure it, will be declared illegal and void as against public policy. . . . '
. . . And when the marriage relation has been assumed, it is equally the  policy
of the law to sustain and uphold it. It, therefore, holds all contracts void
which contemplate or provide for the future separation of the parties . . . .' "
( Phillips v. Thorp, supra, 10 Or. at pp. 495-496.)

   California statutory law of the time reflected these policies and values. In
1872, divorce could be granted only on the grounds of adultery, extreme cruelty,
willful desertion, willful neglect, habitual intemperance, or conviction of a
felony, and could be denied on grounds, inter alia, of connivance or
collusion--the "corrupt consent" by one party to the other's commission of an
act constituting cause for divorce or an agreement between the parties that one
should commit, appear to commit, or represent to the court that one had
committed such an act. (Civ. Code, former §§ 92, 111-114.) The husband had
exclusive control of the community property with "absolute power of disposition
(other than testamentary) as he ha[d] of his separate estate" (Civ. Code, former
§ 172) and a wife could not contract for the payment of money. (Civ. Code,
former § 167.) The court was empowered to order the husband to pay alimony on
divorce if the divorce was granted for an offense of the husband (Civ. Code,
former § 139), but had no power to order a wife to pay alimony.

   The assumptions underlying the refusal to enforce premarital waivers of
spousal support were that the state had a vital interest in and should act to
ensure the permanency of the marriage relation ( Pereira v. Pereira, supra, 156
Cal. at p. 5), and that this interest was undermined by such waivers,
assumptions reflected in statutory law governing marriage, dissolution, and
property rights. In Dawley, supra, 17 Cal. 3d at page 353, however, we
emphasized that only agreements that on their face promote dissolution violate
the public policy favoring marriage. We recognized there that contemporary
attitudes toward the marriage relationship are more pragmatic: "In recent years,
however, an increasing number of couples have executed antenuptial agreements in
order to structure their legal relationship in a manner more suited to their
needs and values. (See generally, Weitzman, Legal Regulation of Marriage:
Tradition and Change (1974) 62 Cal.L.Rev. 1169.) Neither the reordering of
property rights to fit the needs and desires of the couple, nor realistic
planning that takes account of the possibility of dissolution, offends the
public policy favoring and protecting marriage. It is only when the terms of an
agreement go further--when they promote and encourage dissolution, and thereby
threaten to induce the destruction of a  marriage that might otherwise
endure--that such terms offend public policy." (Dawley, supra, 17 Cal. 3d at p.
358.)

   Both public attitude and contemporary official policy have changed
substantially over the past century. Public policy continues to favor and
encourage marriage, but it now acknowledges that lifetime commitment is no
longer the norm. When legitimate grounds for dissolution exist, dissolution does
not contravene public policy, but is the preferred solution. ( Glickman v.
Collins (1975) 13 Cal. 3d 852, 858-859 [120 Cal. Rptr. 76, 533 P.2d 204, 93
A.L.R.3d 513].) The adoption of the California Uniform Premarital Agreement Act
itself reflects recognition that permanency is no longer a dominant
characteristic of modern marriage. The Family Law Act of 1969 (Civ. Code, former
§ 4000 et seq.) permitted, and now the Family Code permits, no-fault
dissolution. (§ 2310.) A stipulation governing division of community property,
once held in reliance on Phillips v. Thorp, supra, 10 Or. 494, to be collusive
and to violate public policy ( Loveren v. Loveren, supra, 106 Cal. at p. 512),
today  is expressly allowed (§§ 2550, 2554), encouraged, and no longer condemned
as facilitating dissolution. (Dawley, supra, 17 Cal. 3d at p. 350, fn. 5.)
Spouses who are separated have long been permitted to contract with regard to
division of property and to include provisions for spousal support on
dissolution, even when community property was evenly divided and thus the
division was not consideration for the modification of spousal support rights. (
Dexter v. Dexter (1954) 42 Cal. 2d 36, 43-44 [265 P.2d 873].) The right of
husband and wife to agree in writing to separate and provide for spousal support
both during separation and on dissolution of the marriage continues to be
expressly recognized by statute. (§ 3580.)

   Legal recognition also has been given to the changing position of married
women who, in increasing numbers, are employed outside the home and have been
given equal right to management of the property of the community as well as
primary right to manage businesses they are operating. (§ 1100.) Public policy
toward spousal support has also changed. While spouses must support each other
during marriage (§ 4300),  the court has been given greater discretion in
marital dissolutions to deny spousal support altogether or to limit such support
in an amount and duration that reflects the ability of both parties in
contemporary unions to provide for their own needs. (§§ 4330, 4320.) The
changing attitudes are reflected in the 1969 repeal of former section 139 of the
Civil Code (enacted 1872), which authorized the court to award lifetime support
if a divorce was based on an offense of the husband. (Stats. 1969, ch. 1608, §
3, p. 3313.) The underlying theory, we explained was then " 'that the husband
entered upon an obligation which bound him to support his wife during the period
of their joint lives, that by his own wrong he has forced her to sever the
relation which enabled  her to compel the performance of this duty, and that he
is required to make compensation for the offense committed by him which has
deprived her of the benefit of the obligation.' (Arnold v. Arnold [(1946)] 76
Cal. App. 2d 877, 885-886 [174 P.2d 674].)" ( Webber v. Webber (1948) 33 Cal. 2d
153, 157-158 [199 P.2d 934].) Today, however,  a court ordering spousal support
must consider, inter alia, "[t]he goal that the supported party shall be
self-supporting within a reasonable period of time." (§ 4320, subd. (k).) The
law has thus progressed from a rule that entitled some women to lifelong alimony
as a condition of the marital contract of support to one that entitles either
spouse to postdissolution support for only so long as necessary to become
self-supporting.

   These changes in the relationship between spouses and support obligations in
particular, accurately described by the Court of Appeal as "dramatic" and by a
legal commentator as a "sea change" (Ellman, The Theory of Alimony (1989) 77
Cal. L.Rev. 1, 7), clearly warrant reassessment of what remains of the rule that
premarital waivers of spousal support may promote dissolution and, if they do
so, are unenforceable. Public policy, to the extent that it is reflected in
these legislative acts, no longer reflects concern that premarital waivers of
property rights threaten the marriage relationship.  Section 1612 expressly
permits the parties to contract with regard to numerous property rights,
including "[t]he disposition of property upon separation, marital dissolution,
death, or the occurrence or nonoccurrence of any other event." (§ 1612, subd.
(a)(3).) No basis appears on which to distinguish premarital waivers of spousal
support from agreements governing property rights insofar as either has a
potential for promoting dissolution. As the Court of Appeal recognized, today
the availability of an enforceable premarital agreement "may in fact encourage
rather than discourage marriage." We agree with the Court of Appeal, therefore,
that, when entered into voluntarily by parties who are aware of the effect of
the agreement, a premarital waiver of spousal support does not offend
contemporary  public policy. Such agreements are, therefore, permitted under
section 1612, subdivision (a)(7),  which authorizes the parties to contract in a
premarital agreement regarding "[a]ny other matter, including their personal
rights and obligations, not in violation of public policy or a statute imposing
a criminal penalty."

   We need not decide here whether circumstances existing at the time
enforcement of a waiver of spousal support is sought might make enforcement
unjust.  12 It is enough to conclude here that no public policy is violated by
permitting enforcement of a waiver of spousal support executed by intelligent,
well-educated persons, each of whom appears to be self-sufficient in property
and earning ability, and both of whom have the advice of  counsel regarding
their rights and obligations as marital partners at the time they execute the
waiver. Such a waiver does  not violate public policy and is not per se
unenforceable as the trial court believed.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -12   The
Legislature may, of course, limit the right to enter into premarital waivers of
spousal support and/or specify the circumstances in which enforcement should be
denied.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

 III. DISPOSITION

   The judgment of the Court of Appeal is affirmed.

   Werdegar, J., Chin, J., Brown, J., Hastings, J., * concurred.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*   Associate
Justice of the Court of Appeal, Second Appellate District, Division Four,
assigned by the Chief Justice pursuant to article VI, section 6 of the
California Constitution.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

CONCUR BY: MOSK

CONCUR

   MOSK, J., Acting C. J.

   I concur in the result.

   The relevant statute provides that premarital agreements may concern any
subject that does not violate public policy or a statute imposing a criminal
penalty. ( Fam. Code, § 1612, subd. (a)(7).) When a statute's words are "clear
and unambiguous our inquiry ends. There is no need for judicial construction and
a court may not indulge in it." ( Diamond Multimedia Systems, Inc. v. Superior
Court (1999) 19 Cal. 4th 1036, 1047 [80 Cal. Rptr. 2d 828, 968 P.2d 539].) That
is true here. Any lingering question whether the Legislature intended to omit
premarital spousal support agreements from the scope of Family Code section 1612
is dispelled by subdivision (b), which prohibits premarital agreements to waive
or reduce child support. Had the Legislature desired to prohibit spousal support
agreements, it could have added a few words similar to those of subdivision (b).

   Clearly, the parties did not conspire to violate the criminal law. The only
question is whether their premarital agreement violated public policy. I agree
with the majority that it did not.

DISSENT BY: KENNARD

DISSENT

   KENNARD, J.

   I dissent.

   In In re Marriage of Higgason (1973) 10 Cal. 3d 476 [110 Cal. Rptr. 897, 516
P.2d 289], this court unanimously held that premarital agreements waiving
spousal support in the event of separation or dissolution of the marriage
violate California's public policy and are therefore invalid, leaving it to the
trial court to determine at the time of separation or dissolution whether to
award spousal support. Three years later, in In re Marriage of Dawley (1976) 17
Cal. 3d 342 [131 Cal. Rptr. 3, 551 P.2d 323], this court, again unanimously,
came to the same conclusion. Our Legislature was fully  aware of these decisions
when in 1985, in adopting provisions of the Uniform Premarital Agreement Act, it
chose to omit the act's provision allowing premarital waiver of spousal support,
thus affirming the decisional law of this state that such waivers violate public
policy.

    In overruling by judicial fiat the Legislature's decision to continue this
state's prohibition against premarital waivers of spousal support, the majority
has (1) invaded the legislative domain, (2) invalidated a legislative decision
reflecting sound public policy, and (3) failed to articulate an intelligible
standard to guide members of the bench and bar in determining whether a
premarital waiver of spousal support is or will be enforceable.

   I cannot and do not join the majority in its usurpation of legislative
powers. Any change in the law at issue should come from the Legislature, not the
judiciary.

   I

   California statutory law generally imposes an obligation to support one's
spouse. ( Fam. Code, § 4300 et seq.)

   In 1985, California became one of the first states to adopt provisions of the
Uniform Premarital Agreement Act. (9B West's U. Laws Ann. (1987) U. Premarital
Agreement Act (1983) p. 369.) Uniform acts are drafted by the National
Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws "to promote uniformity in
state law, on all subjects where uniformity is desirable and practicable, by
voluntary action of each state government." (Id. at p. III.)

   On March 7, 1985, Senate Bill No. 1143 (1985-1986 Reg. Sess.) was introduced
in our Legislature. The bill proposed adopting the Uniform Premarital Agreement
Act in its  entirety. On August 28, 1985, however, the bill was amended to
delete these two provisions of the act:

   Section 3, subdivision (a)(4), allowing spousal support to be modified or
eliminated through premarital agreements (Assem. Amend. to Sen. Bill No. 1143
(1985-1986 Reg. Sess.) Aug. 28, 1985), 1 and

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Section 3
of the Uniform Premarital Agreement Act provides: "(a) Parties to a premarital
agreement may contract with respect to: [P] (1) the rights and obligations of
each of the parties in any of the property of either or both of them whenever
and wherever acquired or located; [P] (2) the right to buy, sell, use, transfer,
exchange, abandon, lease, consume, expend, assign, create a security interest
in, mortgage, encumber, dispose of, or otherwise manage and control property;
[P] (3) the disposition of property upon separation, marital dissolution, death,
or the occurrence or nonoccurrence of any other event; [P] (4) the modification
or elimination of spousal support; [P] (5) the making of a will, trust, or other
arrangement to carry out the provisions of the agreement; [P] (6) the ownership
rights in and disposition of the death benefit from a life insurance policy; [P]
(7) the choice of law governing the construction of the agreement; and [P] (8)
any other matter, including their personal rights and obligations, not in
violation of public policy or a statute imposing a criminal penalty. [P] (b) The
right of a child to support may not be adversely affected by a premarital
agreement." (9B West's U. Laws Ann., supra, at p. 373, italics added.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Section 6, subdivision (b), providing that if, as a result of having entered
into an a premarital agreement waiving spousal support, a spouse at the time  of
separation or marital dissolution becomes impoverished and eligible for public
assistance, then a court retains the authority to award support "to the extent
necessary to avoid that eligibility" (Assem. Amend. to Sen. Bill No. 1143
(1985-1986 Reg. Sess.) Aug. 28, 1985).  2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Section
6, subdivision (b) of the Uniform Premarital Agreement Act states: "If a
provision of a premarital agreement modifies or eliminates spousal support and
that modification or elimination causes one party to the agreement to be
eligible for support under a program of public assistance at the time of
separation or marital dissolution, a court, notwithstanding the terms of the
agreement, may require the other party to provide support to the extent
necessary to avoid that eligibility." (9B West's U. Laws Ann., supra, at p.
376.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   When the Legislature deleted these two provisions from Senate Bill No. 1143,
two decisions of this court, In re Marriage of Higgason, supra, 10 Cal. 3d 476,
and In re Marriage of Dawley, supra, 17 Cal. 3d 342, had held roughly a decade
earlier that premarital agreements waiving spousal support violated California's
public policy and were therefore  invalid. At the time of the deletion and until
today's decision by the majority, it was the trial court that determined whether
to award spousal support, depending on the circumstances existing at the time of
separation or dissolution of the marriage. (See Fam. Code, § 4320 [circumstances
trial court should consider in awarding spousal support].)

   Does the Legislature's deletion of the provision allowing premarital waivers
of spousal support establish its intent to preclude such waivers? The answer is
"yes," as I explain below.

   On point is this court's decision in Kusior v. Silver (1960) 54 Cal. 2d 603
[7 Cal. Rptr. 129, 354 P.2d 657] (Kusior). There, as here, the Legislature was
considering the adoption of a uniform act. There, the Legislature had refused to
enact into law a provision of the Uniform Act on Blood Tests to Determine
Paternity allowing blood tests to show that the husband was not the father of
the child. (Kusior, supra, at p. 618.) There, as here, California decisional law
was contrary to the proposed provision.

   This court in Kusior observed that "[s]tatutes are to be interpreted by
assuming that the Legislature was aware of the existing judicial decisions." (
Kusior, supra, 54 Cal. 2d at p. 618.) We then held that in omitting from its
adoption of the uniform act at issue a provision directly at odds with this
state's decisional law, the Legislature's omission "must be  deemed" an intent
to approve and retain the decisional law. (Ibid.) Similarly, here the
Legislature's express rejection of the Uniform Premarital Agreement Act's
provision allowing premarital spousal support waivers, in the face of decisional
law to the contrary, "must be deemed" an intent to approve and retain the
existing law. (See also Estate of Sanders (1992) 2 Cal. App. 4th 462, 473-474 [3
Cal. Rptr. 2d 536] [" '[t]he rejection by the Legislature of a specific
provision contained in an act as originally introduced is most persuasive to the
conclusion that the act should not be construed to include the omitted
provision' "].)

   This court's decision in Kusior, supra, 54 Cal. 2d 603, is dispositive here.
Under the reasoning of that decision, our Legislature's express rejection of the
proposed uniform law provision allowing waivers of spousal support was a
decision to approve and retain California's rule prohibiting such waivers. By
now deciding that premarital spousal support waivers do not violate California's
public policy, the majority has invaded the legislative domain, judicially
enacting in substance a provision that the Legislature intended to reject, and
judicially abrogating the rule that the Legislature intended to retain.

   II

   Our Legislature's decision not to enact into law the Uniform Premarital
Agreement Act's provision allowing premarital waivers of spousal support, while
adopting other provisions of the act, reflects sound public policy.

   Such waivers do not allow for changed circumstances between execution of the
premarital agreement and separation or dissolution of the marriage. An agreement
equitable at the time of the marriage may later become inequitable and unjust.
For example, the health, earning capacity, or financial resources of a spouse
may change markedly during the marriage, especially one that is lengthy. An
elderly spouse or one in poor health may be left destitute. The earning capacity
of a spouse may be impaired by the obligations of caring for children produced
by a marriage of short duration. After the marriage one spouse may elect to give
up his or her career to raise the children of the marriage or to move to another
location in the interest of furthering the career of the other spouse. And a
spouse may substantially deplete his or her financial resources  to advance the
other spouse's education, training, or career during the marriage. 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   The
issues I address here are not presented in In re Marriage of Bonds (2000) 24
Cal. 4th 1 [99 Cal. Rptr. 2d 252, 5 P.3d 815] (Bonds), a unanimous decision of
this court filed simultaneously with this decision, although both concern
premarital agreements and both require interpretation of the Uniform Premarital
Agreement Act. The main issue in Bonds is whether one spouse voluntarily entered
into the premarital agreement, an issue not presented here. Also, the focus of
the dispute in Bonds appears to be the premarital waiver of community property
rights, not spousal support. This distinction is crucial because the
Legislature, when it enacted the Uniform Premarital Agreement Act, deliberately
omitted the provision authorizing spousal support waivers while approving and
enacting the provision authorizing waivers of community property rights.

   The Legislature's decision to permit waiver of community property rights, but
not spousal support, may be explained on policy grounds. A spouse who has waived
community property rights, but not spousal support, retains effective protection
against a sudden, drastic, and inequitable loss of income resulting from
dissolution of marriage, and may have recourse either to former community
property or to separate property to enforce a spousal support order ( Fam. Code,
§ 4338). By contrast, a spouse who has lost the right to spousal support may
well have no recourse except public assistance. Thus, the inequities that may
result from premarital spousal support waivers are much graver than those that
may result from a premarital waiver of community property rights.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    These considerations are reflected in the Legislature's enactment of Family
Code section 4320, which sets forth spousal support guidelines for the  trial
courts.  4 They are  also reflected in the Legislature's express declarations
that spousal support is a "serious legal obligation[]" ( Fam. Code, § 4250,
subd. (a)) and that it "is the policy of the State of California" to "ensure
fair and sufficient" spousal support awards (id., § 2100, subd. (a)). In
rejecting the proposed provision to allow premarital waivers of spousal support,
the Legislature must have recognized the serious potential for injustice at the
time of dissolution of marriage.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   Family
Code section 4320 provides: "[P] In ordering spousal support under this part,
the court shall consider all of the following circumstances: [P] (a) The extent
to which the earning capacity of each party is sufficient to maintain the
standard of living established during the marriage, taking into account all of
the following: [P] (1) The marketable skills of the supported party; the job
market for those skills; the time and expenses required for the supported party
to acquire the appropriate education or training to develop those skills; and
the possible need for retraining or education to acquire other, more marketable
skills or employment. [P] (2) The extent to which the supported party's present
or future earning capacity is impaired by periods of unemployment that were
incurred during the marriage to permit the supported party to devote time to
domestic duties. [P] (b) The extent to which the supported party contributed to
the attainment of an education, training, a career position, or a license by the
supporting party. [P] (c) The ability to pay of the supporting party, taking
into account the supporting party's earning capacity, earned and unearned
income, assets, and standard of living. [P] (d) The needs of each party based on
the standard of living established during the marriage. [P] (e) The obligations
and assets, including the separate property, of each party. [P] (f) The duration
of the marriage. [P] (g) The ability of the supported party to engage in gainful
employment without unduly interfering with the interests of dependent children
in the custody of the party. [P] (h) The age and health of the parties . . . .
[P] (i) The immediate and specific tax consequences to each party. [P] (j) The
balance of the hardships to each party. [P] (k) The goal that the supported
party shall be self-supporting within a reasonable period of time. . . . [A]
'reasonable period of time' for purposes of this section generally shall be
one-half the length of the marriage. However, nothing in this section is
intended to limit the court's discretion to order support for a greater or
lesser length of time, based on any of the other factors listed in this section
. . . and the circumstances of the parties. [P] (l) Any other factors the court
determines are just and equitable."

   Section 4320 applies to spousal support upon legal separation or dissolution
of the marriage. ( Fam. Code, § 4330, subd. (a).)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     That concern was succinctly expressed in a letter the Women Lawyers'
Association of Los Angeles wrote on June 6, 1985 to Elihu Harris, the Chair of
the Assembly Judiciary Committee, stating its opposition  to that part of Senate
Bill No. 1143 proposing adoption of the Uniform Premarital Agreement Act's
provision allowing premarital waivers of spousal support: "The bill would change
existing California law, which does not enforce premarital waivers of spousal
support, to allow such waivers under certain conditions. Current California law
allows spouses to waive spousal support only at the time of separation, when
they are much more aware of what they have contributed to and sacrificed for the
marriage as well as their prospects for self-support following the separation.
California law regards the duty to support one's spouse as an essential incident
of marriage and refuses to confer the benefits of marriage on those who would
avoid this obligation. Although numerous states have adopted the Uniform
Premarital Agreement Act, California's position represents sounder public policy
and should not be sacrificed to achieve uniformity."

   In a letter to the Legislature on August 14, 1985, the Family Law Section of
the State Bar of California echoed that concern. In opposing the proposed
provision allowing premarital waivers of spousal support, the Family Law Section
warned that such an enactment "would be a major change in California law" and "a
great step backward in terms of assuring that the financial consequences of a
dissolution of marriage are borne by both spouses in an equitable manner."

   In sharp contrast to the thoughtful action by the Legislature, which after
the letters quoted above deleted the proposed provision allowing premarital
waivers of spousal support, the majority ignores the significant public policy
considerations that prompted the Legislature to retain our existing law
prohibiting such waivers.

   III

   After repudiating the existing law of this state prohibiting all premarital
waivers of spousal support, the majority abdicates its responsibility to
articulate guidelines for the bench and bar explaining when, if ever, such
waivers are enforceable. The majority declares that it will not decide "whether
all such agreements [premarital agreements waiving spousal support] are
enforceable regardless of the circumstances of the parties at the time
enforcement is sought" (maj. opn., ante, at p. 41) and that it will not decide
"whether circumstances existing at the time enforcement of a waiver of spousal
support is sought might make enforcement unjust" ( id. at p. 53, fn. omitted).

   Given the majority's "holding" that such provisions may or may not be
enforceable  depending upon circumstances the majority refuses to discuss, what
guidance is there for attorneys preparing a premarital agreement to decide
whether to include a waiver of spousal support? And what guidance is there for
trial courts in determining the enforceability of such agreements? If
enforcement of a premarital waiver of spousal support results in a spouse's
becoming eligible for public assistance, should the trial court order spousal
support limited to the amount necessary to avoid such eligibility, as provided
for in the Uniform Premarital Agreement Act? (See ante, at p. 56, fn. 2.) Or
should the trial court in that instance continue to apply the considerations the
Legislature has specified in Family Code section 4320? (See ante, at p. 58, fn.
3.) The majority's silence on these important questions does a disservice to the
public, the bar, and the bench.

   I would reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

   Respondent's petition for a rehearing was denied November 1, 2000. George, C.
J., did not participate therein. Kennard, J., was of the opinion that the
petition should be granted.


                              13 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In re the Marriage of BURNICE R. and MARSHALL L. FOREMAN,
          JR.  BURNICE R. FOREMAN, Appellant, v. MARSHALL L. FOREMAN,
                                JR., Respondent

                                  No. D003191

           Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District,
                                  Division One

          183 Cal. App. 3d 129; 228 Cal. Rptr. 4; 1986 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      1796


                                  July 8, 1986

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Appellant's petition for review by the Supreme Court was
denied September 25, 1986.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of San Diego County, No. D-75908, Robert J.
O'Neill, Judge.

COUNSEL: Thomas Ashworth III and Mitchell, Ashworth, Keeney, Barry & Pike for
Appellant.

Louis E. Goebel and Goebel, Shensa & Beale for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Work, J., with Kremer, P. J., and Wiener, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: WORK

OPINION

     Burnice R. Foreman appeals from an order denying her request to extend
court-ordered spousal support payments beyond the termination date designated in
the integrated property settlement between herself and her ex-husband, Marshall
L. Foreman, Jr., and incorporated in the 1974 decree dissolving their 23-year
marriage.  We hold the trial court lacked jurisdiction to extend the spousal
support beyond the date designated in the decree, and affirm.

   I

   When the Foremans separated after 23 years of marriage, they entered into a
property settlement containing a spousal support provision obligating  husband
to pay: "the sum of $ 1,300.00 per month, with the first of said payments to be
made on or before May 5, 1974, and thereafter said payments to be made on or
before the 5th day of each succeeding calendar month until Petitioner remarries,
either party dies, or a total of ten years, whichever event first occurs.
Thereafter, said spousal support payments shall automatically reduce to a
jurisdictional amount of $ 1.00 per year for an additional one year, and then
terminate. The said spousal support payments provided hereunder, shall not be
modifiable under any circumstances until June 30, 1977.  Thereafter, said
support payments may be modified by the court on a proper showing by either
party." Burnice's only request for modification came during the 11th year, when
she asked the monthly payments be increased from the $ 1 provided for by the
decree and for an extension of spousal support payments beyond the 11th year.
The court determined it had no jurisdiction to extend payments, but did increase
the $ 1 monthly support figure to $ 1,300 for the remainder of the 11th year.

   II

   Marshall argues as if specific language is needed to give the court
jurisdiction to modify spousal support and through the declarations of himself
and his former lawyer asserts the parties never intended to allow the court to
have extended jurisdiction or have the right to extend the period of spousal
support beyond the period actually agreed upon.  "The only discretion we
intended to give to the court was to change the amount of spousal support in the
one-year period following the ten years of designated spousal support of $ 1,300
per month." Marshall poses the proposition as if the court had no jurisdiction
regarding spousal support unless it was specifically conferred by the parties'
agreement.   However, spousal support is modifiable unless the agreement or
decree contains specific language making it nonmodifiable.  ( Fukuzaki v.
Superior Court (1981) 120 Cal.App.3d 454, 458 [174 Cal.Rptr. 536]; Civ.  Code, 1
§ 4811.) There is no such express written agreement or oral agreement entered
into in open court between the parties here.  Thus, the court specifically
retained jurisdiction to modify spousal support, at least during the stated
term, regardless of any express agreement of the parties that it have that
power.  (§ 4811.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   All
statutory references are to the Civil Code unless otherwise specified.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    III

    Our Supreme Court has stated clearly that "where jurisdiction to award, or
grant requests for, spousal support is reserved until a specified date the court
has fundamental jurisdiction until that date to take new action concerning such
support.  Such new judicial action may include an extension  of spousal support
beyond the last date the court can act." ( In re Marriage of Vomacka (1984) 36
Cal.3d 459, 474 [204 Cal.Rptr. 568, 683 P.2d 248], italics added.) Here, the
trial court distinguished Vomacka based upon differences in the language in the
settlement agreement and decree specifically underlying the Vomacka decision,
and the agreement and interlocutory decree language affecting the Foremans.

   In Vomacka the court was faced with avoiding the effect of section 4801,
subdivision (d) which states: "An order for payment of an allowance for the
support of one of the parties shall terminate at the end of the period specified
in the order and shall not be extended unless the court in its original order
retains jurisdiction." This section had been earlier interpreted in In re
Marriage of Morrison (1978) 20 Cal.3d 437 [143 Cal.Rptr. 139, 573 P.2d 41], as
intended to put the supporting spouse on notice the court has jurisdiction to
extend the spousal support payments and to inform the supported spouse of the
time within which he/she must petition for additional relief.  ( Id., at p 447.)
In Vomacka, it is stated that retention of jurisdiction to extend spousal
support payments may be reasonably implied even in the absence of plain language
in the court order to that effect.  Further, where, as here, there has been a
lengthy marriage, termination of spousal support on a specified date is
disfavored unless the record shows the supported spouse will be able to meet
financial needs at the date scheduled for termination.  (Citing In re Marriage
of Morrison, supra, 20 Cal.3d at p. 453.) Language in spousal support orders
suggesting modification of their terms will be permitted and routinely
interpreted as a retention of the court's fundamental jurisdiction to modify,
and, upon a proper factual showing, to extend spousal support provisions
contained therein.  ( In re Marriage of Vomacka, supra, 36 Cal.3d at p. 470.)

   The conclusion reached in Vomacka specifically applies "where the
jurisdiction to award, on grant requests for, spousal support is reserved until
a specified date.  . . ." ( Id., at p. 474, italics added.) The underlying
agreement in Vomacka contained the following ambiguous language: "The court
shall retain jurisdiction regarding spousal support until September 1, 1974, at
which time [Joyce's] right to request support from [William] shall terminate
forever.  (Italics added.)" ( Id., at p. 462, italics added.)

   The court took pains to point out that a reservation over a right to request
spousal support at any time until September 1, 1984, would be meaningless if the
court was without jurisdiction to award support past that date.  Thus, Vomacka
addressed language in a decree where the court specifically reserved
jurisdiction to award or grant requests for spousal support until a specific
date.

    Vomacka's holding applies when the court has reserved jurisdiction to make
an award of support or to act upon the request for such an award within a
designated period.  Arguably, when the court reserves jurisdiction for a period
of time during which it retains the power to make an  initial award of spousal
support or to act upon a request for a second award of spousal support for a
period of time after the termination of payments under the initial award (the
situation in Vomacka), the language of section 4801, subdivision (d) simply is
inapposite.  That subsection refers to something different, i.e., the fact that
a support order once made shall terminate at the end of the period specified and
not be extended unless the court in its original order retains jurisdiction.

   A recent decision addressed a fact situation somewhat more analogous to the
one with which we deal.  There, the interlocutory order stated husband should
pay spousal support at a monthly sum for a period which would continue "'until
the death of either party, remarriage, until modified by a court of competent
jurisdiction or until the expiration of eight (8) years, whichever first occurs.
[Italics added.]'" ( In re Marriage of Benson (1985) 171 Cal.App.3d 907, 910
[217 Cal.Rptr. 589].) Here, the wife requested an extension before the
court-ordered payments ceased under the first order, unlike the facts in Vomacka
where the wife sought modification of the decree after the court-ordered
payments ceased but during an additional "window" period permitting the wife to
request additional spousal support. Benson interpreted Vomacka as permitting an
extension of the original award under the "reserved jurisdiction" to modify so
long as the modification request was brought before the termination date of
payments set forth in the decree. Benson emphasized the following language in
Vomacka: "Had [wife] not sought modification of the interlocutory decree before
August 1, 1982, her spousal support payments would have ceased on that date.
However, she nonetheless could have sought modification of the decree to provide
for a new spousal support award, rather than an extension of the original award,
pursuant to the language of the decree retaining jurisdiction to hear [wife's]
requests for spousal support until September 1, 1984." ( In re Marriage of
Vomacka, supra, 36 Cal.3d at p. 470, fn. 9.)

   In Vomacka, as in Benson, the wife brought the motion for modification before
the cutoff date of support under the original award. In both the Benson and
Vomacka decrees, there is language from which reservation of jurisdiction may be
implied, i.e., the court-ordered support would "continue until further order of
the court" or "until modified by a court of competent jurisdiction." Here there
is no such language.  The only language of modification refers to modifying
spousal support payments.  Thus, unlike Benson, there is no conditional clause
which can be interpreted as reserving jurisdiction to extend the period of
support beyond that specified in the decree  to comply with section 4801,
subdivision (d).  In Benson the modification clause suggested that support would
continue until death, remarriage or until modified by a court of jurisdiction or
a period of eight years, whichever first occurs.  There, the modification first
occurred and the modification clause was deemed to relate to the power of the
court to modify the term of the support obligation.  In the absence of express
language making the modification apply only to a reduction of support payments,
the court construed it as giving the court jurisdiction to extend as well.

   Here, the language of the decree relating to length of term and conditions
which would affect it is limited solely to death, remarriage or 11 years, after
which it should terminate. There is no language which reasonably can be
interpreted as reserving jurisdiction to avoid the effect of section 4801,
subdivision (d), unless of course, the very inherent power of the court to
modify during the term of the original order contains that power.  Assuming the
language regarding jurisdiction to modify in section 4811 otherwise could be
subject to that interpretation, the language in section 4801, subdivision (d) is
an express legislative limitation on that power, requiring reservation of
jurisdiction to be stated by specific language in the decree of  dissolution to
extend the period of support.  Otherwise, there would be no purpose for that
section, because it always would be ineffective to prevent extensions in light
of the court's inherent power to modify pursuant to section 4811.  In order to
make the statutory scheme rational, section 4811 must be deemed to refer only to
the power to modify the terms of the support order for the time period
designated in the original order of support, and the ability to extend that
period of time deemed legislatively limited by section 4801, subdivision (d) to
those situations where there has been an express reservation of jurisdiction in
the original decree. Vomacka and Benson can be legitimately viewed as not
violating this scheme, because they construe decrees containing reservations of
jurisdiction which can be interpreted according to the public policy factors
applicable to spousal support as such an expression of reservation.

   Applying Vomacka's analysis here, we find there is no express reservation of
jurisdiction in the interlocutory decree, except that included in the language:
"The said spousal support payments provided hereunder, shall not be modifiable
under any circumstances until June 30, 1977.  Thereafter, said support payments
may be modified by the court on a proper showing by either party." (Italics
added.) The express reference to payments makes it unreasonable to construe this
language as not being expressly limited to modifications of the amount of the
payments, rather than implying a reservation of power to extend. 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Three
recent cases referred to in oral argument are not applicable to our facts: In re
Marriage of Frick (1986) 181 Cal.App3d 997 [226 Cal.Rptr. 766], does not address
the issues here; In re Marriage of Segel (1986) 177 Cal.App.3d 1030 [223
Cal.Rptr. 430], involves an attempt to extend the duration of spousal support
through a motion filed after support term in the dissolution decree had expired;
and In re Marriage of Pekar (1985) 173 Cal.App.3d 367 [218 Cal.Rptr. 823],
involves a challenge to a spousal support order following a lengthy marriage in
which the trial court was deemed to have retained jurisdiction to continue
spousal support after an original five-year term during which specific monthly
payments were to be made.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     Order affirmed.


                              14 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In re the Marriage of RAYMOND and ROBERTA MELISSA. RAYMOND
              MELISSA, Appellant, v. ROBERTA MELISSA, Respondent.

                                G045899; G046261

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FOURTH APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION THREE

          212 Cal. App. 4th 598; 151 Cal. Rptr. 3d 608; 2012 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1315


                        December 3, 2012, Opinion Filed

NOTICE:

   As modified Jan. 2, 2013.

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:
   The Publication Status of this Document has been Changed by the Court from
Unpublished to Published January 2, 2013.
Review denied by In re Melissa, 2013 Cal. LEXIS 2281 (Cal., Mar. 20, 2013)

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Appeal from a judgment of the Superior Court of Orange County,
No. 09D010131, Claudia Silbar, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(4) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 61--Premarital Agreement Waiving
Spousal Support--Validity--Application of Law in Effect When Executed.--The
trial court properly applied the law as it then existed in invalidating a
spousal support waiver contained in a 1985 prenuptial agreement. It would be
unfair to apply the law and public policy as it existed between 2000 and 2002
(in effect after a case on which the husband relied), but not also give the wife
the benefit of the many safeguards and protective requirements enacted for
post-2002 agreements, i.e., requiring independent legal representation and seven
days between when the agreement is presented to a party and the time it is
signed (Fam. Code, § 1615, subd. (c)(1), (2)). The trial court correctly
determined the 1985 waiver was unenforceable, applying the case law existing at
the time.

   [Kirkland et al., Cal. Family Law Practice and Procedure (2012) ch. 50, §
50.05; Cal. Forms of Pleading and Practice (2012) ch. 225, Dissolution of
Marriage: Spousal Support, § 225.33.]

COUNSEL: Shuff Law Firm and Tamara Shuff Mortensen for Appellant.

 Minyard Morris, Lonnie K. Seide, Cara Elkin; Snell & Wilmer and Richard A.
Derevan for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by O'Leary, P. J., with Rylaarsdam and Fybel, JJ., concurring.

OPINION BY: O'Leary, P. J.

OPINION

    O'LEARY, P. J.--Raymond Melissa (Raymond) challenges the trial court's
invalidation of Roberta Melissa's (Roberta) spousal support waiver contained in
a 1985 prenuptial agreement.1 Raymond argues the court erred because the waiver
"does not offend contemporary public policy" and the new rules requiring a
spouse to be represented by independent counsel before waiving support cannot be
retroactively applied. (See Fam. Code, § 1612.)2 We conclude the trial court
properly applied the law in effect when the parties signed the agreement, i.e.,
spousal support waivers were deemed invalid as being against public policy. We
affirm the judgment.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   We refer
to the parties by their first names for ease of reading and to avoid confusion,
and not out of disrespect. (In re Marriage of James & Christine C. (2008) 158
Cal.App.4th 1261, 1264, fn. 1 [70 Cal. Rptr. 3d 715].)
2   All further statutory references are to the Family Code, unless otherwise
indicated.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

I

   In the summer of 1984, Raymond (then 41 years old) met Roberta (then 32 years
old). Both had been married before. Raymond told Roberta he was retired but he
had started another company. He owned a home in Newport Beach, a new Jaguar
automobile, and had a net worth of over $ 2 million. She worked as a nurse and
rented an apartment in Huntington Beach. After dating for a few months, they
moved in together with the plan of deciding after six months whether to get
married. When Raymond told Roberta he was not interested in marriage, she moved
out.

   Soon thereafter, the couple reconciled and decided to get married. They set a
wedding date of August 8, 1985, and Roberta moved back in with Raymond.  Around
this same time, they learned Roberta was pregnant.

   The parties disagree on when Raymond first asked Roberta to sign a prenuptial
agreement. However, they agree it was clearly Raymond's condition to getting
married. Raymond told Roberta his last divorce was very difficult and he did not
want to pay spousal support. Raymond explained he would not get married unless
she signed a prenuptial agreement. Roberta agreed to sign it.

   Raymond asked Craig Willford, the attorney son of his neighbor, to draft the
prenuptial agreement (Agreement). Raymond told Willford what he  wanted included
in the Agreement. Roberta had no input about the wording of the document. They
executed the Agreement on August 5, 1985, at a bank in front of a notary.

   The parties dispute when Roberta first saw the Agreement. Roberta recalled
the first time she saw it was on August 5, three days before the wedding, and
when all the invitations had already been sent out. Willford told her she could
have her own attorney review the Agreement, but she did not do so. She did not
understand some of the language in the Agreement. Whereas, Raymond recalled
Willford came over to the house in July to explain the Agreement to him and
Roberta. He agreed with Roberta that they executed the document in August.

   Willford could only "vaguely" remember the events. He did not recall meeting
with Raymond or Roberta to go over the Agreement. Based on notes and dates in
his file, Willford believed he did not prepare the Agreement until sometime in
August.

   The Agreement is approximately three pages long. It begins with the recital,
"Both parties to this Agreement have made to each other a full and complete
disclosure of the nature, extent, and probable value of all of their property,
estate, and expectancies. In particular, Raymond ... has disclosed his ownership
of the single family residence in Orange County and holdings of corporate
stock." No other specific disclosures of assets are made in the Agreement.
Raymond recalls he told Roberta about his assets in March 1985.

   The next recital stated Raymond was represented by counsel and Roberta was
advised of the right to be represented by independent counsel. In addition, the
Agreement stated Roberta "admits and acknowledges that any failure to seek
independent counsel [did] not stem from any inducement of Raymond ... or his
counsel, but rather upon her having read the Agreement, understood it, and
having made a knowledgeable waiver of the right to counsel in that regard. Both
parties admit and acknowledge that they have read the Agreement, and understand
its meaning and legal consequences."

   The first term of the Agreement provided each party waived any claim "in the
separate property of the other." In addition, the Agreement discussed spousal
support: "Each of the parties acknowledge that while the case of In re Marriage
of Higgason (1973) 10 [Cal.3d] 476 [110 Cal.Rptr. 897, 516 P.2d 289] (Higgason)
... provides that the potential for the future right of spousal support cannot
be waived by an agreement, the parties acknowledge that the law (relating to the
authority of individuals to enter into contracts as such  authority is
[a]ffected by the marital status of the parties) is in a state of flux (e.g.
Marvin v. Marvin [(1976) 18 Cal.3d 660 [134 Cal. Rptr. 815, 557 P.2d 106]]). The
parties do specifically state and acknowledge that each is currently capable of
supporting himself or herself and that neither party is entering the marital
relationship with the expectancy of developing reliance upon the earning
capacity of the other. Therefore, for mutual consideration of this waiver and of
the expected marriage, each party mutually releases the other and waives any
potential future rights which would have or may have accrued for spousal support
in the event of a legal separation, dissolution of marriage, or action
therefore. The parties further agree that at anytime either changes his or her
intention to become reliant upon the earnings of the other, notice of such
change in intent shall be given to the other in writing."

   The next term of the Agreement was concerned with what should occur when
separate property is commingled with community property and how the community
property should be valued. The final term stated separate property sold or
reinvested during the marriage would remain separate property.

   After the parties married, they had a son, R., who is mentally disabled, and
also suffers from fragile X syndrome and autism. Roberta stopped working full
time in 1997. The parties separated in October 2009, and Roberta filed her
petition for dissolution in November 2009. After the separation, Roberta lived
with and cared for R., who is now 24 years old. He is able to work part time as
a janitor, earning $9 an hour. Roberta is unemployed.

   The trial court granted Raymond's motion to bifurcate the issue of whether
the Agreement was valid. The court heard testimony from four witnesses: Raymond,
Roberta, Willford, and David Monkarsh (R.'s psychologist). After considering the
briefing and oral argument, the court framed the issue as having three subparts:
(1) Was the entire Agreement valid and enforceable? (2) Was the waiver in 1985
void as being against public policy? (3) If not void, was the waiver
unenforceable due to it being "unjust or unconscionable"?

   The court stated it would start with the second question, and after
considering the Higgason case, the relevant statutes, and In re Marriage of
Pendleton & Fireman (2000) 24 Cal.4th 39 [99 Cal. Rptr. 2d 278, 5 P.3d 839] (
Pendleton), the court concluded it must apply the law in effect in 1985. It
determined the legal authority in 1985, including the Higgason case, was very
clear that waivers of spousal support were void as against public policy. The
court determined the Pendleton case, written after new legislation and legal
amendments, did not overrule the Higgason case.

   In addition, the court determined the spousal waiver was unenforceable as
being unjust. The court stated it found both parties were credible witnesses,
however, "This is a long-term marriage of 20 years or so. There is no dispute
that at least during half of the marriage [Roberta] has not worked." The court
stated Roberta stayed home to care for R. with Raymond's "consent" and
"encourage[ment]."

   Finally, the court stated the first question regarding the Agreement's
validity was not difficult. The spousal support waiver could be severed from the
rest of the Agreement, which was otherwise enforceable. It reasoned, the parties
were on equal footing in terms of how much money they had, their intelligence,
and their understanding of the terms. The court noted Roberta's alleged failure
to read the Agreement was not grounds to set it aside. It concluded, "I did not
see any evidence of any duress, coercion, involuntariness, overreaching, or any
of those other contract principles the court needs to consider for a 1985
[prenuptial agreement]." The court entered a partial judgment holding the
spousal support waiver invalid.

    Nearly a year later, Raymond filed a motion for reconsideration in light of
the newly decided case In re Marriage of Howell (2011) 195 Cal.App.4th 1062 [126
Cal. Rptr. 3d 539] (Howell) (2002 amendment to § 1612 regarding spousal support
waivers cannot be retroactively applied). After a hearing, the court denied the
motion on the grounds the motion was untimely and lacked merit.

   The court filed another partial judgment in July 2011 regarding the parties'
property settlement, a partial judgment in August 2011 resolving support issues,
and in October 2011, it entered a final judgment resolving the remaining
reserved issues. Raymond's appeal concerns only the court's ruling on the
validity of the spousal support waiver.

II

A. The Evolution of Spousal Support Waivers

   The public policy against spousal support waivers dates back to 1872, when
the Legislature enacted former section 159 of the Civil Code, providing, " 'A
husband and wife cannot, by any contract with each other, alter their legal
relations, except as to property, ... and except that they may agree to an
immediate separation, and may make provision for the support of either of them
and of their children during such separation.' " (Pendleton, supra, 24 Cal.4th
at p. 48, fn. omitted.)

   This public policy was still in effect 100 years later, when in 1973, our
Supreme Court concluded in In re Marriage of Higgason, supra, 10 Cal.3d 476 (
Higgason), that premarital agreements designed to waive, diminish, or alter the
statutory obligation of spouses to mutually support each other were contrary to
public policy and therefore void and unenforceable. The court cited to a
respected Harvard Law Review article and listed numerous cases holding this was
the majority rule across the nation. (Id. at p. 486.)

   The rationale for this rule was that marriage was considered more than a mere
contract. It was regarded as a social institution vital to society's stability.
"'Inasmuch as the state rests upon the family and is vitally interested in the
permanency of a marriage relation once established, it, for the promotion of
public welfare, and of private morals as well, makes itself a party to every
marriage contract entered into within its jurisdiction, in this sense, that it
will not permit the dissolution thereof by the other party thereto. Its consent
in the form of a decree of its court passed after hearing in due process of law,
is a prerequisite for a divorce. ... Courts will not enforce any contract which
is the price of consent by one party to the marriage relation, to the
procurement of a divorce by the other.' And, in reference to a similar agreement
to that in the case at bar, the court in the case just cited said: 'Presumably
each party saw in that agreement an individual advantage; to him, in that he
possibly paid her less thereby than the judgment of the court upon hearing would
compel; to her, in that he refrained therefor from answering the allegations of
her petition by proof, and thus possibly permitted a divorce which he could have
prevented.'" (Pereira v. Pereira (1909) 156 Cal. 1, 5 [103 P. 488].)

   "Another concern was that a man should not be able to contract before
marriage against the liability to his wife that he would incur should he commit
offenses against the wife during the marriage. [Citation.]" (Pendleton, supra,
24 Cal.4th at p. 48.) In the 19th century, "divorce could be granted only on the
grounds of adultery, extreme cruelty, willful desertion, willful neglect,
habitual intemperance, or conviction of a felony, and could be denied on
grounds, inter alia, of connivance or collusion--the 'corrupt consent' by one
party to the other's commission of an act constituting cause for divorce or an
agreement between the parties that one should commit, appear to commit, or
represent to the court that one had committed such an act. [Citations.] The
husband had exclusive control of the community property with 'absolute power of
disposition (other than testamentary) as he ha[d] of his separate estate'
[citation] and a wife could not contract for the payment of money. [Citation.]
The court was empowered to order the husband to pay alimony on divorce if the
divorce was granted for an offense of the husband [citation], but had no power
to order a wife to pay alimony. [¶] The assumptions underlying the refusal to
enforce premarital waivers of spousal support were that the state had a vital
interest in and should act to ensure the  permanency of the marriage relation
[citation], and that this interest was undermined by such waivers, assumptions
reflected in statutory law governing marriage, dissolution, and property
rights." (Id. at p. 51.)

   Finally, public policy at that time deemed marriage to be inextricably tied
to society's welfare: " 'The welfare of society is so deeply interested in the
preservation of the marriage relation, and so fraught with evil is regarded
whatever is calculated to impair its usefulness, or designed to terminate it,
that it has long been the settled policy of the law to guard and maintain it
with a watchful vigilance. Although marriage, in the eye of the law, is a civil
contract, unlike any other civil contract, it cannot be rescinded or annulled by
consent of the parties to it. ... That high office can only be performed by a
court of competent jurisdiction, for some specified cause prescribed by law,
upon proof taken in a suit for that purpose. The good order and well being of
society, as well as the laws of this state, require this. And so strict and
careful are courts in the administration of this justice, out of regard for the
public morals and the general welfare of society, that they will esteem it their
duty to interfere upon their own motions whenever it appears the dissolution is
sought to be effected by the connivance or collusion of the parties; and all
contrivances or agreements, having for their object the termination of the
marriage contract, or designed to facilitate or procure it, will be declared
illegal and void as against public policy.' " (Pendleton, supra, 24 Cal.4th at
pp. 50-51.)

   Consistent with this policy, the Higgason court determined spouses assume
mutual obligations of support when they marry. In that case, a wealthy
73-year-old woman married a much younger man, who lacked financial resources. At
issue before the Higgason court was an agreement in which both spouses waived
all interests in property and spousal support. The court concluded the waiver of
support was against public policy because it sought to alter the wife's
statutory obligation to support the husband. (Higgason, supra, 10 Cal.3d at p.
485.)

   The Supreme Court in Higgason explained antenuptial agreements relating "to
the disposition of the property of the respective parties" were enforceable. (
Higgason, supra, 10 Cal.3d at p. 485.) The court will uphold agreements "made in
contemplation that the marriage relation will continue until the parties are
separated by death. Contracts which facilitate divorce or separation by
providing for a settlement  only in the event of such an occurrence are void as
against public policy. [Citations.]" (Ibid.) "[T]here is a clear implication
that if an antenuptial agreement relieves the husband from the obligation of
supporting and maintaining his wife during the continuance of the proposed
marriage relation, it will be held invalid to that extent." (Ibid.)

   Three years after Higgason, our Supreme Court in In re Marriage of Dawley
(1976) 17 Cal.3d 342 [131 Cal. Rptr. 3, 551 P.2d 323] (Dawley), revisited the
issue of the validity of prenuptial agreements. In that case, the parties had
agreed before marriage that the earnings and property acquired during marriage
would be held as separate property because the parties anticipated an early
dissolution of their marriage. The parties also agreed the husband would support
the wife "'for the minimum period'" of 14 months. (Id. at p. 353.) The marriage
lasted longer than expected and when the couple separated, the wife argued the
agreement was void based on dictum in Higgason stating an antenuptial agreement
"'must be made in contemplation that the marriage relation will continue until
the parties are separated by death.'" (Dawley, supra, 17 Cal.3d at p. 346,
quoting Higgason, supra, 10 Cal.3d at p. 485.) The court clarified this dictum
did "not accurately state California law." (Dawley, at p. 346.)

   The Dawley court explained, "Enforcement of the state policy to foster and
protect marriage [citation] does not require the invalidation of entire
agreements based upon the subjective contemplation of the parties; it requires
only that the courts refuse to enforce specific contractual provisions which by
their terms seek to promote the dissolution of a marriage. [¶] ... California
courts have uniformly held that contracts offend the state policy favoring
marriage only insofar as the terms of the contract 'facilitate,' 'encourage,' or
'promote' divorce or dissolution." (Dawley, supra, 17 Cal.3d at pp. 349-350.)

   In a footnote, the Dawley court commented there were several cases asserting
"that an agreement which 'facilitates' dissolution violates public policy, this
terminology is misleading. In a literal sense, any contract which delimits the
property rights of the spouses might 'facilitate' dissolution by making possible
a shorter and less expensive dissolution hearing. But public policy does not
render property agreements unenforceable merely because such agreements simplify
the division of marital property; it is only when the agreement encourages or
promotes dissolution that it offends the public policy to foster and protect
marriage." (Dawley, supra, 17 Cal.3d at p. 350, fn. 5.)

   However, the Dawley court was not asked to consider the validity of a spousal
support waiver. It acknowledged the decisions cited in Higgason invalidating a
spouse's waiver of support rights because it promoted divorce, and noted there
were not similar decisions striking down a contract that "merely provided that
the earnings and accumulations of each spouse will be held as separate
property." (Dawley, supra, 17 Cal.3d at p. 351.)

   Thus, to briefly summarize, in 1985, the status of the law was that
prenuptial agreements would be enforced if the provisions did not objectively
encourage or promote dissolution. There was no per se rule invalidating
premarital agreements. However, it was also determined any written waiver of the
statutory obligation of spouses to mutually support each other was void as being
contrary to public policy.

    Raymond and Roberta's Agreement recognized the rule invalidating any attempt
to waive spousal support, as described by the Supreme Court in Higgason.
However, their Agreement suggested the parties nevertheless wished to include a
spousal support waiver based on their purported belief the law on this issue was
in a "state of flux" based on the Supreme Court case Marvin v. Marvin, supra, 18
Cal.3d 660. The statement is puzzling because the Marvin case simply addressed
how cohabitating unmarried couples may create enforceable express or implied
contracts to address the rights, obligations, and remedies for property, support
and other "marital-type" claims (unless the agreement is made for the rendition
of sexual services). (See id. at p. 674.) So-called "Marvin claims" arise out of
nonmarital cohabitation only. The Marvin court simply recognized adults who
voluntarily live together are "competent as any other persons to contract
respecting their earnings and property rights." (Ibid.) The court held those
parties "may order their economic affairs as they choose, and no policy
precludes the courts from enforcing such agreements." (Ibid.) A Marvin claim for
breach of contract is resolved in a civil lawsuit. The case had nothing to do
with the status of family law or with the then existing public policy denouncing
spousal support waivers in a premarital agreement.

   The issue was not in a "state of flux" until after the Legislature adopted
the Uniform Premarital Agreement Act (Uniform Act) as part of the Civil Code,
effective January 1, 1986 (reenacted in 1994 as Fam. Code, § 1600 et seq.). In
adopting the Uniform Act, the Legislature deleted the subdivision which would
have expressly permitted the parties to modify or eliminate spousal support.
(See Pendleton, supra, 24 Cal.4th at p. 43, fn. 3 [discussion of legislative
history].)

   Subsequently, courts interpreted the Legislature's decision to leave out the
subdivision authorizing support waivers as signifying the Legislature intended
to leave the enforceability of spousal support waivers to the courts. (
Pendleton, supra, 24 Cal.4th at p. 45.) This interpretation is supported by the
legislative history: Several reports issued by the Assembly Subcommittee on
Administration of Justice noted California courts currently did not permit
enforcement of spousal support waivers, but the reports also acknowledged there
was a growing split in authority among the other states on this issue. (Ibid.)

   The adopted portion of the Uniform Act relating to premarital agreements, now
found in section 1612, permitted the parties to contract with respect to
property rights. Specifically, the parties could agree on the right to manage
and control property, the disposition of property after death, the making of
testamentary documents, death benefits, choice of law, and "[a]ny other matter,
including their personal rights and obligations, not in violation of public
policy or a statute imposing a criminal penalty." (§ 1612, subd. (a)(7).)
Section 1612, subdivision (b), clarified the right of a child to support could
not be "adversely affected by a premarital agreement."

   We note Raymond and Roberta executed their Agreement before the Uniform Act
was adopted and before it became effective in 1986. Consequently, it would not
control their Agreement. In any event, the Legislature intentionally omitted
language that would change existing California case authority holding spousal
support waivers invalid. Public policy had not yet evolved on the issue to
prompt the Legislature to expressly recognize and condone such waivers.

   It was not until 2000 that our Supreme Court recognized there had been a
shift in public policy towards spousal support waivers. In Pendleton, supra, 24
Cal.4th at pages 48 to 49, the court explained, "It is clear that the
Legislature understood that the omission of authorization for premarital waivers
of spousal support in section 1612 would leave the law as it was in 1985. The
subcommittee reports reflect that understanding. ... We will not presume that
the Legislature intended that the law remain static. It would be unreasonable to
assume that the Legislature intended the common law of the 19th century to
govern the marital relationship in the 21st century. The most reasonable
understanding of the Legislature's purpose when it omitted subdivision (a)(4) is
that it was satisfied with the evolution of the common law governing premarital
waivers of spousal support and intended to permit that evolution to continue.
Had the Legislature intended to forbid spousal support waivers, it is logical to
assume that it would have done so by expressly including spousal support in
subdivision (b) of section 1612, which [forbids waiver of child support]. [In
analyzing premarital agreements,] the court is free to reexamine the assumptions
that underlie the common law rule that premarital spousal support waivers
promote dissolution and for that reason contravene public policy. [We conclude,]
the common law policy, based on assumptions that dissolution of marriage is
contrary to public policy and that premarital waivers of spousal support may
promote dissolution, is anachronistic."

   The court in Pendleton noted the shift in public policy was nationwide: "Some
41 jurisdictions have already abandoned the common law restrictions on
premarital waivers of spousal support. In 21 jurisdictions, premarital waivers
of spousal support are authorized by statutes that either adopt all or
substantially all of the provisions of the Uniform Act. One jurisdiction (New
York) had other statutory authorization for such waivers, and in another 18  the
right to enforce a premarital waiver of spousal support exists pursuant to
judicial decision." (Pendleton, supra, 24 Cal.4th at p. 49, fns. omitted.)

   In addition, the court reasoned, "Both public attitude and contemporary
official policy have changed substantially over the past century. Public policy
continues to favor and encourage marriage, but it now acknowledges that lifetime
commitment is no longer the norm. When legitimate grounds for dissolution exist,
dissolution does not contravene public policy, but is the preferred solution.
[Citation.] The adoption of the California Uniform Premarital Agreement Act
itself reflects recognition that permanency is no longer a dominant
characteristic of modern marriage. The Family Law Act of 1969 (Civ. Code, former
§ 4000 et seq.) permitted, and now the Family Code permits, no-fault
dissolution. (§ 2310.) A stipulation governing division of community property,
once held ... to be collusive and to violate public policy [citation], today is
expressly allowed (§§ 2550, 2554), encouraged, and no longer condemned as
facilitating dissolution. [Citation.] ... [¶] Legal recognition also has been
given to the changing position of married women who, in increasing numbers, are
employed outside the home and have been given equal right to management of the
property of the community as well as primary right to manage businesses they are
operating. (§ 1100.) Public policy toward spousal support has also changed.
While spouses must support each other during marriage (§ 4300), the court has
been given greater discretion  in marital dissolutions to deny spousal support
altogether or to limit such support in an amount and duration that reflects the
ability of both parties in contemporary unions to provide for their own needs. (
§§ 4330, 4320.)" (Pendleton, supra, 24 Cal.4th at p. 52.)

   The Pendleton court concluded, "These changes in the relationship between
spouses and support obligations in particular ... clearly warrant reassessment
of what remains of the rule that premarital waivers of spousal support may
promote dissolution and, if they do so, are unenforceable. Public policy, to the
extent that it is reflected in these legislative acts, no longer reflects
concern that premarital waivers of property rights threaten the marriage
relationship. Section 1612 expressly permits the parties to contract with regard
to numerous property rights, including '[t]he disposition of property upon
separation, marital dissolution, death, or the occurrence or nonoccurrence of
any other event.' (§ 1612, subd. (a)(3).) No basis appears on which to
distinguish premarital waivers of spousal support from agreements governing
property rights insofar as either has a potential for promoting dissolution. ...
[¶] We need not decide here whether circumstances existing at the time
enforcement of a waiver of spousal support is sought might make enforcement
unjust. It is enough to conclude here that no public policy is violated by
permitting enforcement of a waiver of spousal support executed by intelligent,
well-educated persons, each of whom appears to be self-sufficient in property
and earning ability, and both of whom have the  advice of counsel regarding
their rights and obligations as marital partners at the time they execute the
waiver. Such a waiver does not violate public policy and is not per se
unenforceable as the trial court believed." (Pendleton, supra, 24 Cal.4th at pp.
53-54, fn. omitted.)

   In a footnote, the court stated, "The Legislature may, of course, limit the
right to enter into premarital waivers of spousal support and/or specify the
circumstances in which enforcement should be denied." (Pendleton, supra, 24
Cal.4th at p. 53, fn. 12.) And that is exactly what occurred in response to the
Pendleton opinion.

   In 2002, the Legislature amended the statutory scheme to require spouses to
be represented by independent counsel before waiving spousal support in a
premarital agreement. The Legislature added subdivision (c) to section 1612,
providing, "Any provision in a premarital agreement regarding spousal support,
including ... a waiver of it, is not enforceable if the party against whom
enforcement of the spousal support provision is sought was not represented by
independent counsel at the time the agreement containing the provision was
signed ... ."

   In addition, section 1615 was amended to create a presumption that a
premarital agreement was not executed voluntarily unless the court makes five
designated findings. (See Stats. 2001, ch. 286, § 2, p. 2317; In re Marriage of
Friedman (2002) 100 Cal.App.4th 65, 72 [122 Cal. Rptr. 2d 412].) These include
the finding the party against whom enforcement is sought had at least seven
calendar days between the date he or she was "first presented" with the
agreement and advised to seek independent counsel, and the time he or she signed
the agreement. (§ 1615, subd. (c)(2).)

   In Howell, supra, 195 Cal.App.4th 1062, the court held section 1612,
subdivision (c), invalidating a spousal support waiver executed in the absence
of independent counsel did not apply retroactively.  The court reasoned the
enactment of subdivision (c) of section 1612 constituted a material change in
the law, that "'in the absence of an express retroactivity provision, a statute
will not be applied retroactively unless it is very clear from extrinsic sources
that the Legislature ... must have intended a retroactive application.'
[Citations.]" (Howell, supra, 195 Cal.App.4th at p. 1074.)

   Thus, over the past 25 years the case law and statutory rules regarding
spousal support waivers has evolved significantly. The rules and underlying
public policy regarding support waivers has swung like a pendulum from the one
extreme of complete prohibition, to the other extreme of being condoned but
highly regulated with technical requirements and safeguards. While we no longer
believe prenuptial agreements containing spousal  support waivers encourage
dissolution or will harm society, we are also well aware of the need for
safeguards to ensure fairness and voluntariness.

B. Raymond and Roberta's 1985 Premarital Agreement

   Raymond argues Roberta's waiver of spousal support in 1985 would not be
considered contrary to contemporary public policy. He asserts the court
correctly applied 19th-century legal principles permitting premarital agreements
without independent counsel or any of the requirements listed in section 1615,
but the court erroneously applied public policy existing in 1985. He provides no
case authority, and we found none, supporting his legal theory the trial court
must apply the law existing on the date of execution but ignore the public
policy supporting the rules that existed at that time (applying instead
contemporary public policy but not modern day rules). It is a somewhat puzzling
argument lacking a sound rational basis.

   Fortunately, it is well settled, "The law applicable to the validity and
enforcement of premarital agreements turns on the date of execution." (Hogoboom
& King, Cal. Practice Guide: Family Law (The Rutter Group 2012) ¶ 9:141, p.
9-36.16 (rev. # 1, 2012).) As discussed in some detail above, the applicable law
is different depending on whether the court is analyzing (1) pre-1986 agreements
(before adoption of the Uniform Act), (2) agreements executed in the period
between 1986 and 2002 (before amendment of the Uniform Act), and (3) post-2002
agreements (when the Uniform Act was amended with technical requirements for
valid spousal support waivers that are not retroactive).

   This case involves a pre-1986 agreement. When Raymond and Roberta signed
their premarital agreement in 1985, the law and public policy as articulated by
our Supreme Court in Higgason was in full effect. As correctly noted by the
trial court, under Higgason, a waiver of spousal support was unenforceable.
Indeed, the parties acknowledged the waiver was most likely invalid in their own
Agreement. The trial court properly applied the law existing in 1985 in
considering the validity of the Agreement and the spousal support waiver
provision.

   Relying on Pendleton, Raymond asserts the trial court should have applied
"contemporary public policy" permitting spousal support waivers for that is
exactly what the Pendleton court did. We find he has misinterpreted the holding
of the case. The Pendleton case, decided in 2002, concerned interpretation of a
premarital agreement executed in 1991, which the court recognized was governed
by the provisions of the Uniform Act. (§ 1600 et seq.) The court's application
of "contemporary public policy" in reaching its conclusion a  spousal support
waiver could be enforced, was based in large  part on its reliance on the
"legislative acts" in adopting the Uniform Act. (Pendleton, supra, 24 Cal.4th at
p. 53.)3 As discussed in more detail above, the court concluded the Legislature
omitted language that would have expressly permitted spousal support waivers in
favor of letting the courts consider the issue, keeping pace with the evolving
public policy.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   As noted
by Roberta, the Pendleton court never explains whether it was applying public
policy at the time the parties signed their agreement in 1991, the time of their
trial (1996-1997), or the time of its decision in 2000. We need not consider the
issue because all these events took place after the Legislature adopted the
Uniform Act in 1986. However, we find Roberta's comment reflects Justice
Kennard's dissenting opinion the majority opinion in Pendleton failed to
"articulate guidelines for the bench and bar explaining when, if ever, such
waivers are enforceable." (Pendleton, supra, 24 Cal.4th at p. 59 (dis. opn. of
Kennard, J.).) "The majority's silence on these important questions does a
disservice to the public, the bar, and the bench." (Id. at p. 60 (dis. opn. of
Kennard, J.).) As mentioned above, the Legislature responded to the Pendleton
decision by creating new rules and guidelines. Needless to say, Raymond does not
want this court to consider contemporary public policy as reflected by this
legislative action because the new rules render Roberta's spousal support waiver
invalid.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The Pendleton court determined public policy had significantly shifted since
enactment of the Uniform Act, and it deemed spousal support waivers were
permitted under section 1612, subdivision (a)(7), a statutory provision that did
not exist when Raymond and Roberta executed their Agreement. That provision
simply stated parties could contract with respect to any rights and obligations
"not in violation of public policy ... ." (§ 1612, subd. (a)(7).) We find the
Pendleton court's holding is limited to whether a 1991 premarital agreement
waiving spousal support, controlled by the Uniform Act and more recent public
policy, was enforceable. The trial court correctly concluded the case was not
applicable.

   We conclude the trial court properly applied the law as it then existed in
1985. It would be unfair to apply the law and public policy as it existed
between 2000 and 2002 (in effect after the Pendleton case), but not also give
Roberta the benefit of the many safeguards and protective requirements enacted
for post-2002 agreements, i.e., requiring independent legal representation and
seven days between when the agreement is presented to a party and the time it is
signed. (§ 1615, subd. (c)(1) & (2).)4 The Legislature's 2002 amendments reflect
the most current "contemporary public policy" concerning spousal support
agreements, and not surprisingly, Raymond is not interested in applying the true
current state of the law. The trial court correctly determined the 1985 waiver
was unenforceable, applying the holding of Higgason and majority rule existing
at the time.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   In light
of this ruling, we need not address the court's alternative ground for deeming
the spousal support waiver invalid on the basis it would be unjust to enforce
it.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

III

   The judgment is affirmed. Respondent shall recover her costs on appeal.

   Rylaarsdam, J., and Fybel, J., concurred.


                              15 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             In re the Marriage of HOWARD L. and LYDIA H. HIBBARD.
               HOWARD L. HIBBARD, Appellant, v. LYDIA H. HIBBARD,
                                  Respondent.

                                    A135901

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FIRST APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION FOUR

            212 Cal. App. 4th 1007; 151 Cal. Rptr. 3d 553; 2013 Cal.
                                 App. LEXIS 23


                        January 15, 2013, Opinion Filed

NOTICE:

   As modified Feb. 8, 2013.

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY: Modified and rehearing denied by In re Marriage of Hibbard,
2013 Cal. App. LEXIS 105 (Cal. App. 1st Dist., Feb. 8, 2013)
Review denied by In re Hibbard, 2013 Cal. LEXIS 2553 (Cal., Mar. 27, 2013)

PRIOR-HISTORY:
   Superior Court of Alameda County, No. CH220577, Thomas Nixon, Commissioner.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(4) Dissolution of Marriage § 67--Spousal Support--Modification--Agreements.
--Under Fam. Code, § 3591, subd. (c), the trial court did not have the
discretion to reduce a spousal support obligation to below $2,000 because the
marital settlement agreement provided that amount as the floor on spousal
support.

   [Kirkland et al., Cal. Family Law Practice and Procedure (2012) ch. 51, §
51.60.]

COUNSEL: Howard L. Hibbard, in pro. per., for Appellant.

John F. Staley; and Garrett C. Dailey for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Baskin, J., with Reardon, Acting P. J., and Rivera, J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: Baskin, J.

OPINION

    BASKIN, J.*--Howard L. Hibbard (Howard)1 appeals from an order denying a
modification of his obligation to pay his former wife, Lydia H. Hibbard (Lydia),
spousal support of $2,000 per month. When the parties, who are both lawyers,
divorced, their written agreement required Howard to pay to Lydia spousal
support in an amount of $4,000 per month, and it allowed for a downward
modification under certain limited circumstances "but shall not be reduced to an
amount of less than two thousand dollars per month ... ." Several years later,
Howard became completely disabled and sought to modify the spousal support order
by invoking the court's inherent jurisdiction to modify it. (See Fam. Code, §
3591.)2 The trial court concluded it retained  jurisdiction to modify the
agreement, but denied relief to Howard based on the absence of any of the very
limited circumstances permitting modification of the agreement. We affirm.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*   Judge of
the Contra Costa Superior Court, assigned by the Chief Justice pursuant to
article VI, section 6 of the California Constitution.
1   As is customary in marital dissolution cases, we refer to the parties by
their first names for ease of reading and to avoid confusion, not out of
disrespect. (In re Marriage of James & Christine C. (2008) 158 Cal.App.4th 1261,
1264, fn. 1 [70 Cal. Rptr. 3d 715].)
2   All further statutory references are to the Family Code, unless otherwise
stated.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

I.

Factual and Procedural Background

   Howard is a Vietnam combat veteran with two Bronze Stars for valor in ground
combat. As a result of his service in Vietnam, he has suffered from symptoms of
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) since 1970. According to his
psychotherapist, Howard became totally disabled in 2011 as a result of his PTSD.
In 1971, sometime after Howard's honorable discharge, the parties married; they
separated in 2001 after nearly 30 years of marriage. They had two children,
neither of them minors now.

   In 2002, the parties negotiated a marital settlement agreement (MSA) and
according to it, both were in "good health" and employed, with Lydia earning
$27,000 and Howard earning $84,000 per year. The MSA was attached to and
incorporated into the judgment of dissolution that included the following
support agreement: "FAMILY SUPPORT: [Howard] shall pay to [Lydia] by the 5th day
of each month the sum of $4,000 per month. Said payments may be reduced to an
amount to be mutually agreed upon by [Howard] and [Lydia], after [minor child]
reaches the age of eighteen, graduates from high school and the family residence
is sold. Such a reduction will be based upon a change of living expenses for
[Lydia], but shall not be reduced to an amount lower than two thousand dollars
per month, and it is agreed by the parties that spousal support is an ongoing
obligation of [Howard], and will only terminate upon [Lydia's] death or
remarriage, or the death of [Howard]. [Howard] waives all right to support, now
or in the future." (Italics added.) The MSA also included the following
provisions: "VOLUNTARY AND INFORMED CONSENT: The parties further acknowledge
and agree that they enter into this agreement voluntarily, free from duress,
fraud, undue influence, coercion, or misrepresentation of any kind. [¶] ... [¶]
MODIFICATION, REVOCATION OR TERMINATION: This agreement may be altered, amended,
modified, revoked, or terminated only by an instrument in writing expressly
referring to this document by paragraph to be modified and signed by both
parties. Both parties waive the right to claim, contend or assert in the future
that this agreement was modified, canceled, superseded or changed by oral
agreement[,] course of conduct, or estoppel in the future. [¶] ... [¶]
INVALIDITY; SEVERABILITY: This agreement has been jointly negotiated by and
between both parties and shall not be construed against either party. If any
term, provision or condition of this agreement is held by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, void or unenforceable, the remainder of  the
provisions shall remain in full force and effect and shall in no way be
affected, impaired or invalidated."

   In May 2002, Lydia's support was reduced to $2,000 per month, when the
parties' daughter turned 18 years old. At some point, the family residence was
sold.

   On February 10, 2012, Howard filed a motion to terminate spousal support,
alleging that in December 2011 he had been diagnosed formally with PTSD,
relating to his service in Vietnam, and that he was currently unable to work
more than two to three hours per day. Howard also alleged in 2012 that he had to
borrow $25,000 in order to keep his law practice running and to pay for spousal
support; he also had a federal tax lien against him in the amount of $39,000.

   In his declaration, Howard indicated he would be applying for "a service
connected disability"; he estimated it would take over one year to determine his
eligibility. Howard alleged that Lydia's income had increased to $36,000 per
year. He alleged that the parties' circumstances had changed and the possibility
of either of them becoming disabled was neither contemplated by the parties nor
reflected in the MSA. Howard further declared that his legal business had
declined "due to the recession and impact on real property," such that his
income had been reduced to $38,000 per year--an amount he did not expect to
improve. His income and expense declaration stated that his income was $4,000
per month and his expenses were $7,542 per month. Howard later declared that he
was shutting down his law practice and that he hoped to receive disability
income of $2,940 per month plus Social Security of $1,100 per month for a total
of $4,040 per month. He attached his application for Veterans Benefits
Administration disability benefits.3 By reason of  the foregoing, he asked that
his spousal support be terminated.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Howard's
declaration in support of his application for disability benefits reads as
follows: "Since returning from Vietnam in 1970, I have continuously [sic] been
hounded by my mind. This has been going on so long, I thought it was normal and
learned to cope with it until my anxieties started limiting my work day. [¶] I
have suffered war flashbacks and nightmares every day since my discharge. A
daily flashback is triggered by random scenes such as a road sign, odd vehicles,
people's faces or other scenes, without any direct relationship to war. Almost
every night, I am fighting nightmares by running to or from, climbing away or
toward, hiding from, searching for something I need or fighting some dangerous
circumstances. [¶] In order to keep 'the demons' in check, I abused alcohol and
marijuana every night to cope. Unless I drank myself into a stupor, when I would
try to go to sleep, my mind would turn into a three ring circus of anxieties and
demons. I, like many veterans, threw all the war memories into the closet to
forget it and move on. When I came back from the war I worked through attention
deficit problems in college and law school. I was able to avoid the debilitating
effects of excessive alcohol abuse as I have always maintained a rigorous
workout schedule a couple times a week. [¶] Since 2001, I started to write a
novel. The book is about an attorney who suffers flashbacks every day and
nightmares at night. I used all of my terrifying experiences as chapters in the
book. During this process, I began to notice that my ability to think had become
impaired. The previously friendly coping mechanism of alcohol and marijuana
started to short circuit my mind so I gave up marijuana and continued with
alcohol. In the fall of 2011 alcohol abuse would not calm my mind and I sought
help from my VA nurse practitioner when she confronted me about one of my
checkup blood tests which came up positive for a high amount of alcohol. [¶] I
have had my own law firm since 1973 and thinking through a legal problem is
essencial [sic] to maintaining my business. I am a sole practitioner with only
my wife to help in the office. My ability to think through legal problems
started to decrease from 8 or more hours to 5-6 hours in 2001-2005."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Lydia responded by noting that Howard's law practice grossed $207,760 in
2010, the last year for which he had provided records. From that revenue, he had
paid his current wife's salary and $1,200 per year in continuing education
expenses. Lydia explained her current financial situation as follows: She was 63
years of age and entitled to a teacher's retirement of $965 per month, which,
when added to her Social Security benefits of $773, would be insufficient for
her needs without support. She explained how she worked 52 hours per week, 10
months of the year and was just barely surviving with her teacher's salary and
spousal support. As a result, she had to meet unexpected expenses with her
equity line or credit card. Additionally, she was being treated for a serious,
and potentially sight terminating, eye condition. Lydia worried that her future
was clouded by the possibility of blindness and asked the court to deny Howard's
motion.

   The matter was heard on declaration and oral argument on May 17, 2012. The
trial court determined that it had jurisdiction and that even though Howard's
circumstances were different now, support was subject to an agreed-upon floor of
$2,000 per month that was an enforceable and nonmodifiable order. Howard's
motion to terminate spousal support was denied.

   Howard filed this timely appeal.

II.

Discussion

A. Standard of Review and General Legal Principles Regarding Spousal Support

   " 'Marital settlement agreements incorporated into a dissolution judgment are
construed under the statutory rules governing the interpretations of contracts
generally.' " (In re Marriage of Simundza (2004) 121 Cal.App.4th 1513, 1518 [18
Cal. Rptr. 3d 377] (Simundza).) We conduct an independent review of the MSA that
is the subject of the appeal. (In re Marriage of Smith (2007) 148 Cal.App.4th
1115, 1120 [56 Cal. Rptr. 3d 341]; In re Marriage of Davis (2004) 120
Cal.App.4th 1007, 1017-1018 [16 Cal. Rptr. 3d 220]  (Davis).) We construe the
MSA under the rules governing the interpretation of contracts generally. (In re
Marriage of Corona (2009) 172 Cal.App.4th 1205, 1221 [92 Cal. Rptr. 3d 17];
Simundza, supra, at p. 1518; In re Marriage of Iberti (1997) 55 Cal.App.4th
1434, 1439 [64 Cal. Rptr. 2d 766].)

   As has often been restated: " 'The fundamental goal of contractual
interpretation is to give effect to the mutual intention of the parties.
[Citation.] If contractual language  is clear and explicit, it governs.
[Citation.] On the other hand, "[i]f the terms of a promise are in any respect
ambiguous or uncertain, it must be interpreted in the sense in which the
promisor believed, at the time of making it, that the promisee understood it."
[Citations.]' [Citation.] 'The mutual intention to which the courts give effect
is determined by objective manifestations of the parties' intent, including the
words used in the agreement, as well as extrinsic evidence of such objective
matters as the surrounding circumstances under which the parties negotiated or
entered into the contract; the object, nature and subject matter of the
contract; and the subsequent conduct of the parties. [Citations.]' [Citations.]"
(People v. Shelton (2006) 37 Cal.4th 759, 767 [37 Cal. Rptr. 3d 354, 125 P.3d
290]; accord, Simundza, supra, 121 Cal.App.4th at p. 1518; Davis, supra, 120
Cal.App.4th at p. 1018; In re Marriage of Iberti, supra, 55 Cal.App.4th at pp.
1439-1440.)

   The focus is on ascertaining and implementing the parties' mutual intent when
they entered into the settlement. (Simundza, supra, 121 Cal.App.4th at p. 1518.)
In performing this task, a court must construe the judgment as a whole rather
than separately considering its individual clauses (Yarus v. Yarus (1960) 178
Cal.App.2d 190, 201 [3 Cal. Rptr. 50]), and consider the circumstances when the
parties signed the settlement agreement (In re Marriage of Williams (1972) 29
Cal.App.3d 368, 378 [105 Cal. Rptr. 406]).

   Generally, "[s]pousal support awards and agreements, temporary as well as
'permanent,' are modifiable throughout the support period ... except as
otherwise provided by agreement of the parties. [(Fam. Code, §§ 3603, 3651,
subd. (c)(1), 4333.)]" (Hogoboom & King, Cal. Practice Guide: Family Law (The
Rutter Group 2012) ¶ 17:90, p. 17-32.5 (rev. # 1, 2012), italics omitted.)
"Unlike child support jurisdiction, spousal support jurisdiction does not
necessarily continue postjudgment and may be divested by the terms of the order.
Unless jurisdiction to award spousal support has been either expressly reserved
by the order or impliedly reserved ... , postjudgment spousal support is limited
by the stated duration of the order. [Citations.]" (Id., ¶ 17:91, p. 17-32.5
(rev. # 1, 2012), italics omitted.)

   There is an implied statutory retention of jurisdiction in cases where there
has been a lengthy marriage. "In marriages of 'long duration' (presumptively 10
years or longer), the court is deemed to retain spousal support jurisdiction
'indefinitely' (notwithstanding the absence of an express reservation of
jurisdiction) absent written agreement of the parties to the contrary or a court
order terminating spousal support. [Citations.]" (Hogoboom & King, Cal. Practice
Guide: Family Law, supra, ¶ 17:92, p. 17-32.6 (rev. # 1, 2012), italics
omitted.) "Even so, a retention of spousal support jurisdiction after a
'lengthy' marriage does not limit the court's discretion to terminate spousal
support in later proceedings on a showing of changed circumstances. [(Fam. Code,
§ 4336, subd. (c).)]" (Id., ¶ 17:93, p. 17-32.6 (rev. # 1, 2012), italics
omitted.) Nevertheless, a court's spousal support jurisdiction is limited by
other events set forth in the statutory scheme. For example, as relevant here, a
spousal support agreement "may not be modified or revoked to the extent that a
written agreement ... specifically provides that the spousal support is not
subject to modification or termination."4 (§ 3591, subd. (c); see § 3651, subd.
(d).)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   Section
3591 provides, in relevant part, as follows: "(a) Except as provided in
subdivision[] ... (c), the provisions of an agreement for the support of either
party are subject to subsequent modification or termination by court order. [¶]
... [¶] (c) An agreement for spousal support may not be modified or revoked to
the extent that a written agreement, or, if there is no written agreement, an
oral agreement entered into in open court between the parties, specifically
provides that the spousal support is not subject to modification or
termination."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

 B. Waiver of the Right to Modify

   The question raised in this appeal is whether the parties have agreed in
writing that the spousal support is not subject to modification beyond the
$2,000 floor or subject to termination except upon the death of either party or
Lydia's remarriage. Since there is no conflict in the extrinsic evidence, we
make an independent determination of the meaning of the agreement. (Parsons v.
Bristol Development Co. (1965) 62 Cal.2d 861, 865-866 [44 Cal. Rptr. 767, 402
P.2d 839].)

   Howard argues that the court has the power to modify his support order. We
agree that in general courts can and do modify support orders. Here, however,
there is an agreement and a stipulated order, both of which provide that spousal
support is not modifiable except for the specific circumstances resulting in a
reduction of support to $2,000. The court has limited power under these
circumstances. "[T]he trial court's discretion to modify the spousal support
order is constrained by the terms of the marital settlement agreement. The court
may not simply reevaluate the spousal support award." (In re Marriage of Aninger
(1990) 220 Cal.App.3d 230, 238 [269 Cal. Rptr. 388].)

   There are several case examples which illustrate the ability of spouses to
agree to MSA's that limit the power of the courts to modify spousal support,
despite intervening, possibly unfair, changes of circumstance. For example, in
In re Marriage of Rabkin (1986) 179 Cal.App.3d 1071, 1075 [225 Cal. Rptr. 219],
the parties agreed that the wife would receive the first $214,000 from the sale
of the family residence, receipt of which would not constitute a change of
circumstances for modification of spousal support. When the house sold, she
received $45,000 net cash and a note paying $1,793 per month. (Id. at p. 1077.)
The trial court then reduced her spousal support based in part on the income she
was receiving from the note. (Id. at p. 1078.) The Court of Appeal reversed,
holding that the parties' stipulated support order precluded modification based
upon the sale of the residence. (Id. at p. 1081.)

   Similarly, in In re Marriage of Sasson (1982) 129 Cal.App.3d 140, 142 [180
Cal. Rptr. 815], the parties' 1977 MSA provided that the husband would pay the
wife "nonmodifiable" spousal support until the death of either party, remarriage
of the wife, or March 31, 1985. In 1977, right after the execution of the MSA,
the wife began cohabiting with another man, deposited the spousal support
payments into a shared bank account with him, held herself out to be this man's
spouse, used his name, and bore a child with him. (Id. at pp. 142-143.) Despite
it being patently unfair to continue spousal support, the husband's motion to
terminate support was denied by the trial court and upheld on appeal. (Id. at
pp. 144, 147.) By agreeing that support would be nonmodifiable on any ground,
the husband had waived the ability to modify the order under the provisions of
Civil Code former section 4801.5 (now Fam. Code, § 4323). (Sasson, at pp.
146-147.)

    As these cases instruct, when drafting MSA's, the parties and counsel should
be particularly mindful of all possible circumstances that might warrant a
modification or cessation of spousal support, and plan accordingly. Davis, supra
, 120 Cal.App.4th 1007 provides yet another example of the consequences
resulting from the lack of careful draftsmanship. There, an agreement provided
that spousal support was to continue "until ... the date [wife] receives the
first payment that reflects her [share of husband's] pension, ... at which time
spousal support shall terminate forever" was read literally to require actual
receipt of payment. (Id. at p. 1011.) The husband chose a retirement option that
permitted him to " 'retire' " but continue working for up to five years, during
which time his monthly pension payments would accumulate in an account and could
be disbursed as a lump sum when he stopped working. (Id. at pp. 1011-1012.) The
husband sought to pay the wife her share of his monthly pension benefit and
invoked the termination provisions of their MSA. (Id. at p. 1013.) The trial
court agreed with the husband, but the appellate court thought otherwise, ruling
that the agreement required the wife to "receive" her interest in the husband's
pension--an event that could not occur until the husband stopped working  and
the accumulated retirement payments were disbursed. (Id. at pp. 1014, 1018-1020;
see In re Marriage of Sherman (1984) 162 Cal.App.3d 1132, 1138-1140 [208 Cal.
Rptr. 832] [precluding spousal support modification upon wife's remarriage where
MSA provided terms would not be modifiable].)

   In the instant case, the parties agreed that spousal support would "only
terminate" upon Howard's death or Lydia's death or remarriage. The MSA further
provided that Howard would pay Lydia $4,000 per month in spousal support. When
the parties' daughter graduated from high school and the family residence was
sold, the $4,000 per month could be reduced to an amount mutually agreed upon by
the parties, "based upon a change of living expenses for [Lydia], but shall not
be reduced to an amount lower than two thousand dollars per month ... ." The
trial court determined that it had jurisdiction to modify, but nevertheless,
based on the terms of the agreement, it lacked the ability to modify the
agreed-upon support to less than $2,000. We agree that the MSA made the support
order nonmodifiable to not less than $2,000.

   Although not cited by the parties, we pause to note that In re Marriage of
Alter (2009) 171 Cal.App.4th 718, 738-739 [89 Cal. Rptr. 3d 849] reached an
opposite conclusion, albeit on dissimilar facts. There, an MSA provided that the
husband would pay the wife $3,000 per month in spousal support. The wife was
entitled to a portion of money the husband inherited from his parents. (Id. at
pp. 724-725.) If the wife's portion of the husband's inheritance came to her in
the form of periodic payments, then the $3,000 per month spousal support could
be reduced, " '[b]ut in no event shall said spousal support ... be in an amount
less than one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars per month, regardless of the size of
any inheritance monies Wife may receive." (Id. at p. 739.) The spousal support
payment could also be reduced to $1,000 if the wife's income from active
employment exceeded $75,000 per year or if, upon remarriage, her new spouse had
an annual income or net worth exceeding specified amounts. (Ibid.) The trial
court determined the MSA set a floor for support and reduced the spousal support
payment to $1,000. (Ibid.)  The appellate court reversed, finding that the MSA
did not make the spousal support order absolutely nonmodifiable to less than
$1,000. (Ibid.) Rather, the court determined the agreement "specified the $1,000
floor would apply if [wife] received a stream of income from her portion of
[husband's] inheritance or when her own salary or that of a new spouse reached a
certain level." (Ibid.) The court further noted that the wife "implicitly
concede[d]" that the agreement did "not set an absolute minimum ... ." (Ibid.)

   Here, unlike in In re Marriage of Alter, supra, 171 Cal.App.4th 718, the
support minimum was not contingent on Lydia's income level or on any  income
stream derived from Howard's property. Rather, the MSA unambiguously set a floor
of $2,000 per month for spousal support. We conclude the trial court correctly
interpreted the MSA as setting a nonmodifiable support minimum of $2,000.

C. Howard's Other Contractual Theories

   Despite the otherwise clear language in the MSA providing for a spousal
support floor of $2,000 and termination only in the event of either party's
death or Lydia's remarriage, Howard asserts various contractual theories to
support his position that his support obligations should be terminated. For
example, he argues that an "unequivocal provision" in the MSA was required to
divest the trial court of its jurisdiction to modify spousal support. According
to Howard, the MSA should have contained "specific language precluding judicial
modification." Not so. It is well established that no specific formula or "
'magic' words" are required to preclude modification. (In re Marriage of Jones
(1990) 222 Cal.App.3d 505, 510 [271 Cal. Rptr. 761]; see In re Marriage of
Bennett (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 1022, 1025-1026 [193 Cal. Rptr. 113] [holding that
despite lack of term " 'irrevocable,' " clear intent of parties was
nonmodifiable support obligation].)

   Howard's reliance on In re Marriage of Cesnalis (2003) 106 Cal.App.4th 1267
[131 Cal. Rptr. 2d 436] does nothing to further his position, as that case
actually favors Lydia. In Cesnalis, the first draft of a stipulated judgment
provided that the husband would pay spousal support of $4,000 per month starting
in October 2000, and continuing until either party's death, " 'the remarriage of
Wife' " or September 2003, whichever occurred first. (Id. at p. 1270.) The
duration was not modifiable under any circumstances, and the termination date
was absolute. (Id. at pp. 1270-1271.) The wife insisted the words " 'the
remarriage of Wife' " be removed. (Id. at p. 1270.) The husband agreed and added
other language reiterating the three-year duration of support. (Id. at p. 1271.)
The stipulated judgment was entered in October 2000. (Ibid.) The wife remarried
in August 2001 and her former husband moved unsuccessfully to terminate support
based on her remarriage. (Ibid.) The husband appealed and the Court of Appeal
affirmed, explaining as follows: "No particular words are required to waive
section 4337 and make spousal support continue upon remarriage, but silence will
not do. [Citations.] There must be a written agreement on the issue or the
subject. [Citations.] [¶] Section 4337's remarriage termination is not waived
simply because the written agreement fails to include remarriage among the
terminating events that are expressly mentioned. [Citation.] [¶] Nor is section
4337 overcome if the written agreement simply makes the spousal support
provision 'nonmodifiable' in general. [Citations.] This is because 'termination'
and 'modification' are distinct concepts describing different ways  to alter a
support obligation.  [Citations.] [¶] [In re Marriage of] Thornton [(2002) 95
Cal.App.4th 251 [115 Cal. Rptr. 2d 380]] provides that a written agreement to
waive section 4337's terminating provisions must be 'specific and express.'
[Citation.] Nevertheless, as noted, no particular words are required, and
extrinsic evidence is admissible to resolve whether a written agreement has
waived the section 4337 remarriage termination provision. [Citations.] Before
such extrinsic evidence is properly admitted, however, there must be language in
the written agreement reasonably susceptible to interpretation as a declaration
of an intent that support continue beyond remarriage. [Citations.]" (Cesnalis,
supra, at p. 1272.)

   To the extent Howard suggests that his disability was not foreseeable and,
thus, because of either changed circumstances or impossibility5 the agreement is
subject to modification, this argument is belied by the facts. According to
Howard, he had been suffering with PTSD for 30 years when he agreed to the floor
on spousal support. He was approximately 52 years old when he signed the
agreement and must have known retirement lay ahead for him. Moreover, both
Howard and Lydia were licensed attorneys at the time they signed the MSA.
Considering the judgment as a whole and the circumstances of the parties when
they signed the MSA, we conclude the parties did not intend that a reduction in
Howard's income, either through disability or retirement, or some combination
thereof, would create changed circumstances warranting modification of the
support agreement. (See Simundza, supra, 121 Cal.App.4th at p. 1518; Davis,
supra, 120 Cal.App.4th at p. 1018; In re Marriage of Iberti, supra, 55
Cal.App.4th at pp. 1439-1440.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   Howard
incorrectly cites the Restatement Second of Contracts, section 265, to argue the
theory of frustration of purpose. He claims that since it is now impossible for
him to comply with the spousal support provisions, he is excused from his
performance. This argument is misplaced for two reasons. First, none of the
cases he cited ever applied this theory. Second, Howard omitted the following
from the passage he quoted: "Contract liability is strict liability. It is an
accepted maxim that pacta sunt servanda, contracts are to be kept. The obligor
is therefore liable in damages for breach of contract even if he is without
fault and even if circumstances have made the contract more burdensome or less
desirable than he had anticipated." (Rest.2d Contracts, ch. 11, Introductory
Note, p. 309.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The language in the parties' MSA and stipulated judgment is specific, and the
MSA expressly provides in pertinent part: "[I]n no event shall it be reduced to
an amount lower than two thousand dollars per month, and it is agreed by the
parties that spousal support is an ongoing obligation of [Howard], and will only
terminate upon [Lydia's] death, [Lydia's] remarriage or the death of [Howard]."
Indeed, if Lydia became disabled and sought to increase spousal support, she
would face the same insurmountable obstacle that Howard faces here--the clear
and unambiguous language of the MSA.

   We conclude that as a matter of law the spousal support order in the MSA is
not modifiable, or otherwise subject to termination, until one of the stipulated
circumstances occurs, namely, the death of either party or the remarriage of
Lydia.

III.

Disposition

   The judgment is affirmed. Lydia is entitled to her costs on appeal.

   Reardon, Acting P. J., and Rivera, J., concurred.


                              16 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of JOYCE LESLY and ALLAN SHERIDAN.  JOYCE
            LESLY SHERIDAN, Appellant, v. ALLAN SHERIDAN, Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 27364

           Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

            140 Cal. App. 3d 742; 189 Cal. Rptr. 622; 1983 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1475


                                 March 11, 1983

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Appellant's petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court
was denied May 25, 1983.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Orange County, No. D-100183, Sheila Prell
Sonenshine, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1a) (1b) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 24 -- Dissolution and Separation
Proceedings -- Modification and Vacation of Orders -- Modification to Include
Reservation of Jurisdiction Over Spousal Support. -- In a proceeding to modify
spousal support provisions contained in an interlocutory judgment of dissolution
of marriage, the trial court did not err in issuing an order modifying the
judgment of dissolution to include a reservation of jurisdiction over spousal
support, where both the minutes and a partial transcript of the court
proceedings in the dissolution action showed unequivocally that the omission of
a provision reserving jurisdiction over spousal support was clerical error.
Furthermore, that the dissolution court's original statement of the reservation
was without limitation and was not intended to be limited to the five-year
period during which the wife was to receive spousal support was indicated in the
transcript by the court's statement: "Yes, and that is indefinite" in response
to the question: "It's a reservation of jurisdiction; is that correct, your
Honor?"

(2) Judgments § 32 -- Amendment and Correction -- Time to Correct -- Clerical
Errors.  -- Regardless of the lapse of time or finality of judgment a court may,
upon motion of a party or upon its own motion, correct a clerical mistake in its
judgment, whether the mistake was made by the clerk, counsel, or the court
itself.

(3a) (3b) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 68 -- Property Rights of Parties
-- Support of Other Party -- Modification, Revocation, and Extension -- Factors
Considered -- Duration of Marriage -- Diligence in Seeking Gainful Employment.
-- In a proceeding to modify spousal support provisions contained in an
interlocutory judgment of dissolution of marriage that awarded the former wife $
1,200 a month for five years, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in
denying the former wife a further award of spousal support under the
circumstances shown. The trial court properly considered the duration of the
marriage as one of the factors, but the major reason it denied further support
was its determination that in the five years since the interlocutory judgment,
the former wife had done little to prepare herself for or to seek gainful
employment. This was supported by evidence that the wife attended school for one
year "for enjoyment and not for education," that she obtained a real estate
license and attempted to sell real estate with little success, that she had an
unproductive business which she discontinued, and that she had had a commission
sales job at which she hardly earned enough money to pay for her expenses.

(4) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69 -- Support of Other Party --
Modification, Revocation, and Extension -- Change of Conditions -- Changes
Constituting Grounds for Modification. -- In an action for dissolution of
marriage, the order of the trial court awarding the former wife spousal support
for five years did not limit the kinds of changes in circumstances that would
constitute grounds for modification of the award to continue support for a
longer period to only "reasons of health and burdens of caring for the
children." The court's award was made with the express purpose of giving the
former wife incentive to prepare herself to become self-sustaining, and its
statement regarding changes in circumstances was not made in the formal order,
but orally in the presence of the parties.  Furthermore, the court's language
strongly suggested the circumstances enumerated were meant to be only
illustrative of changes in circumstances that could cause it to modify the
support order, particularly in light of the fact the enumeration of
circumstances was immediately followed by the statement ". . . and that type of
thing."

(5) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69 -- Support of Other Party --
Modification, Revocation, and Extension -- Change of Conditions -- Continuing
Unemployment of Former Spouse.  -- In a proceeding to modify spousal support
provisions contained in an interlocutory judgment of dissolution of marriage
that awarded the former wife support of $ 1,200 a month for five years, the
former wife demonstrated a material change in circumstances, where the
circumstances at the time the original order was made were that, although the
wife was then unemployed, the court expected she would be self-supporting within
five years, and where at the time of the modification proceedings, the wife had
not, in fact, become self-supporting.

COUNSEL: James L. McDonald for Appellant Wife.

Horowitz & Horowitz and Stephen P. Horowitz for Appellant Husband.

JUDGES: Opinion by Kaufman, Acting P. J., with McDaniel, J., and Cox, J., *
concurring.

*   Assigned by the Chairperson of the Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: KAUFMAN

OPINION

     Joyce Lesly Sheridan (former wife) moved to modify child and spousal
support provisions contained in an interlocutory judgment  of dissolution of
marriage and for attorney fees.  In response Allan Sheridan (former husband)
filed opposition and a request for affirmative relief, asserting the court's
jurisdiction over spousal support had terminated and requesting former wife be
ordered to pay child support for the child living with him.  After hearing, the
trial court issued an order modifying the judgment of dissolution to include a
reservation of jurisdiction over spousal support but declined to award former
wife any monetary support under the circumstances shown. The order also denied
former husband's request that former wife be required to pay child support for
the child living with him and increased to $ 500 per month the child support
former husband is required to pay to former wife for the child living with her.
Former wife was awarded attorney fees of $ 1,000 in respect to the proceedings.

   Former wife appeals from the order insofar as it fails to award her spousal
support. Former husband filed a notice of cross-appeal in which he contested the
court's modification of the judgment to include an indefinite reservation of
jurisdiction over spousal support, the award of $ 1,000 attorney fees to former
wife, and the denial of his request for child support payments for the child
living with him.  In his brief on appeal, however, former husband has expressly
abandoned the appeal with respect to the award of attorney fees and indicated
that as it relates to the denial of his request for child support, his appeal is
precautionary and taken only because the trial court expressly stated its
rulings on child support were interrelated with its denial of spousal support.

   Thus, the major issues presented by the appeal are whether the court erred in
modifying the judgment to include a reservation of jurisdiction over spousal
support and, if not, whether the court abused judicial discretion in denying
former wife an award of spousal support under the circumstances shown. We
conclude the judgment was properly modified and no abuse of judicial discretion
has been demonstrated.  Accordingly, the order will be affirmed.

    The interlocutory judgment filed December 16, 1976, ordered former husband
to pay to former wife spousal support of $ 1,200 per month "commencing August 1,
1976, and  continuing on the 1st day of each month thereafter for a period of 60
months." It contained no provision reserving the court's jurisdiction over
spousal support. However, both the court's minutes and a partial transcript of
the court proceedings giving rise to the interlocutory judgment show
unequivocally that the omission of a provision reserving the court's
jurisdiction over spousal support was a clerical error.

   The minutes read in relevant part: "Court orders . . .  spousal support to
wife of $ 1,200.00 per month for five years commencing August 1, 1976, at which
time spousal support shall terminate; court shall retain jurisdiction over
spousal support; . . ." The transcript reads in pertinent part: "With respect to
spousal  support, the Court wishes to retain jurisdiction indefinitely with
respect to child [sic] support, but order that support be paid in the amount of
$ 1200 a month for the next five years on or before the first of the month.
[para.] The obvious purpose of awarding it exactly that way is to give
Petitioner [former wife] the incentive to prepare herself to become
self-sustaining, . . .  If needs change, of course, the burden is on you
[presumably former wife] to Petition the Court for change of circumstances.
[para.] It's anticipated that spousal support will terminate at the conclusion
of the five-year period, or 60 months.  After a period of 60 months, unless due
to reasons of health and burdens of caring for the children and that type of
thing situation [sic], of course, it's necessary to continue support."

   Former wife's attorney asked: "It's a reservation of jurisdiction; is that
correct, your Honor?" The court responded: "Yes, and that is indefinite. We have
still got five years, and you have one kid that's 11 (sic) years old, and I
think that as much as the Petitioner [former wife] will have custody, that there
ought to be protection in that matter."

    Regardless of the lapse of time or finality of judgment a court may, upon
motion of a party or upon its own motion, correct a clerical mistake in its
judgment, whether the mistake was made by the clerk, counsel or the court
itself.  (Code Civ. Proc., § 473; In re Marriage of Mercado (1977) 75 Cal.App.3d
701, 704 [141 Cal.Rptr. 423]; Zisk v. City of Roseville (1976) 56 Cal.App.3d 41,
47 [127 Cal.Rptr. 896]; see 4 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (2d ed. 1971) Judgment, §
66, p. 3228.) "Where the judgment as signed does not express the actual judicial
intention of the court, but is contrary thereto, the signing of such a purported
judgment is a clerical error rather than a judicial one." ( Zisk v. City of
Roseville, supra, 56 Cal.App.3d at p. 47; accord: Bastajian v. Brown (1941) 19
Cal.2d 209, 216 [120 P.2d 9]; see 4 Witkin, Cal.  Procedure (2d ed. 1971)
Judgment, § 68, p. 3230.)

    The court acted with propriety in modifying the judgment to include a
provision reserving jurisdiction over spousal support, that having clearly been
the intention of the court at the time the interlocutory judgment of dissolution
was rendered.

   Former husband argues that, even so, the court intended to limit its
reservation of jurisdiction to the five-year period mentioned by it and did not
intend the five-year period to be enlarged even by timely motion within the
period.  We believe not.  The court's original statement of the reservation was
without limitation, and while some of the language in its subsequent discussion
was ambiguous, ultimately, in answer to counsel's clarifying question, "It's a
reservation of jurisdiction; is that correct, your Honor?" the court responded:
"Yes, and that is indefinite."

    We conclude the modification to insert into the support order the
reservation expressly stated by the court in announcing its ruling but omitted
from the order by clerical error was proper, and we turn to the question of
whether the court abused discretion in denying former wife an actual award of
spousal support.

    The circumstances are that at the time of the separation of the parties they
had been married approximately 13 years and had 2 minor children, a son age 9
and a daughter age 6 at the time of the interlocutory hearing.  Former wife was
33 years old and not employed other than as a homemaker.   As a result of the
division of the community property, including a balancing payment, former wife
received $ 102,000 cash.  Former husband was ordered to pay $ 200 per month on
account of the support of each child and, as previously indicated, $ 1,200 per
month spousal support for 60 months at which time spousal support would be
reduced to zero unless (as now modified) the court should otherwise order.

   Former husband is an orthodontist in practice as a sole practitioner.  His
salary from his professional corporation amounts to some $ 6,000 per month and
his standard of living is high if not affluent.  After entry of the
interlocutory judgment one of the two children began residing fulltime with
former husband and the other child began spending a great deal of time with
former husband. By agreement husband ceased paying support for the child living
with him but he continued to pay child support for the other child.

   Of the $ 102,000 cash received by former wife as a result of the division of
the community property, she used $ 25,000 for a down payment on her home and
some $ 18,000 additional fixing it up.  At the time of the hearing she had about
$ 20,000 in savings, the balance having been used for living expenses over the
previous five years.  She had virtually no income at the time of the hearing,
nor at the time of separation or at the time the interlocutory judgment was
rendered.  After entry of the interlocutory judgment she attended Orange Coast
College for one year and thereafter studied at another school for a real estate
sales license which she subsequently obtained.  For a time she attempted selling
real estate with little success.  She also had a polyester silk flower and plant
business during 1979 and 1980 but again found that unproductive and discontinued
it.  For a few months she held a job selling business equipment on a commission
basis, but she found she was hardly earning enough money to pay for her
expenses.

    Former husband contends the court's order was proper because no appropriate
change in circumstances was shown.  First, it is argued that in making the
original support order the court limited the kinds of change in circumstances
that would constitute grounds for modification to "reasons of health and burdens
of caring for the children" and that there was no evidence of any change for the
worse as to those things.

    We do not decide whether a court may in the manner suggested limit the
future exercise of its discretion to a consideration of only certain enumerated
changes in circumstances.  Certainly, an order should not be given that effect
unless it is crystal clear that was what the court intended.  Here the language
of the court strongly suggests the circumstances it enumerated were meant to be
only illustrative of changes in circumstances that could cause it to modify the
support order. The enumeration of circumstances was immediately followed by,
"and that type of thing situation [sic], of course, it's necessary to continue
support." In addition, we observe that the court's statement was made, not in
the formal order, but orally in the presence of the parties with the express
purpose of giving former wife "incentive to prepare herself to become self
sustaining."

    Next, former husband points out that wife was unemployed at the time of the
original order and is still substantially unemployed. He argues therefore that
no change of circumstances at all was shown.  We do not agree.

   The reduction from $ 1,200 a month to zero when coupled with the reservation
of jurisdiction over support was tantamount to a step-down order to $ 1 per year
such as was involved in In re Marriage of Smith (1978) 79 Cal.App.3d 725, 741
[145 Cal.Rptr. 205], and it is true that to obtain a modification it was
incumbent upon former wife to demonstrate a material change in circumstances.
However, she did.  The circumstances at the time the original order was made
were that, although she was then unemployed, the court expected she would be
self-supporting within five years.  The fact is she was not, and that
constituted a change in circumstances sufficient to support a modification had
the failure of the  court's expectation to materialize not resulted from former
wife's own conduct.  And that brings us to former husband's contention that the
court's order is supported by evidence that wife did not diligently attempt to
find and keep gainful employment.

    The court stated it had no difficulty in finding that former husband had the
ability to pay $ 1,200 per month spousal support and that if the parties had
just separated the court would find the request for $ 1,200 or $ 1,500 a month
spousal support reasonable.  However, in denying spousal support the court
stated: "And I can only conclude, based on the evidence in front of me, that
after five years, the last two years of which were spent working at a job that
paid zero money, going to school for enjoyment and not for education and being
involved in creative endeavors that sometimes cost her more than she reaped in
terms of income, that she thought that something was going to happen at the end
of five years that I am not aware of.  And part of that possibility may be that
the respondent [former husband] was going to go on supporting her." The court
also stated that it felt former husband had "in effect, . . . done his duty" by
paying $ 1,200 a month spousal support for 5 years when the duration of the
marriage had been only 13 years.

    While we do not fully agree with the thought that payment of spousal support
for 5 years necessarily constitutes the full performance of duty following a
13-year marriage, we do not interpret the court's statements as indicating, and
may not presume, the court was employing some rule of thumb or fixed yard-stick
with respect to a former husband's duty of spousal support. It appears to us
that the duration of the marriage was only one factor considered by the trial
court, and it was certainly proper to consider that factor.  (Civ. Code, § 4801;
In re Marriage of Morrison (1978) 20 Cal.3d 437, 449 [143 Cal.Rptr. 439, 573
P.2d 41]; In re Marriage of Rosan (1972) 24 Cal.App.3d 885, 892 [101 Cal.Rptr.
295].)

   We are persuaded that the major reason the trial court denied an award of
spousal support at the present time was its determination that in the five years
since the interlocutory judgment former wife had done little to prepare herself
for or to seek gainful employment. A court may deny an application for increased
spousal support on that basis.  ( In re Marriage of Morrison, supra, 20 Cal.3d
at p. 453; see In re Marriage of Rosan, supra, 24 Cal.App.3d at p. 896.)

   Wife urges her failure in this regard was based on poor judgment rather than
bad faith.  However, we are unaware of any requirement that the failure to
exercise diligence in seeking gainful employment must have been in bad faith to
constitute grounds for denying a request for increased spousal support. The
ground is unreasonable delay in seeking employment consistent with the party's
ability.  (See In re Marriage of Rosan, supra, 24 Cal.App.3d at p. 896.) Whether
there has been such unreasonable delay is a question addressed peculiarly to the
trial court which heard the party's testimony and observed the party's demeanor
at trial.

   While we might have ordered otherwise, we cannot say the trial court abused
judicial discretion in declining to make an award of spousal support under the
circumstances shown.

   The order is affirmed.


                              17 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of CLIFFORD L. and CINDY CORMAN. CLIFFORD
               L. CORMAN, Respondent, v. CINDY CORMAN, Appellant.

                                  No. B105905.

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SECOND APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION FIVE

          59 Cal. App. 4th 1492; 69 Cal. Rptr. 2d 880; 1997 Cal. App.
          LEXIS 1039; 97 Cal. Daily Op. Service 9399; 97 Daily Journal
                                   DAR 15094


                           December 15, 1997, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County. Super. Ct. No. ND010446. John Chemeleski, Temporary Judge. *

*   Pursuant to California Constitution, article VI, § 21.

COUNSEL: Jeffrey W. Doeringer for Appellant.

Marjorie G. Fuller and George S. Zugsmith for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Grignon, Acting P. J., with Armstrong and Godoy Perez, JJ.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: GRIGNON

OPINION

     GRIGNON, Acting P. J.

   Appellant Cindy Corman appeals from a postdissolution judgment child support
order entered in favor of her former husband, respondent Clifford L. Corman.
Cindy 1 contends that the family law court abused its discretion by, in effect,
including nonmodifiable spousal support paid to her by Clifford as an item of
her gross income for purposes of determining child support. We conclude spousal
support received from a party to the child support proceedings does not
constitute gross income for purposes of determining the presumptively correct
guideline child support under Family Code sections 4055 and 4058. We conclude
further that a trial court may not exercise its discretion to consider spousal
support received from a party to the child support proceedings as a special
circumstance justifying departure from the guideline under Family Code section
4057. Accordingly, the postjudgment order modifying child support must be
reversed.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   We use
the parties' first names for ease of reference and not out of disrespect.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   FACTS AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

   Clifford and Cindy were married on June 20, 1981, and separated on November
20, 1992, after a marriage of 11 years. Clifford is a board-certified child,
adolescent, and family psychiatrist. Cindy is unemployed, but has a postgraduate
education. The parties  have twin children, Jacob and Michael, who were born on
February 28, 1982.

    The family law court entered a judgment of dissolution on November 16, 1993,
incorporating the provisions of a marital settlement agreement. The parties'
assets included homes in Long Beach and Rancho Mirage. Clifford and Cindy agreed
to share physical custody of the twins, who would continue to attend school in
the Long Beach area. Cindy would claim the children as dependents for income tax
purposes. The parties agreed that Clifford would pay Cindy $ 1,500 per month in
child support and $ 4,000 per month in spousal support. The spousal support
order was nonmodifiable and payable until either party's death, Cindy's
remarriage, or June 1, 2005. At the time of the dissolution judgment, neither
party was employed and Clifford was receiving disability income. The $ 4,000 per
month in spousal support was sufficient to meet Cindy's needs consistent with
the standard of living that the parties had established during their marriage.

   On January 30, 1996, Clifford filed an order to show cause to modify the
existing child support order. Cindy had moved to the home in Rancho Mirage and
had attempted to sell the property without success. She then had rented the
property at a loss and had moved into her boyfriend's home in Indian Wells. As a
result, she had never shared custody of the children as contemplated in the
dissolution judgment. In fact, she had visited with the children fewer than 10
days a year since 1993. Clifford sought child support from Cindy, an award of
the children as dependents for income tax purposes and attorney's fees.

   Clifford had remarried in 1994 and was supporting a child from his new
marriage and a 17-year-old daughter from a previous marriage, in addition to
supporting the twins.

   Clifford filed an income and expense declaration stating that his average
monthly gross income was $ 20,247, including salary and investment income, and
his net monthly disposable income was $ 14,087. Clifford claimed $ 1,310 per
month as additional child support expenses, consisting of $ 518 per month in
unreimbursed medical expenses of the twins for psychotherapy, medication, and
dental work, and $ 792 per month in expenses for school, summer camp, and
athletics. Clifford also requested a hardship deduction for the two minor
children he supported in addition to the twins.

   On April 17, 1996, Cindy filed her response. Her income and expense
declaration stated that her average monthly gross income, exclusive of spousal
support, was $ 329 and her net monthly disposable income was $ 222. Cindy rented
out the Rancho Mirage home at a significant loss. Cindy had a checking account
balance of $ 100,000 and a retirement account valued between $ 333,000 and $
500,000.

    After a hearing on April 25, 1996, the family law court ordered Cindy to pay
child support to Clifford of $ 500 per child per month, retroactive to February
1, 1996. The family law court used a computer software program to calculate the
statutory guideline child support. Initially, the family law court did not
include the nonmodifiable spousal support in Cindy's gross income, did not take
into account the additional child support expenses or the hardships, and
calculated Cindy's custody time as 3 percent. The guideline established that
Clifford should pay Cindy $ 36 per month in child support. The guideline did not
change when the family law court accorded Clifford two hardship deductions for
the two minor children he supported from other marriages.

   The family law court found that guideline child support was not appropriate
due to two special circumstances: (1) the nonmodifiable spousal support provided
Cindy with a steady stream of income; and (2) the guideline was insufficient and
unrealistic to provide proper support for the twins, considering that the amount
did not adjust for the other two children Clifford was obligated to support. The
family law court recalculated child support by including Cindy's $ 4,000 monthly
spousal support as gross income and deducting the spousal support from
Clifford's income. Using these numbers, Cindy was required to pay Clifford child
support of approximately $ 1,000 per month. In addition, the family law court
noted that Cindy might be responsible for her proportionate  share of the
additional child support expenses in the amount of $ 300. Based on this
information, the family law court ordered Cindy to pay Clifford child support
totaling $ 1,000 per month. The family law court also found that, under the
parties' de facto custody arrangement, Clifford had custody of the twins 97
percent of the year, and ordered that Clifford be permitted to claim the twins
as dependents for income tax purposes. The family law court ordered the parties
to pay their own legal fees.

   Cindy filed a timely appeal from the child support order.

   DISCUSSION

    Standard of Review

    " '   "[T]he trial court's determination to grant or deny a modification of
a support order will ordinarily be upheld on appeal unless an abuse of
discretion is demonstrated." [Citation.] Reversal will be ordered only if
prejudicial error is found after examining the record of the proceedings  below.
[Citation.] However, questions relating to the interpretation of statutes are
matters of law for the reviewing court. [Citation.]' " ( In re Marriage of Drake
(1997) 53 Cal. App. 4th 1139, 1150-1151 [62 Cal. Rptr. 2d 466].)

     "We begin with the touchstone of statutory interpretation, namely, the
probable intent of the Legislature. To interpret statutory language, we must
'ascertain the intent of the Legislature so as to effectuate the purpose of the
law.' " ( California Teachers Assn. v. Governing Bd. of Rialto Unified School
Dist. (1997) 14 Cal. 4th 627, 632 [59 Cal. Rptr. 2d 671, 927 P.2d 1175].) " 'Our
first step [in determining the Legislature's intent] is to scrutinize the actual
words of the statute, giving them a plain and commonsense meaning. [Citations.]'
" ( Id. at p. 633.) " 'In analyzing statutory language, we seek to give meaning
to every word and phrase in the statute to accomplish a result consistent with
the legislative purpose. . . .' " ( Id. at p. 634.) " 'The words of the statute
must be construed in context, keeping in mind the statutory purpose. . . .' " (
Kane v. Hurley (1994) 30 Cal. App. 4th 859, 862 [35 Cal. Rptr. 2d 809].) " ' "
'If the language [of a statute] is clear and unambiguous there is no need for
construction, nor is it necessary to resort to indicia of the intent of the
[Legislature]. . . .' " ' " ( People v. Ramirez (1995) 33 Cal. App. 4th 559, 563
[39 Cal. Rptr. 2d 374].)

   Calculation of Guideline Child Support

   Effective January 1, 1994, the Legislature adopted the Statewide Uniform
Guideline for child support. ( Fam. Code, § 4050 et seq.) 2 The family law court
uses an algebraic formula to calculate the presumptively correct amount of child
support. (§ 4055.) In computing guideline child support, the family law court
first determines each parent's annual gross income. Section 4058, subdivision
(a) defines gross income expansively: "The annual gross income of each parent
means income from whatever source derived, except as specified in subdivision
(c) and includes, but is not limited to, the following: [P] (1) Income such as
commissions, salaries, royalties, wages, bonuses, rents, dividends, pensions,
interest, trust income, annuities, workers' compensation benefits, unemployment
insurance benefits, disability insurance benefits, social security benefits, and
spousal support actually received from a person not a party to the proceeding to
establish a child support order under this article. . . ." 3 Section 4058,
subdivision (c) excludes from annual gross income any child support received for
children of other relationships and payments from public assistance programs.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Unless
otherwise indicated, all future statutory references are to the Family Code.
3   Section 4058, subdivision (b) provides: "The court may, in its discretion,
consider the earning capacity of a parent in lieu of the parent's income,
consistent with the best interests of the children." The family law court was
not requested to consider Cindy's earning capacity in lieu of income.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

       The question arises whether spousal support received from a party to the
child support proceeding constitutes gross income under section 4058,
subdivision (a). We look to the words of the statute in context to ascertain the
intent of the Legislature. On  the one hand, the definition of gross income in
section 4058, subdivision (a) is very expansive. It expressly includes all
income except for income specified in section 4058, subdivision (c). Spousal
support is not expressly excluded from gross income pursuant to subdivision (c).
On the other hand, section 4058, subdivision (a) also sets forth a nonexclusive
list of qualifying income. That list explicitly includes "spousal support
actually received from a person not a party to the proceeding to establish a
child support order." (§ 4058, subd. (a), italics added.) Thus, the statute
expressly includes nonparty spousal support as income.

   Although section 4058 defines gross income broadly, and party spousal support
is not expressly excluded, the only type of spousal support specifically
included in gross income is spousal support from a person who is not a party to
the child support proceeding. By necessary implication,  the Legislature did not
intend the inclusion of spousal support from a person who is a party to the
proceeding. Otherwise, spousal support, without qualification, would have been
included in the list of qualifying income. Thus, the specific inclusion of
nonparty spousal support as gross income impliedly excludes party spousal
support, despite the expansive initial definition of gross income.

   In confirming our commonsense construction of the statutory language, we may
also look to similar statutes.   " 'It is a settled rule of statutory
construction that where a statute, with reference to one subject contains a
given provision, the omission of such provision from a similar statute
concerning a related subject is significant to show that a different legislative
intent existed with reference to the different statutes.' " ( In re v. Jose A.
(1992) 5 Cal. App. 4th 697, 701-702 [7 Cal. Rptr. 2d 44].)   Section 4062 allows
the family law court to order additional child support for certain expenses,
such as child care costs relating to employment and special needs of the
children. "The amounts in Section 4062, if ordered to be paid, shall be
considered additional support for the children and shall be computed in
accordance with the following: [P] . . . [P] (c) In cases where spousal support
is or has been ordered to be paid by one parent to the other, for purposes of
allocating additional expenses pursuant to Section 4062, the gross income of the
parent paying spousal support shall be decreased by the amount of the spousal
support paid and the gross income of the parent  receiving the spousal support
shall be increased by the amount of the spousal support received for as long as
the spousal support order is in effect and is paid." (§ 4061, subd. (c).) 4

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   Thus,
Cindy's nonmodifiable spousal support could be taken into account for purposes
of apportioning additional child support expenses under sections 4061 and 4062.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In sections 4061 and 4062, the Legislature specifically addressed the role of
spousal support being paid from one party to the other in considering the
allocation of additional child support expenses. The Legislature acknowledged
that spousal support being paid between the parties to the proceeding required
consideration in apportioning additional child support expenses; however, the
Legislature chose to omit spousal support between parties to the proceeding from
the definition of gross income for purposes of calculating guideline child
support.

   We conclude gross income under section 4058 does not include spousal support
from a party to the proceeding.  5

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   We have
reviewed the legislative history of the statute.  Civil Code section 4721 was
the precursor of section 4058. As initially introduced, the bill ultimately
enacted into law as Civil Code section 4721 defined gross annual income simply
as "income from all sources except child support payments actually received and
public assistance payments issued on the basis of a needs determination test."
(Assem. Bill No. 1527 (1983-1984 Reg. Sess.) as introduced Mar. 3, 1983.) The
July 11, 1983, version of the bill modified this definition by specifically
stating that gross income did not include "any spousal and child support
payments actually received." (Ibid., italics added.) The June 21, 1984 version
of the bill did not address spousal support. It provided that gross income
included income from whatever source derived and enumerated several items of
income without referring to any type of spousal support. It deleted the
reference to spousal support as a specific exclusion from gross income. (Ibid.)
The August 9, 1984, version of the bill specifically included as gross income "
spousal support actually received from a person not a party to the order." (Ibid
.) This language was retained in the version of the bill as finally enacted. Our
examination of the legislative history has not revealed the reasoning behind the
various revisions regarding spousal support. Thus, the legislative history
appears to be of no assistance in construction of the statute.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     Special Circumstances

     In this case, the family law court properly did not include Cindy's spousal
support in gross income in determining the guideline child support. However,
when the guideline child support payable from Cindy to Clifford was calculated
to be zero, the family law court determined that the guideline child support was
unjust and inappropriate under the circumstances. Specifically, the family law
court found that Cindy's nonmodifiable spousal support constituted a "special
circumstance" justifying deviation from the guideline. In this respect, the
family law court erred.

   The presumption that guideline child support is correct may be rebutted by
evidence that application of the formula would be unjust or inappropriate in
the particular case because one or more of five factors apply. (§ 4057, subd.
(b).) The fifth factor, 6 as stated in section 4057, subdivision (b)(5), is that
"[a]pplication of the formula would be unjust or inappropriate due to special
circumstances in the particular case. These special circumstances include, but
are not limited to, the following: [P] (A) Cases in which the parents have
different time-sharing arrangements for different children. [P] (B) Cases in
which both parents have substantially equal time-sharing of the children and one
parent has a much lower or higher percentage of income used for housing than the
other parent. [P] (C) Cases in which the children have special medical or other
needs that could require child support that would be greater than the formula
amount." (Italics added.) The three special circumstances set forth in the fifth
factor are not exclusive.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   The
parties do not contend that any of the other four factors are applicable.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     "When the trial court exercises its discretion to depart from the statutory
guideline amount of child support, as here, we review that departure for an
abuse of discretion." ( In re Marriage of Wood (1995) 37 Cal. App. 4th 1059,
1066 [44 Cal. Rptr. 2d 236].) The trial court may not, however, exercise its
discretion to consider as a special circumstance, income which has been excluded
from consideration by the Legislature. (Ibid. [new mate income under § 4057.5].)
The trial court may not disregard a statutory prohibition against consideration
of a particular item of income.  (37 Cal. App. 4th at p. 1067.) This is so
whether the statutory prohibition is express or implied. Moreover, the trial
court may not consider excluded income under the guise of determining that
application of the guidelines would be unjust or inappropriate. ( Id. at pp.
1067-1068.)

     Here, the family law court departed from the guideline because it found
that the nonmodifiable spousal support order was a special circumstance
sufficient to make application of the guideline inappropriate. 7 However, the
family law court may not exercise its discretion by treating as gross income a
type of spousal support which the Legislature has excluded from gross income.
Moreover, Clifford and Cindy bargained for and agreed to a nonmodifiable monthly
spousal support order. The inclusion of spousal support in Cindy's income would
result in a de facto modification of the nonmodifiable spousal support order.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   The trial
court also found that Clifford's responsibility for two additional minor
children was a special circumstance justifying departure from the guideline. We
express no opinion on this issue, but note that the support of other children
may be a special circumstance permitting an equitable adjustment of child
support. (Cf.  County of Lake v. Antoni (1993) 18 Cal. App. 4th 1102, 1105-1106
[22 Cal. Rptr. 2d 804]; Haggard v. Haggard (1995) 38 Cal. App. 4th 1566, 1572
[45 Cal. Rptr. 2d 638].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    We conclude the family law court could not, under the facts of this case,
consider Cindy's nonmodifiable spousal support as a special circumstance
justifying a departure from the guideline. We note that there is no evidence in
this case the needs of the children were not being met or the absence of child
support from Cindy would create a financial hardship for the children.

   Conclusion

   That portion of the family law court's order requiring Cindy to pay $ 1,000
in child support must be reversed. On remand, the  family law court is to
reconsider the issue of child support payable by Cindy to Clifford. It may
depart from the guideline if it finds (1) application of the guideline would be
unjust or inappropriate, and (2) one or more of the statutory factors is
applicable. In determining whether special circumstances exist, the family law
court shall not consider Cindy's nonmodifiable spousal support, but may consider
any other appropriate special circumstances. Because we reverse the child
support order, we do not reach the attorney's fee issue. The trial court will
reconsider the attorney's fee issue on remand after redetermining the merits of
the child support order.  Cindy has raised no issues concerning the other
portions of the order and we do not disturb them.

   DISPOSITION

   The postjudgment order modifying child support is reversed. The matter is
remanded to the family law court for further proceedings consistent with this
opinion solely on the issue of the amount of child support, if any, Cindy should
be required to pay to Clifford and any award of attorney's fees. The parties are
to bear their own costs on appeal.

   Armstrong, J., and Godoy Perez, J., concurred.


                              18 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In re the Marriage of LINDA D. and RICHARD E. BROWN. LINDA
            A. DRESSER, Appellant, v. RICHARD E. BROWN, Respondent.

                                  No. D020440.

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FOURTH APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION ONE

           35 Cal. App. 4th 785; 41 Cal. Rptr. 2d 506; 1995 Cal. App.
          LEXIS 515; 95 Cal. Daily Op. Service 4203; 95 Daily Journal
                                    DAR 7213


                             May 31, 1995, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of San Diego County, No. DN46298, Gerald L.
Barry, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports

(1a) (1b) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 67--Spousal Support--
Jurisdiction--Modification of Award--Parties' Agreement for Support for Certain
Period Upon Which Jurisdiction Ceases--Motion for Modification Prior to
Termination of Period.  --In a proceeding involving the dissolution of a 14-year
marriage, the trial court erred in concluding it lacked jurisdiction to modify a
spousal support award. The husband and wife had agreed that support would be
paid for 60 months and that, after the payment of the 60th installment, the
obligation to pay spousal support would terminate and no court would have
jurisdiction to extend the spousal support award either as to amount or
duration. The wife brought her motion to extend the duration of the award before
the expiration of the 60-month period. Civ. Code, former § 4811, subd. (b),
permitted parties to agree that a support order was not subject to modification,
but explicit written language was required to terminate jurisdiction to modify.
Also, the trial court retains jurisdiction to extend the support term when the
marriage has been of long duration unless the agreement specifically provides to
the contrary (Civ. Code, former § 4801, subd. (d)). The parties' agreement did
not contain explicit language precluding modification of the award before the
expiration of the 60-month period. Indeed, the agreement expressly contemplated
that the court would retain jurisdiction before expiration of the 60-month
period. The court's retention of jurisdiction until expiration of the 60-month
period to hear motions regarding spousal support implied that the court retained
power to grant those requests.

   [See 11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (9d ed. 1990) Husband and Wife, § 281.]

(2) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 67--Spousal Support--Jurisdiction--
Modification of Award.  --Language in a spousal support order suggesting that
modification of its terms will be permitted is routinely interpreted as a
retention of the court's jurisdiction to modify and extend the spousal support
provisions. Where jurisdiction to award, or grant request for, spousal support
is reserved until a specified date, the court has fundamental jurisdiction until
that date to take new action concerning an extension of spousal support beyond
the last date the court can act. Such new judicial action may include an
extension of spousal support beyond the last date the court can act.

COUNSEL: Charles K. Bell for Appellant.

Roy B. Garrett for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Kremer, P. J., with Haller, J., and Hoffman, J., *
concurring.

*   Judge of the San Diego Superior Court sitting under assignment by the
Chairperson of the Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: KREMER, P. J.

OPINION

     KREMER, P. J.

   Linda A. Dresser (formerly Linda D. Brown) appeals an order denying her
request to modify spousal support. She contends the superior court erred in
concluding it lacked jurisdiction to extend the duration of Richard E. Brown's
spousal support obligation beyond the 60-month limit set forth in the judgment
of dissolution incorporating the parties' marital settlement agreement
(Agreement). We reverse the order and direct the superior court to entertain
further proceedings to determine the merits of the motion for modification of
spousal support.

   I.

    FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

   In May 1987 the parties separated after a 14-year marriage.

   In June 1988 the parties signed the Agreement prepared by Linda's attorney.
1 The Agreement provided Richard would pay Linda $2,000 monthly spousal support
for 60 months beginning after sale of their residence and Linda's relocation to
a new home. The Agreement and the judgment of dissolution entered in November
1988 incorporating the Agreement also provided: "After the payment of the 60th
installment of $2,000.00 after the sale of the subject residence, [Richard's]
obligation to pay spousal support to [Linda] shall terminate forever and no
Court shall have any jurisdiction to extend the within award of spousal support
either as to amount or duration after said date."

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   For
purposes of clarity, we refer to the parties by their first names.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

II.

   LINDA'S MOTION TO MODIFY SPOUSAL SUPPORT

   In April 1993--before expiration of the 60-month period specified in the
Agreement--Linda asked the superior court to extend the duration of spousal
support beyond that period until further order of the court. Linda  contended
the Agreement at least implicitly provided the court with jurisdiction before
expiration of the 60-month period to extend spousal support beyond such time.
Richard opposed Linda's motion to modify spousal support.

   In August 1993 Linda's motion to extend the duration of spousal support came
for hearing. After hearing, the court denied Linda's request as beyond its
jurisdiction.  2 Linda appeals.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   The
superior court characterized the matter as involving "solely" the legal issue
whether the language of the judgment and the Agreement vested the court with
continuing jurisdiction to extend spousal support beyond the 60-month period.
Finding the Agreement's language was "explicit enough" to meet the requirements
of former Civil Code section 4801, subdivision (d), the court concluded such
language terminated jurisdiction to extend support beyond the 60-month limit.
Thus, the court did not reach the merits of Linda's request to modify spousal
support.

   All statutory references are to the Civil Code unless otherwise specified.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    III

   DISCUSSION

     Linda contends the superior court should have concluded it retained
jurisdiction to modify and extend the duration of the spousal support award
beyond the 60-month period. Citing former section 4811, subdivision (b), Linda
asserts the Agreement's language did not specifically preclude court
modification--before Richard's payment of the 60th installment--of the amount or
duration of spousal support. Instead, according to Linda, under the Agreement
and the judgment, the court at least implicitly retained jurisdiction before the
specified spousal support termination date to extend the duration of such
support beyond such time. We agree. Since the Agreement did not contain specific
language expressly terminating--before expiration of the 60-month
period--jurisdiction to extend the duration of spousal support beyond the
60-month limit, the superior court erred in concluding it lacked jurisdiction to
determine the merits of Linda's motion for modification. ( In re Marriage of
Vomacka (1984) 36 Cal. 3d 459 [204 Cal. Rptr. 568, 683 P.2d 248]; In re Marriage
of Jones  (1990) 222 Cal. App. 3d 505 [271 Cal. Rptr. 761]; former § 4801, subd.
(d), 4811,  subd. (b).) 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Former
section 4811, subdivision (b), provided: "The provisions of any agreement for
the support of either party shall be deemed to be separate and severable from
the provisions of the agreement relating to property. All orders for the support
of either party based on the agreement shall be deemed law-imposed and shall be
deemed made under the power of the court to make the orders. The provisions of
any agreement or order for the support of either party shall be subject to
subsequent modification or revocation by court order . . . except to the extent
that any written agreement . . . specifically provides to the contrary."

   Former section 4801, subdivision (d), provided in part: "An order for payment
of an allowance for the support of one of the parties shall terminate at the end
of the period specified in the order and shall not be extended unless the court
in its original order retains jurisdiction. Except upon written agreement of the
parties to the contrary or a court order terminating spousal support, the court
retains jurisdiction indefinitely where the marriage has been of long duration."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    "The California Supreme Court has interpreted  Civil Code section 4811,
subdivision (b) as 'permit[ting] the parties to agree that the provisions of any
agreement or order for the support of either party shall not be subject to
subsequent modification or revocation by court order.' [Citation.]" ( In re
Marriage of Zlatnik (1988) 197 Cal. App. 3d 1284, 1287 [243 Cal. Rptr. 454], fn.
omitted, citing In re Marriage of Vomacka, supra, 36 Cal. 3d at pp. 462-463.)
However, the statute "preserves court jurisdiction to modify a support order
unless the contrary is provided by a written agreement." (In re Marriage of
Jones, supra, 222 Cal. App. 3d at p. 509.) Further, former section 4801,
subdivision (d), "relates to the court's jurisdiction to extend support past the
termination date provided in an original order." (In re Marriage of Jones, supra
, at p. 509.) "A court retains jurisdiction to extend the support term when the
marriage has been of long duration unless the agreement specifically provides to
the contrary." (Id. at p. 514.) 4

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   In In re
Marriage of Jones, supra, 222 Cal. App. 3d 505, we observed: "A line of cases
best illustrated by In re Marriage of Vomacka, supra, 36 Cal. 3d 459 read the
provisions of section 4811 together with 4801 and reached the conclusion that,
to be effective, language in a marital agreement intended to preclude
jurisdiction to extend support had to be stated rather explicitly. Implications
drawn from the agreement suggesting possible intention to reserve jurisdiction
would be favored." (In re Marriage of Jones, supra, at p. 512.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    In 1987 the Legislature added the following language to former section 4801,
subdivision (d): " 'Except upon written agreement of the parties to the contrary
or a court order terminating spousal support, the court retains jurisdiction
indefinitely where the marriage has been of long duration.' " (In re Marriage of
Jones, supra, 222 Cal. App. 3d at p. 513.) "On its face, this amendment would
seem to incorporate the requirement of section 4811, subdivision (b) into 4801,
subdivision (d). Under 4811, subdivision (b) jurisdiction to modify is retained
unless the parties 'specifically provide[] to the contrary.' Under section 4801,
subdivision (d) where a 'marriage of long duration' is involved . . . ,
jurisdiction to extend the support term is maintained unless there is a written
agreement 'to the contrary.' " (In re Marriage of Jones, supra, at pp. 513-514.)
In Jones we concluded that by such statutory amendment "the Legislature intended
to adopt, for purposes of deprivation of jurisdiction to extend, in the case of
marriages of long duration, the same requirements that had long been in force
for deprivation of jurisdiction to modify[.]" ( Id. at p. 514.) Hence,  in this
case indisputably involving a marriage of long duration, we conclude that before
expiration of  the 60-month period the court retained jurisdiction to extend the
support term beyond such time since neither the Agreement nor the judgment
specifically provided to the contrary. (Ibid.)

   Although a trial court may not extend spousal support where a judgment based
on the parties' agreement "expressly terminates the court's jurisdiction to do
so," explicit language is required to terminate such jurisdiction. (In re
Marriage of Zlatnik, supra, 197 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 1288, 1290, fn. 7; accord,
In re Marriage  of Vomacka, supra, 36 Cal. 3d at p. 465; In re Marriage of Jones
, supra, 222 Cal. App. 3d at p. 512.) Further, any "ambiguity in the language of
a marital property agreement . . . must be decided in favor of the right to
spousal support." (In re Marriage of Vomacka, supra, at p. 469.) 5

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   The
specific rule for interpreting marital property agreements in favor of the right
to spousal support must prevail here over section 1654's general rule of
construing any uncertainty in contractual language against the party who caused
such uncertainty to exist.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Here the Agreement and the judgment did not contain explicit language
precluding--before expiration of the 60-month period--court modification of the
spousal support award to extend its duration beyond that time. (In re Marriage
of Jones, supra, 222 Cal. App. 3d at p. 514.) Instead, similar to the situation
in Jones, the provisions of the Agreement and the judgment here "were simply for
a specified monthly support amount for a period of years, and a flat statement
of termination on a date certain." ( Id. at p. 512.) Further, the Agreement
expressly contemplated the court would retain jurisdiction to determine a motion
to modify spousal support before expiration of the 60-month period. 6 Moreover,
the language in the Agreement and the judgment stating that after Richard's
payment of the 60th installment no court would have jurisdiction to extend the
amount or duration of spousal support implicitly and necessarily acknowledged
the court retained jurisdiction to modify those support matters before
expiration of the 60-month period. (In re Marriage of Vomacka, supra, 36 Cal. 3d
at pp. 470-471, 474; § 1638, 1641, 1644.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6
Specifically, the Agreement provided: "In the event that any subsequent issues
arise relating to support or modification, either party shall have the right to
seek, and the other agrees to deliver, copies and appropriate authorizations for
subsequent separate income tax returns."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -



    "[L]anguage in a spousal support order suggesting that modification of its
terms will be permitted is routinely interpreted as a retention of the court's
fundamental jurisdiction to modify and, upon a proper factual showing, to extend
the spousal support provisions contained therein." (In re Marriage of Vomacka,
supra, 36 Cal. 3d at p. 470.) Where, as here, "jurisdiction to award, or grant
requests for, spousal support is reserved until a  specified date the court has
fundamental jurisdiction until that date to take new action concerning such
support. Such new judicial action may include an extension of spousal support
beyond the last date the court can act." ( Id. at p. 474.)   Here the court's
retention of jurisdiction until expiration of the 60-month period to hear
motions regarding spousal support implied that the court retained power to grant
those requests. ( Id. at p. 471.) A conclusion the court lacked jurisdiction to
award spousal support past such date would render "meaningless" its retention of
jurisdiction until that time to hear requests for support. (Ibid.) Hence, the
court's retention of jurisdiction--until expiration of the 60-month period--to
modify the spousal support provisions of the dissolution judgment included
retention of "fundamental jurisdiction" to extend the duration of spousal
support payments beyond that time. (Ibid.) 7

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   In In re
Marriage of Vomacka, supra, 36 Cal. 3d 459, the parties stipulated to an
interlocutory judgment providing the court would retain jurisdiction regarding
spousal support until September 1, 1984, at which time the wife's right to
request spousal support from the husband would "terminate forever." ( Id. at pp.
461-462.) The Supreme Court analyzed the judgment's language in accord with
several policies favoring an interpretation resulting in retention of
jurisdiction, to wit, "disfavoring the absolute termination of spousal support
without a determination that the supported spouse can become self-supporting;
interpreting ambiguous spousal support agreements and orders in favor of
support; and the fundamental jurisdiction of trial courts to modify existing
spousal support orders to extend support payments past the last date they can
act." ( Id. at pp. 467, 474.) The Supreme Court concluded the superior court's
"retention of jurisdiction until September 1, 1984, to modify the spousal
support provisions of the interlocutory decree necessarily included a retention
of its fundamental jurisdiction to extend spousal support payments beyond that
date." ( Id. at p. 471.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    In sum, the language of the Agreement and the judgment did not expressly
divest the superior court of jurisdiction--before expiration of the 60-month
period--to modify and extend the duration of spousal support beyond that time.
Since there was no provision specifically precluding such judicial extension of
the duration of spousal support, the superior court should have concluded that
before such time it retained jurisdiction to determine the merits of Linda's
motion for modification. (In re Marriage of Vomacka, supra, 36 Cal. 3d at pp.
470-471, 474; In re Marriage of Jones, supra, 222 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 513-514;
former § 4801, subd. (d), 4811, subd. (b).) Thus, the order denying Linda's
motion for lack of jurisdiction must be reversed.  8

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -8   Linda
seeks attorney fees on appeal. However, we do not reach that issue since such
request should be made in the first instance to the superior court. ( In re
Marriage of Davis (1983) 141 Cal. App. 3d 71, 78 [190 Cal. Rptr. 104].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     DISPOSITION

   The order is reversed. The superior court is directed to entertain further
proceedings to determine the merits of appellant's motion to modify spousal
support. Appellant is awarded costs on appeal.

   Haller, J., and Hoffman, J., * concurred.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*   Judge of
the San Diego Superior Court sitting under assignment by the Chairperson of the
Judicial Council.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -


                              19 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            In re the Marriage of DOROTHY M. and NARCISO L. BURLINI.
            NARCISO L.  BURLINI, Respondent, v. DOROTHY M. BURLINI,
                                   Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 52706

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                 Division Five

            143 Cal. App. 3d 65; 191 Cal. Rptr. 541; 1983 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1735


                                  May 18, 1983

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A petition for a rehearing was denied June 10, 1983, and
appellant's petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied July 13,
1983.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Santa Clara County, No. 440930, O. Vincent
Bruno, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1a) (1b) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 67--Support of Other Party--
Modification, Revocation, and Extension--Jurisdiction--Discretion.  --A court is
vested with broad discretion in fixing the amount of spousal support at trial,
and in a proceeding dissolving a 24-year marriage, there was no abuse of
discretion by the trial court in ordering the husband to pay the wife spousal
support of $ 850 per month for three months, then $ 700 per month for four
years, with the court reserving jurisdiction over the issue of spousal support
thereafter in the event the wife could demonstrate a further need for spousal
support when the jurisdictional step-down occurred. The court considered the
applicable factors set forth in Civ. Code, § 4801, including the wife's ability
to work, her projected assets, her income from community assets awarded to her
including an income producing duplex, and the time required for her to acquire a
future education and likely become self-supporting.

(2a) (2b) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 63--Support of Other Party--
Guiding Considerations--Superior Court Spousal Support Schedules--Discretion.
--Temporary spousal support is utilized to maintain the living conditions and
standards of the parties in as close to the status quo position as possible
pending trial and the division of their assets and obligations. The purpose of
permanent spousal support, on the other hand, is not to preserve the
preseparation status quo but to provide financial assistance, if appropriate, as
determined by the financial circumstances of the parties after their dissolution
and the division of their community property. Thus a superior court schedule of
guidelines for spousal support cannot be used for both temporary orders and for
the fixing of so-called "permanent" spousal support. In determining permanent
spousal support at trial, the court is bound to apply the factors enumerated in
Civ. Code, § 4801.

(3) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 53--Division of Community and
Quasi-community Property--Award of Particular Asset to One Party to Effect Equal
Division--Discretion.  --In a proceeding to dissolve a 24-year marriage, the
court did not err in awarding a family business, which was community property,
to the husband rather than awarding half of the business to the wife. The equal
division requirement of Civ. Code, § 4800, permits an award of any asset to one
party where economic conditions warrant. Courts have discretion to reject strict
"in kind" divisions in order to avoid financial inequalities and may reject such
a division of a family business where it would impair the business. There was
substantial evidence that an equal division of the family business would have
been destructive.

(4) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 59--Division of Community and
Quasi-community Property--Appeal.  --In a proceeding to dissolve a 24-year
marriage, the court's resolution of an evidentiary conflict between the wife's
testimony as to the value of a family business and that of a professional
appraiser could not be disturbed on appeal.

(5) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 52--Division of Community and
Quasi-community Property--Valuation--Waiver of Error.  --On appeal from an
interlocutory judgment dissolving a 24-year marriage, the wife waived any
asserted error of the trial court in determining the value of a family business
without her presentation of an appraiser's testimony, where her counsel remained
silent in response to the court's statement that all possible relevant evidence
had been produced. Further, any failure in obtaining and presenting expert
testimony on the value of the business was due to the wife not fully pursuing
her rights to pretrial discovery.

COUNSEL: Albin E. Danell, Danell, Haley & Rychlik and Danell & Boeggeman for
Appellant.

Douglas H. Pendleton for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by King, J., with Low, P. J., and Haning, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: KING

OPINION

     In this case we hold that one schedule of guidelines for spousal support
may not be used for fixing both temporary and permanent spousal support and that
an in-kind division of a community coin laundry business is not required,
despite the fact that the business consists of washers and dryers placed in
various apartment complex locations.

   Dorothy M. Burlini appeals from an interlocutory judgment of dissolution of
her marriage to Narciso L. Burlini, challenging the portions of the judgment
awarding spousal support to her and fixing the value of the coin laundry
business and awarding it to her husband as part of his share of the community
property. We affirm the judgment.

    The parties were married in October 1955 and separated just over 24 years
later in December 1979.  In 1963 Narciso started the "Bur-Lin" coin laundry
business in his spare time.  Over the years the business became a full-time
enterprise.  At the time of the parties' separation, approximately 500 washers
and dryers were operated in various locations, primarily in apartment complexes.
Narciso installed and serviced the machines, most of which were old and required
considerable maintenance and repair. He also regularly changed and serviced
their locks, and dealt with the owners of the premises on which the machines
were located.  Dorothy was the bookkeeper for the business, handled telephone
calls for repairs, assisted in cleaning laundry rooms and equipment, and
performed minor repairs on the machines. Excluding the coin laundry business,
community property was valued at more than $ 480,000 at trial.

   The trial judge ordered that Narciso pay Dorothy spousal support of $ 850 per
month for three months and thereafter pay $ 700 per month for a period of four
years (until Feb. 1, 1985), with the court reserving jurisdiction over the issue
of spousal support thereafter.  Dorothy contends this order was an abuse of
discretion because the support schedules adopted by the Santa Clara Superior
Court mandated a higher  amount, and that no evidence was presented which
justified a jurisdictional step down.

      The court was vested with broad discretion in fixing the amount of spousal
support at trial.  ( In re Marriage of Morrison (1978) 20 Cal.3d 437, 454 [143
Cal.Rptr. 139, 573 P.2d 41].) No abuse of discretion is evident.  The court's
comments at the dissolution hearing demonstrated the court did consider the
applicable factors set forth in Civil Code section 4801, including Dorothy's
ability to work, her projected assets, her income from community assets awarded
to her including an income producing duplex, and the time required for her to
acquire a future education and likely become self-supporting.   On these facts
the trial judge properly retained jurisdiction in the event Dorothy can
demonstrate a further need for spousal support when the jurisdictional step down
occurs.  (See In re Marriage of Epstein (1979) 24 Cal.3d 76 [154 Cal.Rptr. 413,
592 P.2d 1165]; In re Marriage of Richmond (1980) 105 Cal.App.3d 352 [164
Cal.Rptr. 381].)

     A reading of the Santa Clara Superior Court guidelines for spousal support
does not disclose whether they are utilized only for temporary orders, or
whether they are also used for the fixing of so-called "permanent" spousal
support. One schedule of guidelines for spousal support cannot be used for both
purposes, since the purpose of a temporary order of spousal support is far
different than that of a permanent order.  Temporary spousal support is utilized
to maintain the living conditions and standards of the parties in as close to
the status quo position as possible pending trial and the division of their
assets and obligations.  (Adams & Sevitch, Cal. Family Law Practice  (4th ed.
1983) [§ N:3].) The statutory authorization for temporary spousal support is
found in Civil Code section 4357.

   Spouses residing together have one family income whether one or both spouses
are employed.  They develop a standard of living based upon that income.
Separation of the parties results in no change in that income, but their total
expenses increase because of the additional expenses incurred by the party who
leaves the family home.  That person must incur new expenses, including those
for shelter, utilities, and furnishings.  Separation may also result in an
increase of some expenses for the spouse remaining in the family residence.  The
temporary spousal support order is an attempt, pending trial, to allocate the
family income equitably between the parties, considering their individual
incomes and expenses.  Many California courts have adopted guidelines for
temporary support. These are nothing more than a method of dividing the family
income proportionately by adopting a schedule, in chart form, based upon either
the net income of the person being asked to pay support or the net incomes of
both parties.  Guidelines for temporary spousal support generally include a
statement such as that contained at page 15 of the Uniform Domestic Relations
Local Rules for Bay Area Superior Courts that "This schedule shall not be used
as a guideline for long-term spousal support at trial or thereafter."

   The purpose of permanent spousal support is not to preserve the preseparation
status quo but to provide financial assistance, if appropriate,  as determined
by the financial circumstances of the parties after their dissolution and the
division of their community property. In determining spousal support at trial
the court is bound to apply the factors enumerated in Civil Code section 4801.
For these reasons, Dorothy's reliance on the Santa Clara Superior Court spousal
support schedule is misplaced.  Such a schedule can only be used to fix
temporary support since the factors to be considered in determining permanent
spousal support are prescribed by Civil Code section 4801.

   Nothing stated above should be interpreted as discouraging the adoption of
schedules for temporary support and their use as guidelines by trial courts.  To
the contrary, their use should be encouraged to help lawyers and litigants
predict more accurately what temporary support order would be issued if the case
proceeded to a contested hearing.  Although guidelines represent a  proportional
division of the family income, they are in graph form and easily understood,
even by pro per litigants.  They promote consistency in the temporary orders
issued in a department with a busy domestic relations motion calendar, and are
especially valuable in achieving comparable orders under similar financial facts
in those courts where multiple departments hear such motions.

   This valuable tool permits lawyers and clients to avoid the need for hearings
and the emotional and financial expense they involve, and therefore promotes
judicial economy by avoiding thousands of such hearings in California courts
each year.  Guidelines for temporary support originated with the Marin County
Superior Court and, over the past 10 years, have been adopted by many courts,
including most of the larger superior courts in California.

   Although the adoption of guidelines for temporary support is to be
encouraged, it should be emphasized that they are only guidelines to be utilized
in cases with no unusual facts or circumstances.  If, for example, the tax
consequences contemplated by the guidelines, e.g., temporary spousal support not
to be taxable to the recipient, are incorrect, or a party is paying spousal or
child support from a prior relationship, the guidelines should be applied as
modified by such facts or circumstances.  This would also be true where there
are unusually large house or other monthly payments, special expenses are being
incurred for educational, medical, or dental expenses of children, child care
expenses are incurred to permit a custodial parent to work (or complete
education or training), or there are exceptional medical or dental expenses, or
other special needs of a spouse or child.  Indeed, the facts or circumstances of
a particular case might well be so unusual that a court's guidelines for
temporary support would be totally inapplicable.

     Dorothy next contends that the court erroneously refused to grant her
request for an "in kind" award of half of the coin laundry business.  She relies
on the equal division requirement of Civil Code section 4800.  However, section
4800, subdivision (b)(1), permits an award of any asset to one party "[where]
economic circumstances warrant . . . ." Courts have discretion to reject "strict
'in kind' divisions" in order to avoid financial inequalities ( In re Marriage
of Connolly (1979) 23 Cal.3d 590, 603 [153 Cal.Rptr. 423, 591 P.2d 911]), and
may reject such a division of a family business where it would impair the
business.  ( In re Marriage of Brigden (1978) 80 Cal.App.3d 380, 391-392 [145
Cal.Rptr.  716].)

   The determination whether "economic circumstances warrant" is entrusted to
the sound discretion of the trial court.  The issue in this action is whether
the trial court abused its discretion.  "Althoughprecise definition is
difficult, it is generally accepted that the appropriate test of abuse of
discretion is whether or not the trial court exceeded the bounds of reason, all
of the circumstances before it being considered." ( In re Marriage of Connolly,
supra, 23 Cal.3d 590, 598.)

   We conclude there was no abuse of discretion. There was substantial evidence
in the present case that an equal division of the family business would have
been destructive.  Narciso's certified public accountant and appraiser both
testified he was the "key person" running the business, because he serviced the
machines and had primary contact with the owners of the properties  where the
machines were located.  This testimony, and the evidence that extensive labor
was required to keep the aged machines in working order, supported the court's
conclusions that Dorothy could not operate the business without taking in a
partner to perform Narciso's functions and that she would ultimately "destroy"
the business.  (See In re Marriage of Smith (1978) 79 Cal.App.3d 725, 751 [145
Cal.Rptr. 205] [no reasonable probability of award of sign-making business to
wife where evidence demonstrated that husband had necessary technical knowledge
and experience but wife did not]; compare In re Marriage of Brigden, supra, 80
Cal.App.3d at p. 392 and fn. 6 [fungible shares  of stock easily divided in
half, therefore no impairment of value by in kind distribution].)

     Dorothy next contends that the trial court abused its discretion in fixing
the fair market value of the coin laundry business at $ 50,000.  Dorothy
testified that in her opinion the business was worth $ 150,000 to $ 200,000,
while Narciso's appraiser testified that three different valuation methods
produced values of $ 21,242, $ 42,122, and $ 50,000.  The court's resolution of
the evidentiary conflict between Dorothy's testimony and that of the
professional appraiser cannot be disturbed on appeal.  ( In re Marriage of Mix
(1975) 14 Cal.3d 604, 614 [122 Cal.Rptr. 79, 536 P.2d 479].)

     Dorothy's final contention is that she was denied business records
necessary to allow her to obtain and present expert testimony on the value of
the business.  The record indicates that any failure in this regard was due to
Dorothy not fully pursuing her rights to pretrial discovery.  Moreover, during
trial the court said, "I think that you produced all of the evidence and all of
the possible relevant considerations that could be taken into consideration in
arriving at a proper disposition." Counsel did not reply.  Thus Dorothy
impliedly waived any assertion that it was error to determine the value of the
business without her presentation of an appraiser's testimony.  (6 Witkin, Cal.
Procedure (2d ed. 1971) Appeal, § 272 at p. 4260; see generally Kauffman v. De
Mutiis (1948) 31 Cal.2d 429, 432 [189 P.2d 271].)

   The judgment is affirmed.


                              20 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of LAURA B. and PARK E. DIETZ.  LAURA B.
                DIETZ, Appellant, v. PARK E. DIETZ, Respondent.

                                    G040640

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FOURTH APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION THREE

          176 Cal. App. 4th 387; 97 Cal. Rptr. 3d 616; 2009 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1282


                             August 3, 2009, Filed

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY: Modified by In re Marriage of Dietz, 2009 Cal. App. LEXIS
1476 (Cal. App. 4th Dist., Sept. 2, 2009)
Request denied by In re Marriage of Dietz, 2009 Cal. LEXIS 11604 (Cal., Nov. 10,
2009)

PRIOR-HISTORY:
   Appeal from a postjudgment order of the Superior Court of Orange County, No.
96D009383, Clay M. Smith, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(3) Dissolution of Marriage § 69--Spousal Support--Modification--Change of
Conditions--Stipulated Judgment--Appreciation of Assets.--In a postdissolution
proceeding to modify spousal support, the key finding the trial court relied on
in balancing the Fam. Code, § 4320, factors for modification of spousal support
was the same finding the court initially relied upon in determining that a
material change of circumstances had occurred in the first place--that the wife
should be expected to be more self-sufficient, given the assets she was provided
in a stipulated judgment and the accessibility and appreciation of those assets
since the stipulated judgment. The trial court's conclusion that a material
change of circumstances occurred based on this finding, without more, was
erroneous.

   [Kirkland et al., Cal. Family Law Practice and Procedure (2009) ch. 52, §
52.20; Cal. Forms of Pleading and Practice (2009) ch. 225, Dissolution of
Marriage: Spousal Support, § 225.240; 11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (10th ed.
2005) Husband and Wife, § 284.]

COUNSEL: Law Offices of Marjorie G. Fuller and Marjorie G. Fuller for Appellant.


Martin & McCormick, John D. Martin and Kathy J. McCormick for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Fybel, J., with O'Leary, Acting P. J., and Aronson, J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: Fybel

OPINION

    FYBEL, J.--

INTRODUCTION

   Following the entry of the judgment dissolving their marriage, Park E. Dietz
and Laura B. Dietz 1 entered into a stipulated judgment in 1999, in which they
divided their community property, including their retirement accounts, and
agreed Park would pay Laura monthly spousal support. In 2007, Park sought a
court order terminating or, alternatively, reducing his spousal support
obligation.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   We use
the parties' first names to avoid confusion and intend no disrespect. (Nairne v.
Jessop-Humblet (2002) 101 Cal.App.4th 1124, 1126, fn. 1 [124 Cal. Rptr. 2d 726]
.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   After the hearing, the trial court found that a material change of
circumstances had occurred since the stipulated judgment because (1) Laura had
reached an age at which she could access her share of the retirement accounts
without penalty; and (2) she had realized appreciation in securities
(securities) she owned. 2 The court ordered Park's monthly spousal support
obligation be reduced, and denied Laura's request that Park contribute toward
her attorney fees and costs.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   As
explained, post, it is unclear whether these securities were included in the
stipulated judgment and we remand for determinations in this regard.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Laura contends the trial court erred by reducing Park's spousal support
obligation because no material change of circumstances had occurred to warrant
such a modification. She also challenges the trial court's denial of her request
for attorney fees and costs.

   We reverse. As discussed in detail, post, the trial court erred by concluding
the accessibility and increased value of the retirement accounts awarded to
Laura in the stipulated judgment constituted a material change of circumstances
justifying a decrease in Park's monthly spousal support obligation. The
stipulated judgment expressly awarded Laura and Park equal shares of the
retirement accounts and any increase in their values. Although Park's income had
significantly increased and Laura remained unemployed since the stipulated
judgment, the trial court reduced Park's monthly spousal support obligation
based on the accessibility and value of the retirement accounts. We hold Laura's
rights to access the retirement accounts on a penalty-free basis and to any
increase in their values were insufficient, without more, to constitute a
material change of circumstances permitting a reduction in her spousal support
under Family Code section 4320. (All further statutory references are to the
Family Code.)

   In determining whether to award attorney fees and costs in postdissolution
proceedings, the trial court must consider "'how to apportion the overall cost
of the litigation equitably between the parties under their relative
circumstances.'" (In re Marriage of Terry (2000) 80 Cal.App.4th 921, 933 [95
Cal. Rptr. 2d 760].) The trial court did not order Park to pay any of Laura's
attorney fees and costs because Park had sought the termination or reduction of
spousal support in good faith and both parties had access to quality legal
assistance. Because the court applied an incorrect standard in considering
Laura's request for attorney fees and costs, we remand the matter to the trial
court for reconsideration of Laura's request.

BACKGROUND

I.

Judgment of Dissolution; 1999 Stipulated Judgment; 2002 Stipulated Judgment

   Park and Laura were married in 1981 and separated in 1996. The judgment of
dissolution of their marriage was entered in February 1998. In April 1999, Park
and Laura agreed to a stipulated judgment as to reserved issues (the 1999
stipulated judgment), which addressed the joint custody of their then
16-year-old son, Park's support obligations, and the division of their community
property.

   As to Park's support obligations, the 1999 stipulated judgment stated Park
"shall pay to [Laura], as and for spousal support, the sum of $ 16,500.00 per
month ... commencing October 1, 1998, and continuing thereafter until the death
of [Laura], death of [Park], remarriage of [Laura], or further order of Court."
The 1999 stipulated judgment also required Park to pay Laura $ 3,500 in monthly
child support until their son "reaches 19, or reaches 18 and is not a full-time
high school student residing with a parent, whichever occurs first." The 1999
stipulated judgment stated: "The support in this case was based upon [Laura]'s
having no income, and [Park] having income in the sum of $ 87,721.00 per month."

   As to the division of Park's and Laura's retirement accounts, the 1999
stipulated judgment stated, in part, that Park and Laura would each retain
"[o]ne-half (1/2) the retirement plans earned by [Park] during marriage,
including any and all contributions made up to the date of separation (Sept. 25,
1996), and any increase or decrease in value of such assets related to market
conditions."

   The 1999 stipulated judgment otherwise divided the parties' community
property by awarding Laura (1) all of the miscellaneous furniture, furnishings,
and appliances; (2) the sum of $ 3,000 reflecting Laura's interest in  Park's
frequent flier miles; (3) two Mercedes automobiles; (4) a residence in Corona
del Mar, subject to an encumbrance in the amount of $ 144,000; (5) an equalizing
sum from the proceeds from the sale of another residence (Perham residence) in
the amount of $ 992,454 "minus the net equity in the [Corona del Mar]
residence"; 3 (6) "[t]he distribution earlier received from the Fidelity Spartan
Account, in the approximate sum of $ 160,000.00"; (7) "[t]he sum of $ 500.00 on
account of an interest charge"; (8) Dell Computer stock valued at $ 900; and (9)
two Fidelity Investments accounts and a mutual fund IRA.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   The 1999
stipulated judgment provided that the balance of the proceeds from the sale of
the Perham residence after this payment to Laura "shall be divided equally"
between Laura and Park.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The 1999 stipulated judgment awarded to Park: (1) "[m]iscellaneous
antiquarian books in a collection, with a stipulated value of $ 8,650.00"; (2)
miscellaneous personal property, having a value of $ 45,420; (3)
"[m]iscellaneous furniture, furnishings and appliances" in Park's possession,
valued at $ 1,095; (4) all of the frequent flier miles and hotel points acquired
by Park during and after the marriage; (5) the "[b]usiness consisting of a
corporation known as 'Threat Assessment Group, Inc.'"; (6) the "[p]rofessional
practice consisting of a corporation known as 'Park Dietz and Associates,
Inc.'"; 4 (7) "[t]he distribution earlier received from the Fidelity Spartan
Account, in the approximate sum of $ 160,000.00"; (8) a Fidelity blue chip
growth IRA account; and (9) an equal share of the proceeds from the sale of the
Perham residence after the equalizing payment, described ante, was made to
Laura.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   The 1999
stipulated judgment stated the two businesses awarded to Park had "a stipulated
value of $ 1,000,000.00."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In October 2002, Park and Laura entered into a stipulation to modify the 1999
stipulated judgment by striking its references  to Laura's award of the Fidelity
Investments accounts and a mutual fund IRA and Park's Fidelity blue chip growth
IRA account. The parties further stipulated to modify the portions of the 1999
stipulated judgment addressing the division of certain retirement accounts to
state, as modified, the following: "Each party is awarded one-half of the
community interest in the retirement plans accumulated by the parties during the
marriage, including any and all contributions made from May 11, 1980 up to
September 25, 1996 and any increase or decrease in value of such assets related
to market conditions. Any contributions made by either party before May 11, 1980
and/or subsequent to September 25, 1996 (and any earnings/losses on such
contributions) shall be deemed to be the sole and separate property of the party
who has made the contribution... . Such retirement plans will be divided
pursuant to Qualified Domestic Relations Orders. Each party shall pay his/her
own attorney's fees related to the preparation of such Qualified Domestic
Relations  Orders." The stipulation's modified language further stated, "[s]aid
retirement plans consist of" (1) TIAA-CREF retirement annuities, (2) a Vanguard
plan account, (3) certain Fidelity Keogh brokerage accounts, (4) a Fidelity
Investments mutual fund IRA account, (5) a Fidelity Investments brokerage Keogh
profit-sharing account, and (6) a Fidelity IRA account. The stipulation to
modify the 1999 stipulated judgment was accepted by the trial court.

II.

Laura's Order to Show Cause Seeking Division of Parties' Retirement Accounts;
Park's Order to Show Cause Seeking Termination or Reduction of Spousal Support
Obligation

   In May 2007, Laura filed an order to show cause seeking the actual division
of the parties' retirement accounts. Laura contended, "[f]or several years I
have been trying to get [Park] to divide our pension assets. He refuses to do
so." Park filed a responsive declaration stating his agreement to an order
effecting the immediate division of the retirement accounts and requiring
Laura's counsel to obtain the financial records necessary for the division.

   In August 2007, Park filed an order to show cause seeking the termination of
his spousal support obligation under the 1999 stipulated judgment. Park sought
alternative relief, as follows: "If the Court is not inclined to immediately
terminate spousal support, then [Park] requests that the Court [e]stablish a
hearing and discovery schedule so that this matter may be heard on an expedited
basis, and to include live testimony; or, in the alternative, Order a 'step
down' schedule that forces [Laura] to begin supporting herself based on her
earning capacity and takes into account her income from assets and other
investments, with an ultimate termination of spousal support."

III.

Hearing

   The hearing on the orders to show cause took place in May 2008. At the
beginning of the hearing, Park and Laura agreed to the entry of another
stipulated judgment which resolved the issue of their undivided retirement
accounts as follows: "Investment accounts standing in the name of Park Elliot
Dietz, MD, at Fidelity Investments ... shall be awarded to Laura B. Dietz as a
full and final community property distribution of the community assets held by
the parties during their marriage." The 2008 stipulated judgment further stated,
"[t]hese distributions of investment/retirement  accounts [are] intended to be a
tax free transfer of jointly owned assets to Petitioner, Laura Dietz[,] incident
to the Judgment of Dissolution and Judgment on Reserved Issues  dated April 29,
1999 and October 21, 2002 respect[ive]ly." Finally, it stated, "[t]he parties
agree that with the entry of this judgment, there are no assets that remain
undivided and neither party has any unresolved claims against the other
regarding asset division."

   The hearing resumed to resolve the sole remaining issue--whether Park's
spousal support obligation should be terminated or reduced. Laura testified she
was 62 years old. She testified that during the marriage she had worked for
Park's two businesses handling administrative matters. She has not been employed
since 1995. In 2000, Laura began suffering from symptoms of a respiratory
illness that was diagnosed in 2005 as allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis;
she had contracted the illness through the presence of fungus in the Corona del
Mar residence that she had been awarded in the 1999 stipulated judgment. Laura
used money she had inherited from her mother toward the cost of remediating and
renovating that residence. She also testified it was not medically advisable for
her to go back to work.

   Park testified he was a 59-year-old forensic psychiatrist. 5 He acknowledged
he earned 50 percent more in 2007 than he had earned in 1998. Park stated, "I
would agree that it would appear that I have more than enough to pay [Laura]
spousal support."

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   Park
testified he would turn 60 years old in August 2008, so he was older than 59½ at
the time of the hearing.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

IV.

Trial Court Orders Spousal Support Reduced; Laura Appeals

   Following the hearing, the court initially stated, "at first glance the
circumstances really don't seem to be that much different from what they were in
1999 when the prior support order was entered." The court, however, explained it
had found a material change of circumstances justifying a reexamination of the
spousal support because (1) based on a comparison of Laura's income and expense
declarations for May 2007 and May 2008, her marketable securities investment
account increased by about $ 220,000; and (2) "she has recently been allocated
approximately $ 500,000 in retirement assets" and "she has reached the age at
which she can begin to use that retirement asset without penalty" to provide for
her support. 6

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   Federal
and state laws regulating retirement accounts "provide that contributions to
such plans within specified limits are tax deductible, and they penalize
withdrawals from such plans prior to the participant's reaching age 59 ½." (In
re Marriage of Olson (1993) 14 Cal.App.4th 1, 11 [17 Cal. Rptr. 2d 480], fn.
omitted.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The trial court further stated it considered whether to terminate or modify
Park's spousal support obligation by reweighing the factors set forth in section
4320 to determine a "just and reasonable result under the facts and
circumstances of this case." The court concluded that some of the relevant
factors "militate strongly in [Park]'s favor" in that Laura "has substantial
assets. To put it simply, she is a wealthy woman. She has not less than $ 4
million in assets, including a $ 2.7 million un[e]ncumbered residence, $ 800,000
in marketable securities, and $ 500,000 in retirement assets. ... [¶] Although
... only $ 1.3 million is liquid." The court stated Laura's substantial
retirement assets were now accessible to her without penalty. Although the court
noted undisputed evidence  that Laura was unable to work due to her health
condition, it also stated, "[g]iven her assets, one could certainly conclude
that she has every ability to be self-sufficient, even without going out into
the workforce. Certainly, with $ 4 million--not less than a $ 4 million
estate--normally one would be expected to be self-sufficient, even if he or she
were unable to work in the normal sense." The court found that Laura's needs
were not greater at the time of trial than they were at the time the 1999
stipulated judgment was entered.

   In Laura's favor, the court found the marriage was a long-term marriage of
approximately 15 years; "the parties achieved an upper marital standard of
living during the marriage"; Laura was "entitled, if the assets are available,
to maintain the marital standard of living post dissolution"; and "clearly,
between the parties there are sufficient assets for both parties to maintain the
marital standard of living post dissolution, now and into the foreseeable
future." The court also found Park's income had increased since the 1999
stipulated judgment, and Park enjoyed "substantial tax savings as a result of
the spousal support, because it is deductible from gross income."

   Having concluded Laura was "more than able to maintain the marital standard
of living with less than the $ 16,500 per month in spousal support that she has
been receiving for the last several years," the trial court turned to the
question of "[w]hat reduction is appropriate?" 7

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   For
reasons we explain, post, the trial court rejected Park's proposal that the
court issue a stepdown order gradually reducing spousal support over time.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The court stated, "[i]n looking at just her increase since the date of
judgment, that increase is not less than $ 720,000; $ 220,000 in marketable
securities, $ 500,000 in retirement assets. If one were to infer a reasonable
return of 5 percent, that would yield $ 36,000 in income without invading the
princip[al]. That, of course, is $ 3,000 a month." The court ordered Park's
monthly spousal support obligation be reduced by $ 3,000 effective June 1, 2008,
which the court concluded, "need not have any effect on [Laura]'s ability to
maintain the marital standard of living."

   The trial court also denied Laura's request that Park pay her attorney fees
and costs under section 2030, stating, "[b]oth parties here have equal access
to quality legal services. The order to show cause re termination or reduction
in spousal support was appropriate. It was brought in good faith. It was
earnest. There just isn't any reason here to shift the burden of the attorney's
fees.?

   Laura appealed.

DISCUSSION

I.

We Reverse the Trial Court's Order Reducing Spousal Support.

   Laura contends the trial court erred by reducing Park's monthly spousal
support obligation because there had been no material change of circumstances
since the 1999 stipulated judgment to warrant such a reduction. We conclude the
trial court erred by reducing spousal support.

A.

General Legal Principles Governing Modifications of Spousal Support

   "Modification of spousal support, even if the prior amount is established by
agreement, requires a material change of circumstances since the last order.
[Citations.]  Change of circumstances means a reduction or increase in the
supporting spouse's ability to pay and/or an increase or decrease in the
supported spouse's needs. [Citations.] It includes all factors affecting need
and the ability to pay." (In re Marriage of McCann (1996) 41 Cal.App.4th 978,
982 [48 Cal. Rptr. 2d 864].) "A trial court considering whether to modify a
spousal support order considers the same criteria set forth in Family Code
section 4320 as it considered in making the initial order." (In re Marriage of
West (2007) 152 Cal.App.4th 240, 247 [60 Cal. Rptr. 3d 858].)

   Section 4320 provides:

   "In ordering spousal support under this part, the court shall consider all of
the following circumstances:

   "(a) The extent to which the earning capacity of each party is sufficient to
maintain the standard of living established during the marriage, taking into
account all of the following:

   "(1) The marketable skills of the supported party; the job market for those
skills; the time and expenses required for the supported party to acquire the
appropriate education or training to develop those skills; and the possible need
for retraining or education to acquire other, more marketable skills or
employment.

   "(2) The extent to which the supported party's present or future earning
capacity is impaired by periods of unemployment that were incurred during the
marriage to permit the supported party to devote time to domestic duties.

   "(b) The extent to which the supported party contributed to the attainment of
an education, training, a career position, or a license by the supporting party.

   "(c) The ability of the supporting party to pay spousal support, taking into
account the supporting party's earning capacity, earned and unearned income,
assets, and standard of living.

   "(d) The needs of each party based on the standard of living established
during the marriage.

   "(e) The obligations and assets, including the separate property, of each
party.

   "(f) The duration of the marriage.

   "(g) The ability of the supported party to engage in gainful employment
without unduly interfering with the interests of dependent children in the
custody of the party.

   "(h) The age and health of the parties.

   "(i) Documented evidence of any history of domestic violence ... .

   "(j) The immediate and specific tax consequences to each party.

   "(k) The balance of the hardships to each party.

   "(l) The goal that the supported party shall be self-supporting within a
reasonable period of time. ...

   "(m) The criminal conviction of an abusive spouse shall be considered in
making a reduction or elimination of a spousal support award in accordance with
Section 4325.

   "(n) Any other factors the court determines are just and equitable."

B.

Standard of Review

   "Appellate review of orders modifying spousal support is governed by an abuse
of discretion standard, and such an abuse occurs when a court modifies a support
order without substantial evidence of a material change of circumstances." (In
re Marriage of McCann, supra, 41 Cal.App.4th at pp. 982-983; see In re Marriage
of West, supra,  152 Cal.App.4th at p. 246 ["A spousal support order is
modifiable only upon a material change of circumstances since the last order,"
and "[w]here there is no substantial evidence of a material change of
circumstances, an order modifying a support order will be overturned for abuse
of discretion"]; In re Marriage of Smith (1990) 225 Cal.App.3d 469, 480 [274
Cal. Rptr. 911] ["Absent a change of circumstances, a motion for modification is
nothing more than an impermissible collateral attack on a prior final order."].)
"'So long as the court exercised its discretion along legal lines, its decision
will not be reversed on appeal if there is substantial evidence to support it.'"
(In re Marriage of Biderman (1992) 5 Cal.App.4th 409, 412 [6 Cal. Rptr. 2d 791]
.)

C.

The Trial Court Was Bound to Give Effect to the Parties' Intent and Reasonable
Expectations As Expressed in the 1999 Stipulated Judgment.

   "[A] marital settlement agreement is a contract between the parties.
[Citations.] Where the agreement permits modifications, those modifications
require a showing of a change in circumstances. [Citations.] Moreover, in
determining what constitutes a change in circumstances the trial court is bound
to give effect to the intent and reasonable expectations of the parties as
expressed in the agreement," and, thus, "the trial court's discretion to modify
the spousal support order is constrained by the terms of the marital settlement
agreement." (In re Marriage of Aninger (1990) 220 Cal.App.3d 230, 238 [269 Cal.
Rptr. 388].) In In re Marriage of Norvall (1987) 192 Cal.App.3d 1047, 1061 [237
Cal. Rptr. 770], the appellate court held that evidence of income produced from
a community property source awarded to the wife in a stipulated settlement
agreement did not constitute substantial evidence of a material change of
circumstances to justify a reduction in the husband's spousal support
obligation.

   Similarly, in In re Marriage of Rabkin (1986) 179 Cal.App.3d 1071, 1081 [225
Cal. Rptr. 219], the appellate court reversed an order reducing the  husband's
spousal support obligation, stating in part: "We have concluded that none of
these factors furnished a proper basis for the trial court's $ 250 per month
reduction in wife's permanent spousal support. As for the sale of the family
residence and wife's resulting right to receive approximately $ 1,800 in monthly
mortgage payments, such right constituted the single major asset awarded to wife
as her one-half share of the community property. The parties' agreement, which
was very carefully drafted by skilled attorneys, provided that wife would
receive her share of the community property and spousal support. It makes no
more sense to reduce wife's spousal support because she received her rightful
share of the community property than it would to increase wife's spousal support
because husband received his rightful share of the community property. (In fact,
husband testified ... that his pension plan, which was allegedly worth $ 175,000
on the date of separation, was now worth between $ 260,000 and $ 270,000.)"

   Here, the 1999 stipulated judgment constituted a similar marital settlement
agreement. Thus, in determining whether a material change of circumstances had
occurred, necessary to support a modification of Park's spousal support
obligation, the trial court was required to "give effect to" Park's and Laura's
"intent and reasonable expectations ... as expressed in the agreement." (In re
Marriage of Aninger, supra, 220 Cal.App.3d at p. 238.)

   The 1999 stipulated judgment reflects Park and Laura's bargained-for exchange
through which they agreed how they would  divide their assets, including their
community property interests in the retirement accounts. The stipulated judgment
expressly acknowledges Park and Laura's expectations that the value of the
subject retirement accounts might increase, stating that each party would
receive one-half of the community property interest in the retirement accounts,
"including any and all contributions made up to the date of separation (Sept.
25, 1996), and any increase or decrease in value of such assets related to
market conditions." (Italics added.) The 2002 stipulated judgment, which
modified portions of the 1999 stipulated judgment, again expressly stated that
each party was awarded one-half of the community property interest in the
retirement accounts and retained the language, "including ... any increase or
decrease in value of such assets related to market conditions." Necessarily
included in this express division of the retirement accounts was the parties'
reasonable expectations that they both would reach the age at which they could
access such accounts without a penalty. 8

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -8   Indeed,
based on the parties' ages at the time of the May 2008 hearing (Laura was 62
years old and Park was about to turn 60 years old), neither Laura nor Park was
that far away from reaching 59½ years of age at the time they signed the 1999
stipulated judgment in April 1999 and the 2002 stipulated judgment in late 2002.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The 1999 stipulated judgment also reflects the parties' expectations as to
spousal support. They agreed Park would pay Laura $ 16,500 in monthly spousal
support until Park's death, Laura's death, Laura's remarriage, or by further
order of the court. The 1999 stipulated judgment further stated, "[t]he support
in this case was based upon [Laura]'s having no income, and [Park] having income
in the sum of $ 87,721.00 per month." The 1999 stipulated judgment did not in
any way suggest the parties expected that spousal support, or any modification
thereof, would be based on the value of the parties' community property assets
divided therein.

   In light of the parties' reasonable expectations as expressed in the 1999
stipulated judgment (and reiterated in the 2002 stipulated judgment), we turn to
consider whether a material change of circumstance surfaced to support the
reduction of Park's spousal support obligation. The trial court concluded a
material change  of circumstances had occurred because Laura's share of the
community property interest in the retirement accounts was now accessible to her
without penalty and was valued at $ 500,000, and Laura owned securities that had
increased in value by $ 220,000.

   But as discussed ante, the accessibility and possible increase in value of
Laura's share of the retirement accounts were part of the parties' expressed
reasonable expectations in entering the 1999 stipulated judgment and cannot
constitute a material change of circumstances on these facts. The 1999
stipulated judgment provided that Laura would receive half of the community
property interest in the retirement accounts and spousal support, and further
expressly stated spousal support was based on the parties' respective incomes.
It is undisputed Park's income had significantly increased since the 1999
stipulated judgment and Laura was unable to work due to her medical condition.

   Furthermore, the record shows Laura and Park actually divided their interest
in the retirement accounts at the hearing in this case and each received an
equal interest valued at $ 500,000 in retirement accounts at that time. Park
testified that, given his ability to pay, he would have no problem paying the
agreed-upon, existing spousal support. On these facts, the trial court's
conclusion that a material change of circumstances had occurred, based on the
accessibility and value of Laura's share of the retirement accounts constituted
error. (Accord, In re Marriage of Norvall, supra, 192 Cal.App.3d 1047, 1061; In
re Marriage of Rabkin, supra, 179 Cal.App.3d 1071, 1081.)

   As to the trial court's finding that a material change of circumstances had
occurred based on the appreciation of Laura's securities, the record is unclear
whether Laura was awarded those securities through the 1999 stipulated
judgment. (In the opening brief, Laura contends the securities were part of the
1999 stipulated judgment, and Park does not refute this assertion in the
respondent's brief.) If Laura was awarded the securities in the 1999 stipulated
judgment as part of her share of the community property assets through the
parties' bargained-for exchange, the appreciation of such securities would be
within the parties' reasonable expectations in entering into the 1999 stipulated
judgment. Because the record is unclear whether the securities were part of the
stipulated judgment, we remand to the trial court to determine whether the
securities were awarded through the 1999 stipulated judgment, and if so, to
apply the same standards explained, ante. If the trial court concludes those
securities were not awarded to Laura through the 1999 stipulated judgment, the
court may reconsider whether a material change of circumstances sufficient to
justify a reduction in spousal support has occurred.

D.

The Trial Court's Consideration of the Factors Set Forth in Section 4320 in
Determining Whether to Reduce Spousal Support Did Not Support a Reduction of
Spousal Support.

   In the respondent's brief, Park argues the trial court did not rely solely on
the accessibility and value of the retirement accounts in determining that a
change of circumstances had occurred, but reached that conclusion only after it
"undertook the required reweighing of the [section] 4320 factors." As we will
explain, the record does not contain evidence supporting any factor that shows a
material change of circumstances had occurred that would warrant depriving Laura
of the benefit of the bargain she made with Park in the 1999 stipulated
judgment.

   After concluding a material change of circumstances had occurred, based on
the accessibility and value of the retirement accounts and the appreciation of
the securities Laura owned, the trial court considered whether a reduction in
spousal support would be appropriate by reweighing the factors set forth in
section 4320. The trial court did not consider factors that "ha[d] no relevant
evidence in this record and so can't be specifically factored into the
analysis."

   The trial court considered that the parties' marriage "was a long-term
marriage of approximately 15 years." (See § 4320, subd. (f) [duration of
marriage].) The court found Laura's testimony about her health condition and her
inability to work was unrebutted. Thus, factors involving her earning capacity,
marketable skills, and any expectation of her becoming self-supporting within a
reasonable period of time through employment did not support a reduction in
spousal support. (See § 4320, subds. (a), (l).) Although Laura inherited about $
400,000 from her mother after the 1999  stipulated judgment, that money had been
used to substantially renovate the Corona del Mar residence after the discovery
of a mold infestation and was not available to use for her support. (See § 4320,
subd. (e).) No evidence was presented  showing that Laura had received any other
separate property after the parties agreed to the 1999 stipulated judgment.

   The trial court also observed the parties had achieved an "upper" marital
standard of living during the marriage, and "between the parties there are
sufficient assets for both parties to maintain the marital standard of living
post dissolution, now and into the foreseeable future." Indeed, the trial court
found Park's monthly income had increased by about 28 percent since the 1999
stipulated judgment. (See § 4320, subd. (c) [supporting spouse's ability to pay
spousal support].) The court found that Park "does enjoy substantial tax savings
as a result of the spousal support, because it is deductible from gross income."
(See § 4320, subd. (j).)

   As to Laura's obligations and assets (§ 4320, subd. (e)), the trial court
found the majority of Laura's assets, namely, the family residence, were
"illiquid" and further found that Laura had not mismanaged her assets. As to
Laura's needs (§ 4320, subd. (d)), the court stated Laura's "needs today are no
greater than they were at the time of the judgment in order for her to maintain
the marital standard of living." Although the court did not find Laura's needs
had decreased, the trial court commented, "[i]t could be argued, and, in fact,
[Park] did argue persuasively that her needs may be somewhat less, because her
only child has now reached the age of majority, has concluded his education, and
is self-supporting." But no evidence was presented showing to what extent
Laura's need for spousal support might have decreased after their son reached
the age of majority and Park's $ 3,500 monthly child support obligation had
terminated. (See Hogoboom & King, Cal. Practice Guide: Family Law (The Rutter
Group 2009) ¶ 17:150.4, pp. 17-34 to 17-35 (rev. # 1, 2008) [stating "[a]
custodial parent is commonly awarded lower spousal support in exchange for
higher child support"].) As the court did not rely on a decrease in Laura's
needs as a factor for reducing spousal support, we do not further address it.

   The key finding the trial court relied on in balancing the section 4320
factors was the same finding the court initially relied upon in determining that
a material change of circumstances had occurred in the first place?that Laura,
given the assets she was provided in the 1999 stipulated judgment, and the
accessibility and appreciation of such assets since the 1999 stipulated
judgment, should be expected to be more self-sufficient. As discussed, ante, the
court's conclusion that a material change of circumstances occurred based on
this finding, without more, was erroneous. The court's reliance on this finding
is further illustrated by its calculation of the reduction of Park's  spousal
support obligation. In so calculating the spousal support obligation, the trial
court (1) added the value of Laura's share of the community property interest in
the retirement accounts ($ 500,000) to the amount her share of the securities
had appreciated ($ 220,000) for a total of $ 720,000; (2) imputed a "reasonable
return of 5 percent" on the $ 720,000 "that would yield $ 36,000 in income
without invading the princip[al]"; and (3) divided the $ 36,000 by 12 months to
determine that spousal support should be reduced by $ 3,000 per month.

   Furthermore, no evidence was presented at the hearing to support the trial
court's decision to impute a 5 percent return on those assets. In rejecting
Park's request that the trial court gradually terminate spousal support through
a stepdown order, the court acknowledged the dearth of evidence on this point,
stating: "There was no evidence given with respect  to the return that one could
expect to achieve on the retirement account; the rate at which one would be
expected, given [Laura]'s age and other factors, to use that asset; how long it
could be expected to last; what would be a reasonable amount for her to withdraw
based upon actuarial data and so on. [¶] So there is no record here based upon
which the court could conclude any particular schedule on which she would use
her retirement assets and enable the court to make an order stepping down
spousal support in the future. So I'm not going to do that." (See In re Marriage
of Kennedy (1987) 193 Cal.App.3d 1633, 1641 [239 Cal. Rptr. 151] [the court may
not ascribe an arbitrary and theoretical rate of return on assets].)

   Thus, the trial court's order reducing Park's spousal support obligation,
based on its consideration of the section 4320 factors on this record,
constituted error.

E.

In re Marriage of Schmir

   The trial court stated it heavily relied on In re Marriage of Schmir (2005)
134 Cal.App.4th 43 [35 Cal. Rptr. 3d 716] (Schmir), stating that case "really
does seem to be directly on point here." 9 In Schmir, the trial court found
three material changes of circumstances had occurred since the parties entered a
marital settlement agreement requiring the husband to pay $ 5,800 in  monthly
spousal support: (1) the wife was "presently employable as a licensed clinical
social worker"; (2) the wife's monthly medical expenses had decreased from $
2,000 to $ 500; and (3) the wife was eligible to withdraw funds from her
retirement account without penalty. (134 Cal.App.4th at pp. 46-47.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -9   In the
opening brief, Laura cites an opinion that has not been certified for
publication in which an appellate court distinguished Schmir, supra, 134
Cal.App.4th 43. Laura's citation to this unpublished opinion violated rule
8.1115(a) of the California Rules of Court, which states: "[A]n opinion of a
California Court of Appeal or superior court appellate division that is not
certified for publication or ordered published must not be cited or relied on by
a court or a party in any other action."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The wife in Schmir, supra, 134 Cal.App.4th at page 51, argued on appeal,
inter alia, that "her ability to make penalty-free withdrawals from her
retirement account is not a change in circumstances because the parties must
have contemplated when they entered into their support agreement in 1989 [the
wife] would reach the age when she could begin making withdrawals from the
account without penalty. Therefore her reaching the requisite age is not a
change in circumstance but merely an aspect of the same circumstance existing at
the time of the original support order in 1989." (Fn. omitted.) The appellate
court rejected the wife's argument, stating, "[a]dopting [the wife]'s line of
reasoning would mean that as a matter of law the supporting spouse's attainment
of retirement age could never constitute a change of circumstance for purposes
of a motion to modify a support order." (Ibid., italics added.) Citing In re
Marriage of Reynolds (1998) 63 Cal.App.4th 1373, 1379 [74 Cal.Rptr.2d 636], 10
and the cases cited therein, the appellate  court stated: "Numerous appellate
court decisions have rejected such a result even though the parties in those
cases clearly contemplated the supporting spouse would one day reach the age
when he or she could legitimately retire." (Schmir, supra, 134 Cal.App.4th at p.
51.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -10   In In re
Marriage of Reynolds, supra, 63 Cal.App.4th at page 1379, the appellate court
stated, "in the instance of a bona fide retirement, a supporting spouse should
not be forced to continue working. Under those circumstances, the trial court
may determine that there has been a material change in circumstances to justify
a modification of support." The Reynolds court held that the trial court abused
its discretion by "refus[ing] to recognize the effect of Husband's retirement
and incorrectly applied a 'capacity to earn' standard." (Ibid.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   We agree with Schmir that a supporting spouse's attainment of retirement age
may constitute a material change of circumstances for purposes of a motion to
modify a support order, depending on the circumstances of a given case. The loss
of income as a result of a supporting spouse's retirement at an appropriate age
11 might be such a case. We do not agree, however, that such a proposition
establishes as a matter of law that a supported spouse's attainment of the age
by which retirement accounts divided in a marital settlement agreement might be
accessed without penalty automatically constitutes a material change of
circumstances.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -11   "The
courts have also held that a supporting spouse cannot retire prematurely in
order to avoid paying spousal support." (In re Marriage of Reynolds, supra, 63
Cal.App.4th at p. 1379.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   As discussed, ante, here, the parties agreed to an equal division of their
community property interest in the retirement accounts, providing each with  $
500,000 in retirement assets. As of the time of the hearing, both parties had
reached the age by which they could access the retirement accounts without
penalty. The parties bargained for the equal division of their retirement
accounts in the 1999 stipulated judgment with the expectation that they each
would be able to access the retirement accounts without penalty at 59½ years
old.

   We acknowledge that there might be a case where the trial court could
properly exercise its discretion to impute reasonable withdrawals from
retirement accounts as additional income for purposes of modifying spousal
support. For example, in In re Marriage of Olson, supra, 14 Cal.App.4th at page
13, the appellate court stated in dicta: "[D]uring the timeframe within which a
participant has the option to draw funds from the retirement plan without
penalty, that is between ages 59½ and 70½, but is choosing not to do so, the
court should have discretion as to whether or not to impute reasonable
withdrawals as additional income for purposes of fixing spousal support, but
should do so weighing the public policy favoring provision for one's retirement
by allowing funds in the plan to accrue tax free, against all other
circumstances in the case. This is especially pertinent where, as here, it would
appear that the payor will soon retire at which time his ability to pay spousal
support will be based upon income which, for the most part, will be produced by
his retirement plans."

   This is not such a case. Spousal support was never determined based in any
way on income Park might have derived from his share of the retirement accounts.
Park acknowledged he had sufficient resources to satisfy his spousal support
obligation.

   Because the trial court's order reducing Park's monthly spousal support
obligation was not supported by substantial evidence of a material change of
circumstances, we reverse.

II.

We Remand for the Trial Court to Reconsider Laura's Request for Attorney Fees
and Costs.

   Laura argues, "[t]he trial court erred in refusing to order Park to pay a
contributive  share of Laura's attorney fees, based on their relative
circumstances." As discussed, post, because the trial court applied an incorrect
standard in refusing to make such an order, we remand to the trial court for
reconsideration of Laura's request.

   "The trial court may in its discretion award fees or costs reasonably
necessary to maintain or defend any proceeding occurring after entry of
judgment. [Citation.] The trial court is to decide 'what is just and reasonable
under the relative circumstances' [citation], taking into consideration 'the
need for the award to enable each party, to the extent practical, to have
sufficient financial resources to present the party's case adequately ... . The
fact that the party requesting an award of attorney's fees and costs has
resources ... is not itself a bar to an order that the other party pay part or
all of the fees and costs requested. Financial resources are only one factor for
the court to consider in determining how to apportion the overall cost of the
litigation equitably between the parties under their relative circumstances'
[citation]." (In re Marriage of Terry, supra, 80 Cal.App.4th at p. 933.) "In
assessing the applicant's relative 'need' and the other party's ability to pay,
the court may take into account 'all evidence concerning the parties' current
incomes, assets, and abilities, including investment and income-producing
properties.' " (Ibid.) In In re Marriage of Terry, the appellate court held,
"[i]n light of the fact that [the wife] is by far the wealthier spouse, the
trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying her fees." (Ibid.)

   "'[A] motion for attorney fees and costs in a dissolution proceeding is left
to the sound discretion of the trial court. [Citations.] In the absence of a
clear showing of abuse, its determination will not be disturbed on appeal.'
[Citation.] Thus, we affirm the court's order unless '"no judge could reasonably
make the order made. [Citations.]"'" (In re Marriage of Duncan (2001) 90
Cal.App.4th 617, 631 [108 Cal. Rptr. 2d 833].)

   Here, the trial court stated it "finds that there is no need ... for [Park]
to pay any portion of [Laura's] attorney's fees. Both parties here have equal
access to quality legal services. The order to show cause re termination or
reduction in spousal support was appropriate. It was brought in good faith. It
was earnest. There just isn't any reason here to shift the burden of the
attorney's fees."

   The proper legal standard for determining whether to award attorney fees in
such proceedings is not whether the proceedings were brought in good faith or in
earnest, or even whether the party requesting attorney fees and costs had
resources to pay attorney fees without considering other factors. (In re
Marriage of Terry, supra, 80 Cal.App.4th at p. 933.) Instead, the trial court is
required to determine how to apportion the overall cost of the litigation
equitably between the parties under their relative circumstances. (Ibid.) We
therefore remand the matter to the trial court to reconsider Laura's request for
attorney fees and costs under the standard set forth, ante. We express no
opinion on what conclusion the trial court should reach after applying the
proper standard on remand.

DISPOSITION

   The postjudgment order reducing Park's monthly spousal support obligation is
reversed. With respect to any securities not in the retirement accounts, the
trial court is to determine whether there is any material change of
circumstances consistent  with the views explained in this opinion. On remand,
the trial court shall also reconsider Laura's request for attorney fees and
costs under the standard set forth, ante, in part II of the Discussion. Laura
shall recover costs on appeal.

   O'Leary, Acting P. J., and Aronson, J., concurred.

   On September 2, 2009, the opinion was modified to read as printed above.


                              21 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In re the Marriage of MARY JANE and ROBERT A. OLSON.  MARY
             JANE OLSON, Appellant, v. ROBERT A. OLSON, Appellant.

                                  No. A057005

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FIRST APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION FIVE

            14 Cal. App. 4th 1; 17 Cal. Rptr. 2d 480; 1993 Cal. App.
          LEXIS 250; 93 Cal. Daily Op. Service 1827; 93 Daily Journal
                                    DAR 3257


                            March 11, 1993, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Contra Costa County, No. 250664, Patricia
K. Sepulveda, Judge.

COUNSEL: Bernard N. Wolf and Susan A. Bender for Appellant Wife.

Frank R. Frisch for Appellant Husband.

JUDGES: Opinion by King, J., with Peterson, P. J., and Haning, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: KING, J.

OPINION

     In this case we hold that delegation of judicial authority to a special
master to make factual findings and exercise judgment in determining the income
of the parties for the purpose of setting spousal support is an abuse of
discretion, unless done by agreement of the parties.  Although it will usually
be an abuse of discretion to use a computer program designed to compute
temporary spousal support for the determination of permanent spousal support, or
a modification thereof, we affirm the procedure under the particular facts of
this case, where there was fluctuating income each month and the court, having
considered the statutory factors, determined this program would provide a fair
method to fix the proper amount of permanent spousal support. Finally, we hold
that trial courts possess broad discretion to include, exclude or partially
include contributions to individual retirement plans, and earnings or accruals
of such plans not actually withdrawn, as income available for determining the
amount to be ordered for spousal support.

    Mary Jane Olson appeals from an order modifying spousal support, alleging
the trial court improperly delegated its judicial authority and erred in
establishing a method for determining future support levels.

   After 30 years of marriage, Robert and Mary Jane Olson 1 obtained a judgment
of dissolution as to marital status in 1984.  The following year, the trial
court rendered a further judgment incorporating a marital settlement agreement
which included spousal support of $ 1,500 per month.  In September 1987, the
court denied Mary Jane's motion to increase spousal support except to the extent
of $ 100 per month "volunteered" by Robert.  Both parties appealed, but the
appeals were dismissed pursuant to a stipulation which made the order
nonmodifiable through 1988.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   For ease
of reference, we will refer to the parties by their first names, Robert and Mary
Jane.  (See In re Marriage of Smith (1990) 225 Cal.App.3d 469, 475-476, fn. 1
[274 Cal.Rptr. 911].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    On April 12, 1991, Robert filed a motion to reduce spousal support to $ 500
per month based on an alleged decrease in his ability to pay.  In her responsive
declaration, Mary Jane requested that the existing order remain in effect.
After a hearing on October 8, 1991, the trial court issued a detailed notice of
intended decision.

    The court found that a decrease in Robert's wages constituted a substantial
change in circumstances since the prior order.  It found credible his testimony
that his employment earnings would continue to decrease, leading to retirement
in the not too distant future.  (He was 66 at the time.) Robert was receiving
other income from Social Security, interest and dividends, and a small pension.
He had over $ 400,000 in individual retirement accounts (IRAs), annuities,
savings bonds, stocks and other savings.  Some came from his share of the
community property (each party had received about $ 235,000 at dissolution) and
some from postseparation earnings. Robert had paid all spousal support
previously ordered.

   The court's intended decision provided that Robert would not be required to
draw on the principal of his investments or retirement plans for spousal support
,  but that when he did make withdrawals, whether of income or principal, the
amounts actually received would be considered as income available for spousal
support. In order to avoid repeated litigation as Robert's income fluctuated,
the trial court provided that he should pay Mary Jane 27 percent of his gross
income, from whatever source, each month.

   Robert moved for clarification, reconsideration or a new trial.  Mary Jane
also filed objections to the intended decision.  After further hearing, the
court  issued a minute order incorporating its prior rulings and findings except
for the percentage method of calculating spousal support. In order to avoid
monthly litigation of support-related issues as the parties' incomes fluctuated,
and in light of "the great animosity between the parties and their respective
counsel," 2 the court found it had no choice but to appoint an accountant as a
special master to determine the level of income available to each party each
month, and to calculate the amount of spousal support to be paid using the
standard Dissomaster default computer program. 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2
Unfortunately, the animosity between the parties, and between their attorneys,
has not lessened with the passage of seven years since the dissolution.
Although no court order can require former spouses to curb their animosity
toward each other, counsel bear a responsibility to conduct themselves with
appropriate professional detachment and not to act as if they themselves were
the litigants.  In marital dissolution cases, the court possesses the power to
impose a sanction to the extent that "the conduct of each party or attorney
furthers or frustrates the policy of the law to promote settlement of litigation
and, where possible, to reduce the cost of litigation by encouraging cooperation
between the parties and attorneys." (See Civ. Code, § 4370.6, subd. (a).) In
this case, the bitterness between the parties and counsel seems to have blinded
them to the cost of resolving their differences.  Indeed, one counsel suggested
that the proper way to resolve these disputes about monthly income would be for
the parties to return to court each month so that the judge could decide the
proper amount of spousal support to be paid for that month.  Overburdened
taxpayers and judicial resources should not have to bear the further burden of
parties who are apparently incapable of acting like mature adults.  Although we
hold the trial court exceeded its authority in delegating judicial power to the
special master, we do not in any way mean to imply that the court was in error
by attempting to designate a separate forum for the time-consuming tasks of
factfinding and making recommendations to the court, and providing that it be
done at the expense of the parties, rather than the taxpayers and the judicial
system.
3   For assistance in setting child support and temporary spousal support, two
computer programs appear to be used by most family law judges in California.
"Dissomaster" was developed by Stephen Adams, Esq., and is produced by
California Family Law Reports, while "Supportax" was developed by George Norton,
Esq., and is produced by The Rutter Group.  The computer programs determine
child support according to the statutory formula and calculate temporary spousal
support as provided by local rules for the ordinary case.  The benefit of the
programs is that they enable a family law judge to input appropriate factual
information about the income of the parties and have temporary spousal support
computed in accordance with local rules, automatically taking into account the
tax consequences of the order to each party.  Unusual factors affecting
temporary spousal support, and rebuttal factors to the statutory formula for
child support, require the judge to make adjustments to the calculations made by
the basic computer program.

   The default program ordered by the trial court in this case determines the
amount for spousal support by taking 40 percent of the high earner's income and
reducing it by 50 percent of the low earner's income, taking into account the
tax consequences of the deductibility of spousal support to the payor, and its
taxability to the payee. As we will discuss, the application of such a formula
across the board for all cases of temporary spousal support is appropriate as a
means of maintaining the financial status quo of the parties pending trial.
However, such a blanket approach to permanent spousal support, or the
modification of spousal support, would be an abuse of discretion for failing to
fix spousal support after consideration of the applicable factors set forth in
Civil Code section 4801, subdivision (a).

   There are dangers in the use of a computer program, even when used only for
temporary spousal support. First of all, since the program is based upon certain
assumptions, it should only be used where the court has adopted local rules with
the same assumptions for the fixing of ordinary temporary spousal support.
Second, to the extent unusual circumstances exist in a given case, the temporary
spousal support amount generated by the computer program must be adjusted for
them.  For example, if one of the parties is to be responsible for the income
taxes of both, or if one party is paying substantial sums for an adult child to
attend college, adjustments should be made.

   Although it appears these computer programs are regularly utilized to
determine temporary spousal support in most family law courts, there is no
authority for their use unless they incorporate guidelines for temporary spousal
support adopted by local court rule.

   An even greater danger is that the trial judge may use the results from a
computer program designed for temporary spousal support to determine permanent
spousal support. The purposes of temporary and permanent spousal support are
vastly different, and in most cases the amounts ordered for each will be
different.  The purpose of temporary spousal support is to preserve the status
quo of the parties pending trial, while the purposes of permanent support are
set forth in Civil Code section 4801, subdivision (a).  (See In re Marriage of
Burlini (1983) 143 Cal.App.3d 65 [191 Cal.Rptr. 541].) For this reason, using a
computer program based on the court's guidelines for temporary spousal support
is inappropriate for fixing permanent spousal support. However, in looking at
different amounts the court might order for permanent support, the court, by
using the computer program, is able to obtain a rapid calculation of the tax
effects of each amount to each party and determine the resulting net spendable
income each party would have at different levels of permanent spousal support.
Indeed, by going outside the basic computer program, the judge can even start
with different amounts for net spendable income which the supported spouse might
need and work backwards to the amount of spousal support to be ordered to result
in that amount of net spendable income.  Finally, fixing permanent support
simply by use of a computer program would be an abdication of judicial
responsibility because permanent spousal support must be fixed only after
consideration of the applicable factors set forth in Civil Code section 4801,
subdivision (a).  No computer program can do this; it must be done by the judge.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      The order included the following specific provisions: All taxable income
received by either party is considered available for support.  Future earnings
placed in savings accounts, will be considered as available income; those placed
in IRAs and tax-deferred annuities will be considered only upon withdrawal.
(Robert was ordered to "keep such funds as he is able to save from his income in
the future segregated to the extent necessary for the Special Master to
determine the source thereof.") Interest income will be considered available for
support when withdrawn rather than when accumulated.  The special master could
adjust the computer program's calculation to account for any extraordinary tax
situation which was proven to his satisfaction. 4

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   The title
given to the appointee in family law cases appears to be, in part,
geographically based.  In Northern California the appointee appears to be most
often designated a special master, while in Southern California the appointee is
called a referee.  The latter term apparently comes from the statutory language
empowering the court to make a "reference" either by agreement of the parties
pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure section 638 or on its own motion pursuant to
Code of Civil Procedure section 639.  In the family law context, the title of
special master may more accurately describe the function the appointee is to
perform, especially when the reference is made by agreement of the parties.  The
ordinary party in marital dissolution cases might envision a referee as someone
with a striped shirt and whistle around his or her neck to be blown when a foul
is committed, rather than someone empowered to decide the result of the game or
to make recommendations to that end to the trial court.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     After further briefing, the trial court issued an additional minute order
awarding Mary Jane $ 5,000 in attorney fees and costs.  On March 5, 1992, the
trial court rendered its order after hearing.  It specifies that Robert may
deduct from his taxable income "legitimate business expenses as determined by
the Special Master." It also differs from the minute orders by providing that
future taxable interest earned by bank accounts currently in existence will be
considered income when paid, whether or not actually withdrawn.

    I

     "Whether a modification of a spousal support order is warranted depends
upon the facts and circumstances of each case, and its propriety rests in the
sound discretion of the trial court the exercise of which this court will not
disturb unless as a matter of law an abuse of discretion is shown." (In re
Marriage of Hoffmeister (1987) 191 Cal.App.3d 351, 357-358 [236 Cal.Rptr. 543].)
An abuse of discretion occurs "where, considering all the relevant
circumstances, the court has exceeded the bounds of reason or it can fairly be
said that no judge would reasonably make the same order under the same
circumstances."  (In re Marriage of Smith, supra, 225 Cal.App.3d 469, 480,
citations and internal quotation marks omitted.)

   There is no dispute on appeal that the court's finding of a decrease and
fluctuations in Robert's income constituted a change in circumstances justifying
a modification.  However, Mary Jane contends the trial court's order constitutes
an improper delegation of judicial authority to the special master to set
spousal support. We agree.

   In In re Marriage of Matthews (1980) 101 Cal.App.3d 811, 817 [161 Cal.Rptr.
879], the court invalidated as "an improper delegation of judicial power to a
subordinate court attache" a provision which authorized a family therapist
supervising court-ordered visitation rights to alter the visitation schedule "in
any way she deemed reasonable and necessary." The Matthews court relied on
Washburn v. Washburn (1942) 49 Cal.App.2d 581 [122 P.2d 96], in which the court
reversed an order transferring custody of two minor children from the mother to
the father based only on a report by a domestic relations investigator.  (In re
Marriage of Matthews, supra, 101 Cal.App.3d at p. 816.) The Washburn court held,
and the California Supreme Court reaffirmed in Fewel v. Fewel (1943) 23 Cal.2d
431, 436 [144 P.2d 592], "that the power of decision vested in the trial court
may not be delegated to investigators or other subordinate officials or attaches
of the court." (In re Marriage of Matthews, supra, 101 Cal.App.3d at pp. 816-817
.)

    Like the therapist in Matthews and the investigator in Washburn, the special
master in this case was not merely gathering data, but was making factual
determinations (monthly income, business expenses and tax information) which
were necessary to develop the factual financial information to input into the
computer program. As indicated previously (ante, fn. 2), the level of animosity
between the parties and counsel in this case certainly justified the appointment
of a special master, and the appointment itself was not, under the
circumstances, an abuse of discretion. However, absent a stipulation by the
parties, the  special master could not be empowered to make binding factual
findings or judicial determinations. 5 The delegation to the special master of
authority to determine what business expenses to allow as deductions from income
for Robert, to make tax determinations and to adjust for extraordinary tax
circumstances he accepted constituted an improper delegation of judicial
authority. Where a reference to a special master is made on the court's own
motion, the court itself must make these determinations, usually upon the
receipt of a report containing findings and recommendations of the special
master which the court may either adopt as its own or modify as appropriate.  Of
course, if the reference is by agreement of the parties, the parties can
stipulate to the special master making determinations which otherwise  would be
an unlawful delegation of judicial authority.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   The best
and least expensive method of resolving disputes such as this one, is for the
parties to stipulate not only to the appointment of a special master, but also
that the special master be empowered to determine the issues either as an
arbitrator, as a judge pro tempore pursuant to article VI, section 21, of the
California Constitution, or by reference by agreement of the parties pursuant to
Code of Civil Procedure section 638.  Given the degree of animosity involved
here, such a stipulation would most likely have been impossible to obtain.
Under those circumstances, the court has little option except to retain the case
or make a reference on its own motion pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure
section 639.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    II

   Mary Jane next contends the trial court erred in several respects when it set
out the method for determining the amount of spousal support due each month.
Initially, she maintains the court failed to consider her needs, specifically
her alleged deteriorating health, limited health insurance and medical expenses.
On the contrary, in 1987 the court found her future medical needs and health
conditions were known and considered at the time of the original support order
and were provided for by the stipulated judgment.  From 1987 to the time of the
hearing, her medical and dental expenses had increased by only $ 15 per month.
If there is any future change in this regard, she may of course move for a
modification of support.

     Mary Jane contends it was an abuse of discretion or an improper delegation
of judicial authority to order the special master to determine the  monthly
amount of future spousal support by the use of the standard Dissomaster default
computer program. The court must exercise its discretion in setting or modifying
permanent spousal support by consideration of all appropriate factors under
Civil Code section 4801, subdivision (a), 6 and the weight to be given to those
which are applicable.  "A motion for modification of spousal support may only be
granted if there has been a material change of circumstances since the last
order." (In re Marriage of Smith, supra, 225 Cal.App.3d at p. 480, citation
omitted.) For this reason, it would constitute an abuse of discretion for the
trial court simply to substitute the use of a computer program for the required
consideration and appropriate weighing of the statutory factors.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   Unless
otherwise indicated, all further statutory references are to the Civil Code.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In this case the trial court found that a decrease in and projected
fluctuations of Robert's income constituted the requisite change of
circumstances.  Accordingly, the court attempted to fashion a just, equitable
and relatively inexpensive method of calculating future support because the
income of the parties will vary from month to month.  Mary Jane does not
identify any statutory factor as to which evidence was submitted that the trial
court failed to consider.

   It seems clear the trial court determined that in this case the computer
program offered the fairest and least expensive method of fixing future spousal
support given the fluctuating nature of each party's income.  There is no
indication that the trial court used this computer program as a substitute for
judicial discretion or in lieu of considering the factors prescribed by section
4801, subdivision (a), on an across-the-board basis for setting or modifying
permanent spousal support. Under the facts of this case, we cannot say the court
abused its discretion in directing the use of the computer program for monthly
adjustments in spousal support as monthly income fluctuated.  Should there be
future changes of circumstances, other than fluctuating income, or if income
should stabilize, nothing in the challenged order precludes either party from
bringing another motion to modify.

   III

     Mary Jane's next claim of error is that the court's order considering
accruals to retirement plan funds as income available for support only to the
extent that they were withdrawn was an abuse of discretion. She claims the court
should not have precluded consideration of earnings Robert had previously placed
in retirement and annuity accounts, and the accruals on those accounts, until
such time as he chooses to withdraw them.  These plans were awarded to Robert as
his share of community property, or were sums  accumulated during the period
Robert was paying Mary Jane the court- ordered spousal support and were set
aside by him for his retirement. Mary Jane cites no authority requiring him to
withdraw funds at her convenience.

    It is true that in assessing a party's ability to pay spousal support, a
court may consider investment income.  (In re Marriage of Tapia (1989) 211
Cal.App.3d 628, 631 [259 Cal.Rptr. 459].) "The existence and not the source of
sums of money or services available is the relevant factor." (Fuller v. Fuller
(1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 405, 410 [152 Cal.Rptr. 467].) The issue in Tapia and
Fuller was whether a court awarding child or spousal support should consider the
income of a party's nonmarital partner to the extent it reduced his living
expenses and thus affected the amount of money he had available to pay support.
Neither Tapia nor Fuller mandates consideration of accruals in an accumulating
retirement plan before there are any withdrawals.

   Mary Jane cites In re Marriage of Kennedy (1987) 193 Cal.App.3d 1633 [239
Cal.Rptr. 151] for the proposition that the court should treat retirement
benefits that a party is eligible to receive but chooses not to draw as a
potential source of spousal support. 7 It is hard to see why.  The Kennedy court
held it was an abuse of discretion to consider the amount a party could be
earning from capital assets awarded at dissolution had she made
income-generating investments.  (Id. at pp. 1638-1641.) Furthermore, the court
suggested, without deciding, that the trial court probably did not have the
authority to order a party to invest her share of the community assets in
income-producing property.  (Id. at p. 1640 & fn. 3.) To the extent it is at all
analogous, Kennedy supports the trial court's refusal to require Robert to
withdraw his retirement funds or to consider them as income until he does so. 8


- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   The
parties' community property interests in retirement benefits were awarded to
each of them in the original judgment.  Here, we deal solely with the issue of
whether accruals to one party's retirement plans must be considered as income
for purposes of spousal support before being withdrawn. Of course, a nonemployee
spouse receiving his or her community interest by an in-kind division of the
retirement plan benefits is entitled to begin receiving those benefits when the
employee is eligible to retire and begin drawing them.  This right cannot be
defeated by the employee continuing to work.  (In re Marriage of Gillmore (1981)
29 Cal.3d 418 [174 Cal.Rptr. 493, 629 P.2d 1].)
8   Mary Jane twice states that the Kennedy court "held" a trial court "must"
consider "the actual rate of return which a spouse's assets generate." In fact,
the court said in dictum, "We believe it would have been within the court's
discretion to consider the rate of return earned on the balance of the property
division after purchase of the home." (In re Marriage of Kennedy, supra, 193
Cal.App.3d at p. 1641.) The Kennedy court had no occasion to consider whether
the return on funds invested in a tax-deferred retirement account should be
considered as income as it accrues when it is not withdrawn.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Mary Jane cites no authority for her claim that it is unfair to consider as
income her IRA withdrawals as well as Robert's.  She argues that as her  support
decreases she will be "constrained" to make such withdrawals which, when counted
as income, may result in further decreases in support and so on in a downward
spiral.  It is equally true the court ordered that if Robert withdraws IRA funds
(e.g., "for purchase of a motor vehicle, payment of attorney's fees, etc.,")
they also will be considered income and result in increased support,
constraining him as well.  On the record before us, it cannot be said that the
trial court abused its discretion in treating both parties the same in this
regard. 9

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -9   Of
course, the parties must begin to withdraw funds from their retirement accounts
upon reaching age 70 1/2.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The extent of the discretion possessed by trial courts to consider, partially
consider, or refuse to consider accruals in a retirement plan in fixing spousal
support is an issue of first impression in California.  We begin with the
general rule, as discussed earlier, that modification of a spousal support order
rests within the sound discretion of the trial court.

   It is clear as a matter of public policy that Social Security benefits are
not intended to be the sole source of income upon retirement. Federal and state
laws encourage citizens to save for their retirement years by providing tax
benefits for contributions to individual retirement plans such as IRAs, Keogh
plans, and deferred compensation  plans, as well as employer-sponsored plans. 10
These laws provide that contributions to such plans within specified limits are
tax deductible, and they penalize withdrawals from such plans prior to the
participant's 11 reaching age 59 1/2 as well as penalizing any failure to make
minimum withdrawals based upon life expectancy, after the participant reaches
age 70 1/2.  In the meantime, because of the tax deductibility of contributions
to the plans and the nontaxability of earnings and accruals not withdrawn, the
growth of the assets in such plans can be significant.  The public policy behind
this statutory scheme is to assure a flow of income upon retirement, in addition
to social security benefits and any other sources of income, for the life of the
participant and, perhaps, a surviving spouse or child.  (It is obviously beyond
the scope of the issues before us to provide a detailed discussion of the law
applicable to retirement plans and marital rights therein.  For a general
discussion of this subject, see Jaffe et al., Employee Retirement and Deferred
Compensation Plans on Dissolution of Marriage (Cont.Ed.Bar 1989).)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -10   Because
the only retirement plans involved here are not employer-sponsored plans, but
are the individual plans of Robert and Mary Jane, all further discussion about
retirement plans pertains only to individual plans.
11   We adopt the terminology of federal law.  "Participant" is the employee or
self-employed person who has a retirement plan. An "alternate payee," for our
purposes, is the spouse of former spouse of participant.  (See 29 U.S.C. § 1001
et seq.; In re Marriage of Baker (1988 204 Cal.App.3d 206 [251 Cal.Rptr. 126].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The Legislature, in prescribing the factors to be considered by trial courts
in fixing permanent spousal support in section 4801, subdivision (a), has
provided no specific guidance as to what consideration the court should give to
contributions to or accruals in retirement plans.  This issue might fall within
a number of the factors that are set forth in the statute, particularly the age
of the parties and the tax consequences to each party.  In any event, the issue
would certainly fit within the final factor listed in the statute, "Any other
factors which [the court] deems just and equitable."

   We conclude that trial courts possess broad discretion when setting or
modifying permanent spousal support about whether to consider as income
contributions to individual retirement plans by a participant and accruals
therein not withdrawn. The Legislature has wisely left this within the court's
discretion.  It is easy to foresee cases where contributions and accruals are
best not considered as income available to pay permanent spousal support. 12 In
other cases, it may be appropriate to consider all or part of either or both as
being available for permanent spousal support. The trial court is in the best
position to determine under the facts and circumstances of each case how its
discretion should be exercised, given the dual, but possibly conflicting, public
policies of awarding spousal support where appropriate and of encouraging
citizens to save for their retirement. 13

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -12   Although
not before us, it appears trial courts possess the broadest possible discretion
to consider, partially consider, or refuse to consider contributions to
retirement plans and accruals in such plans as income available for temporary
spousal support. If the plan is an employer- sponsored plan, such as many
governmental plans, the contributions may be mandatory and should not be
considered.  If the parties have regularly made nonmandatory contributions, the
court may favor continuing to do so to preserve the status quo pending trial.
(See In re Marriage of Winter (1992) 7 Cal.App.4th 1926 [10 Cal.Rptr.2d 225].)
On the other hand, if the contributions are not mandated, the financial strain
resulting from the separation may be so great that the court will consider, as
income available for support, money which would otherwise have been contributed
to a retirement plan. Under these circumstances, it may be necessary to forego
contributions to the plan temporarily in order for the parties to financially
survive until trial.
13   For example, is it appropriate for the judge to make different orders for
temporary spousal support if all circumstances are identical, except that the
payee is: (1) self-employed with a gross income of $ 5,000 a month from which he
or she regularly makes $ 1,000 monthly tax deductible contributions to a Keogh
plan, (2) employed with a gross income of $ 4,000 where the employee makes no
contributions to a retirement plan sponsored and fully funded by the employer,
or (3) employed with a gross income of $ 4,000 after a mandatory monthly
contribution to the employer's retirement plan which is not taxable as income?
Should the order for spousal support be identical in each case?
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Withdrawals from retirement plans, when made, are treated as ordinary income
and taxable as such.  However, withdrawals made prior to the time the
participant reaches age 59 1/2, in most cases, are not only taxed as ordinary
income, but are subject to a 10 percent penalty because of  withdrawal prior to
normal retirement age.  For this reason, it would appear to be an abuse of
discretion to order an amount of  spousal support based on funds in a retirement
plan which if withdrawn, would be subject to this penalty.  Where the
participant is making nonmandatory contributions to a retirement plan, it should
be within the discretion of the trial court to consider whether those
contributions in whole or in part, even though tax deductible if made, should or
should not be considered as income available for spousal support. Additionally,
during the timeframe within which a participant has the option to draw funds
from the retirement plan without penalty, that is between ages 59 1/2 and 70
1/2, but is choosing not to do so, the court should have discretion as to
whether or not to impute reasonable withdrawals as additional income for
purposes of fixing spousal support, but should do so weighing the public policy
favoring provision for one's retirement by allowing funds in the plan to accrue
tax free, against all other circumstances in the case.  This is especially
pertinent where, as here, it would appear that the payor will soon retire at
which time his ability to pay spousal support will be based upon income which,
for the most part, will be produced by his retirement plans.

   Additionally, once the participant reaches age 70 1/2, the court possesses
discretion to consider as income available for spousal support an amount greater
than the statutorily mandated minimum withdrawals. However, the court must be
cautious in doing so, recognizing that the statutory scheme is intended to
provide retirement income for the life expectancy of the participant and,
perhaps, an alternate payee. The trial court is obviously in the best position
to make these decisions and appellate courts should be reluctant to interfere
with its decisions.

   Thus, we hold that the trial court possesses broad discretion to determine
whether to consider as income available for spousal support purposes
contributions made by a participant to his or her retirement plan, as well as
accruals or accrued earnings of that plan which are not withdrawn. No bright
line can be drawn, although it would take extreme circumstances to justify
ordering a payor of spousal support to withdraw funds from his or her retirement
plan prior to age 59 1/2 and incur not only the income tax liability thereon,
but also the additional 10 percent penalty.

   IV

   It is not true, as Mary Jane contends, that the trial court's methodology
eliminates the changed circumstances requirement for future support
modification. The challenged order was fashioned in response to a showing that
Robert's income had substantially decreased since the prior order and the
income of the parties could fluctuate from month to month.  It does not preclude
further modification if circumstances regarding any of the statutory factors
change again, or when Robert fully retires.  The change of circumstances
referred to occurs "since the last order." (In re Marriage of Smith, supra, 225
Cal.App.3d at p. 480.) The monthly calculations ordered by the trial court are
not themselves modification orders, as Mary Jane seems to believe.  They do not
purport to take into account any changes other than the monthly fluctuations in
the parties' incomes.

   V

   Finally, Mary Jane asks us to remand the matter to the trial court to
determine her right to attorney fees on appeal pursuant to section 4370.  Of
course, "a remand order is unnecessary because section 4370 gives the trial
court power to make such an  award without our direction." (In re Marriage of
Colvin (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1570, 1582 [4 Cal.Rptr.2d 323].) But Robert urges us
to determine that Mary Jane is not entitled to attorney fees because "the facts
clearly establish" she has no need therefore.  (See In re Marriage of Davis
(1983) 141 Cal.App.3d 71, 78 [190 Cal.Rptr. 104].) He points to her trial
testimony that she was withdrawing $ 500 per month from an IRA account to pay
her attorneys. 14

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -14   Although
the trial court in its tentative decision stated its intention not to include
this amount in calculating Mary Jane's monthly income because, "The court shall
not 'force' her to expend those funds, any more than it will force [Robert] to
do so," the final order does not contain this exclusion.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   "The fact that the party requesting an award of attorneys' fees and costs has
the resources from which he or she could pay his or her own attorneys' fees and
costs is not itself a bar to an order that the other party pay part, or all of
the fees and costs requested.  Financial resources are only one factor for the
court to consider in determining how to apportion the overall cost of the
litigation equitably between the parties under their relative circumstances." (§
4370.5, subd. (b).)

   Robert correctly reports that "the issue of attorneys' fees at the trial
level was substantially litigated," but this is not to say the issue of attorney
fees on appeal was litigated at the trial level.  It was not.  As Robert himself
notes, no request for appellate fees was made below.

   VI

   In his cross-appeal, Robert contends the trial court erred by not placing a $
1,600 cap on monthly spousal support to be established by the special  master.
He notes that in response to his motion to reduce support, Mary Jane requested
only that the 1987 order remain in full force and effect, and did not show that
the $ 1,600 awarded therein was insufficient to meet her needs at a level
commensurate with the marital standard of living.

   "As a general rule, issues not properly raised at trial will not be
considered on appeal." (CNA Casualty of California v. Seaboard Surety Co. (1986)
176 Cal.App.3d 598, 618 [222 Cal.Rptr. 276].) Robert did not ask that such a cap
be imposed, even when  the possibility that Mary Jane would receive more than $
1,600 in some months was discussed in court.  Furthermore, as Mary Jane points
out, such a cap would enable Robert, to the extent he can control when he
receives income, to make a withdrawal in a single month providing his full
annual income and only have to pay $ 1,600 for the entire year.  Robert
acknowledges that, in fact, he would never be required to pay more than $ 19,200
in a single year, the total of $ 1,600 a month paid for 12 months under the
formula ordered by the trial court.  Since this issue was not raised before the
trial court, we decline to consider it.

   The judgment is reversed, and the cause remanded for further proceedings
consistent with this opinion.  On remand the trial court shall determine Mary
Jane's right to attorney fees and costs on appeal, if any.

   Peterson, P. J., and Haning, J., concurred.


                              22 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              In re the Marriage of SARAH MIRIAM KLINE and SEYMOUR
             HOROWITZ.  SARAH MIRIAM KLINE HOROWITZ, Appellant, v.
                          SEYMOUR HOROWITZ, Respondent

                                  No. A016450

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                 Division Five

            159 Cal. App. 3d 377; 205 Cal. Rptr. 880; 1984 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2434


                                August 21, 1984

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Contra Costa County, No. 191689, James H.
Libbey, Temporary Judge. *

*   Pursuant to Constitution, article VI, section 21.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1a) (1b) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 67--Support of Other Party--
Modification, Revocation, and Extension--Jurisdiction--Pending Appeal.  --The
trial court in a dissolution proceeding had jurisdiction to modify spousal
support on a showing of changed circumstances while an appeal from the
dissolution judgment was pending. On changed circumstances, a modifiable spousal
support obligation is not a matter "embraced" in or "affected" by an
interlocutory judgment ordering payment of spousal support such as to stay
modification proceedings in the trial court pending an appeal from an
interlocutory judgment (Code Civ. Proc., § 916, subd. (a)).

(2) Appellate Review § 35--Presenting and Preserving Questions in Trial Court--
Jurisdiction.  --Subject matter jurisdiction cannot be conferred by waiver or
estoppel, and thus jurisdictional challenges can be asserted for the first time
on appeal, regardless of inconsistent conduct in the trial court.

(3) Appellate Review § 64--Effect of Appeal--Powers of Trial Court Pending
Appeal.  --The purpose of the rule (Code Civ. Proc., § 916) depriving the trial
court of jurisdiction pending appeal in civil actions is to protect the
jurisdiction of the appellate court by preventing the trial court from rendering
the appeal futile by changing the judgment into something different.
Accordingly, whether a matter is "embraced" in or "affected" by a judgment
within the meaning of Code Civ. Proc., § 916, depends on whether postjudgment
proceedings on the matter would have any effect on the "effectiveness" of the
appeal.

(4) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69--Support of Other Party--
Modification, Revocation, and Extension--Change of Conditions.  --The death of a
wife's mother which relieved the wife of an obligation to make monthly annuity
payments to the mother and of a debt to the mother was sufficient evidence of
changed conditions to justify modification of the wife's spousal support.

(5) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 74--Support of Other Party--Appeal--
Effect--Enforcement of Support Order.  --A wife's appeal from an interlocutory
dissolution judgment, including an appeal from the child and spousal support
provisions, precluded her from enforcing a postjudgment wage assignment which
she obtained while her appeal was pending. Although the wife contended her
appeal from the support provisions of the interlocutory judgment was simply a
protective cross-appeal filed in response to the husband's appeal, and that she
did not challenge the permanent child or spousal support award, it did not
appear the trial court was apprised of the change in the nature of the wife's
appeal before it rendered its order terminating the wage assignment, and the
wife therefore waived any error by failing to assert the partial abandonment of
the appeal in the trial court.

(6) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 109--Enforcement of Orders--By Party
Appealing Support Judgment.  --The exception to the rule prohibiting enforcement
of an appealed judgment of dissolution, that the appellant may seek enforcement
if he or she is concededly entitled to the benefits which are accepted and a
reversal will not affect the right to those benefits, applies only where the
supporting spouse does not contest the supported spouse's right to the amount of
support awarded.

COUNSEL: Michael Madajian, De Goff & Sherman and Richard Sherman for Appellant.

Garrett C. Dailey, Davies & Dailey and Bernard N. Wolf for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by King, J., with Low, P. J., and Haning, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: KING

OPINION

     In this case we hold that the trial court in a dissolution proceeding
retains jurisdiction to modify the amount of spousal support, upon a showing of
changed circumstances, pending an appeal from an order for spousal support in
the dissolution judgment. Sarah Miriam Kline Horowitz appeals from portions of a
postjudgment order modifying her spousal support award and terminating a wage
assignment. We affirm the order.

   Facts

   Sarah filed a petition for dissolution of marriage in 1978, after a 17-year
marriage to Seymour Horowitz.  In the interlocutory judgment of dissolution,
filed September 5, 1980, the court characterized and divided numerous items of
real and personal property and ordered Seymour to pay spousal support of $ 500 a
month and child support of $ 250 a month for each of two minor children.  In a
financial declaration filed March 19, 1980, Sarah had declared an income of $
819 per month, and living expenses of $ 4,486.50 per month, including a monthly
annuity payment of $ 2,336 to her mother, on which Sarah was 16 months behind at
the time of trial.

   Sarah and Seymour both took appeals from the interlocutory judgment,
including its provision for child and spousal support. (In re Marriage of
Horowitz (1984) ante, p. 368 [205 Cal.Rptr. 874.) Those appeals have not  been
consolidated with the present appeal, but we heard oral argument in both cases
on the same day and we render our decisions simultaneously.

   While the appeals from the interlocutory judgment were pending,  Sarah
obtained a wage assignment because of Seymour's arrearages of $ 1,005 in spousal
support and $ 3,500 in child support.  Seymour posted no appeal bond; thus
enforcement of his obligation to pay support was not stayed pending appeal. (
Code Civ. Proc., §§ 916, 917.1.) Seymour moved to terminate the wage assignment
on the ground that Sarah had appealed from the interlocutory judgment, including
its support provisions, and therefore could not have it enforced.  Sarah
subsequently moved for an order that Seymour pay the support ordered in the
judgment or pay temporary support pending appeal; Seymour moved to terminate
spousal support (specifying the temporary support order). 1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Sarah
properly points out that the temporary support order of April 1979 was actually
superseded by the permanent spousal support order in the interlocutory judgment,
which was not stayed by the posting of an appeal bond.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The motions were heard on September 23, 1981, over one year after entry of
the interlocutory judgment, by a different judge than the one who rendered the
interlocutory judgment. 2 At the hearing Sarah testified that because of the
death of her mother at the end of the previous year, she was no longer obligated
to make the $ 2,336 monthly annuity payments, and was also relieved of a $
32,704 debt to her mother.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Although
we hold the trial court has jurisdiction to modify spousal support pending
appeal, it should be exercised with caution and only upon a showing of changed
circumstances, so as to avoid the possibility of judge shopping.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   On February 10, 1982, the court rendered an order which, among other things,
modified Seymour's obligation to pay spousal support, ordering it would cease,
effective October 1, 1981, but retaining jurisdiction over the issue of spousal
support. As justification for the modification of spousal support, the order
specified "the death of petitioner's mother, Bertha Kline, which reduced
petitioner's monthly expenses by the sum of $ 2,336 per month, relieved
petitioner of $ 32,704 of debt, and unfettered the securities account previously
held by petitioner for the benefit of Bertha Kline; and the evidence presented
in court that petitioner  had greater earning ability from the stock accounts
under her control than she was currently utilizing." The court also rendered a
separate order terminating the wage assignment obtained by Sarah.

   I. Jurisdiction to modify spousal support pending appeal.



   Sarah challenges the modification of Seymour's spousal support obligation,
contending that the court lacked jurisdiction to modify a judgment  that was on
appeal.  She relies on Code of Civil Procedure section 916, subdivision (a),
which provides that, with certain exceptions, "the perfecting of an appeal stays
proceedings in the trial court upon the judgment or order appealed from or upon
the matters embraced therein or affected thereby . . . ." (Italics added.) 3

   (See fn. 4.) The issue presented is whether, upon changed circumstances, a
modifiable spousal support obligation is a matter "embraced" in or "affected" by
an interlocutory judgment ordering payment of spousal support, so that
modification proceedings in the trial court are stayed pending an appeal from
the interlocutory judgment. 4

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3    Code of
Civil Procedure section 916 provides in full: "(a) Except as provided in
Sections 917.1 through 917.9 and in Section 117.7, the perfecting of an appeal
stays proceedings in the trial court upon the judgment or order appealed from or
upon the matters embraced therein or affected thereby, including enforcement of
the judgment or order, but the trial court may proceed upon any other matter
embraced in the action and not affected by the judgment or order.

   "(b) When there is a stay of proceedings other than the enforcement of the
judgment, the trial court shall have jurisdiction of proceedings related to the
enforcement of the judgment as well as any other matter embraced in the action
and not affected by the judgment or order appealed from."
4   Seymour argues that Sarah waived any jurisdictional challenges by failing to
assert them below, and that she is also estopped to assert jurisdictional
challenges because she herself sought an increase in spousal support at the
modification hearing.  It is well-settled, however, that subject matter
jurisdiction cannot be conferred by waiver or estoppel; jurisdictional
challenges thus can be asserted for the first time on appeal, regardless of
inconsistent conduct below.  (E.g., Summers v. Superior Court (1959) 53 Cal.2d
295, 298 [1 Cal.Rptr. 324, 347 P.2d 668]; 1 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (2d ed. 1970)
Jurisdiction, § 10, pp.  534-535; 6 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (2d ed. 1971) Appeal,
§ 280, p.  4269.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -



The purpose of the rule depriving the trial court of jurisdiction pending appeal
in civil actions is to protect the jurisdiction of the appellate court; the rule
prevents the trial court from rendering the appeal futile by changing the
judgment into something different.  (See Lerner v. Superior Court (1952) 38
Cal.2d 676, 680 [242 P.2d 321]; San Francisco Savings Union v. Myers (1887) 72
Cal. 161, 163 [13 P. 403].) Accordingly, whether a matter is "embraced" in or
"affected" by a judgment within the meaning of Code of Civil Procedure section
916 depends on whether postjudgment proceedings on the matter would have any
effect on the "effectiveness" of the appeal.  ( United Professional Planning,
Inc. v. Superior Court (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 377, 384-385 [88 Cal.Rptr. 551].)
Thus in United Professional Planning the court held that an order expunging a
lis pendens, following a defense judgment in a specific performance action, was
not a proceeding on a matter embraced in or affected by the judgment: because
the expungement statute ( Code Civ.  Proc., § 409.1) permitted an expungement
order before judgment or trial, creating the possibility that the judgment could
be rendered meaningless before its rendition, an expungement order after appeal
would have had no greater effect on the judgment and thus would not have
affected the effectiveness of the appeal.  (Id.)

    Similarly, in the present case modification of the spousal support
provisions in the interlocutory judgment retaining jurisdiction for future
modification did not alter the effectiveness of the appeals from the judgment,
because the same result could have been achieved through other means without
having any effect upon the effectiveness of the appeal or rendering it futile.
Seymour could have posted a bond to stay the spousal support provisions of the
judgment.  (See generally Hogan v. Paddon  (1928) 91 Cal.App. 606, 612 [267 P.
392] [amount of bond for stay of spousal support order to be fixed by
considering amount of monthly allowance and probable duration of appeal]; 6
Witkin, Cal. Procedure (2d ed. 1971) Appeal, § 165, p. 4157 [no time
requirements for posting of appeal bond].) Thereafter, upon Sarah's inevitable
motion for temporary support pending appeal ( Civ. Code, § 4357), the court
could have ordered payment of a reduced amount of temporary support pending
appeal, or no temporary support at all, upon a finding of changed circumstances.
5 If the appellate court subsequently affirmed the judgment, thereby renewing
the efficacy of the permanent spousal support provisions throughout the pendency
of the appeal, the trial court would still have equity jurisdiction to refuse to
enforce the stayed order for the period after the change of circumstances, thus
in effect retaining the reduction in support payments.  (See In re Marriage of
Sandy (1980) 113 Cal.App.3d 724, 728-729 [169 Cal.Rptr. 747].) 6 If the
appellate court reversed the spousal support provisions of the judgment and
remanded the cause for a redetermination of the spousal support issue, on remand
the trial court would be authorized to consider the change of circumstances in
ordering future spousal support, if any, ( Hall v. Superior Court (1955) 45
Cal.2d 377, 385 [289 P.2d 431]), so that, again, the same result could be
achieved.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   The
temporary support order or a denial of temporary support would itself be
appealable by Sarah.  ( Kruly v. Superior Court (1963) 216 Cal.App.2d 589, 591
[31 Cal.Rptr. 122].)

   The order for temporary support pending appeal, absent a change of
circumstances since trial, is usually for the same amount the trial judge
ordered, so that parties are neither penalized nor rewarded for taking an
appeal.  The temporary order may differ if the division of property, and income
therefrom, is also appealed and not received by the party to whom the trial
judge awarded it.
6   The court in In re Marriage of Sandy, supra, 113 Cal.App.3d 728-729, held
that an order "confirming" husband's obligation to pay a reduced amount of
spousal support as of a date prior to his motion for the order was not an
impermissible retroactive modification of spousal support, but was a proper
exercise of the court's equitable discretion to determine whether and to what
extent the original support provision should be enforced by execution.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Thus modification of Seymour's spousal support obligation, with the trial
court retaining jurisdiction over the issue, had no greater effect on the
effectiveness of the appeals from the interlocutory judgment than there would
have been had Seymour posted an appeal bond and litigated the change of
circumstances issue in temporary support proceedings.  Deprivation of trial
court jurisdiction to modify the amount of the permanent spousal support order
would provide no greater protection to the appellate court's jurisdiction, as
the same result could be achieved below through other means.  Further, to
require the party seeking modification to follow the more complicated
alternative procedure rather than simply obtaining direct modification of the
permanent support order pending appeal would contravene the general rule that
"in the absence of compelling analogous case law or persuasive language in the
statutes, the rule should be adopted which best serves the efficient and proper
administration of the courts." ( United Professional Planning, Inc. v. Superior
Court, supra, 9 Cal.App.3d at p. 385.) 7

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   We note
that since 1955 trial courts have been authorized by statute to modify child
custody orders pending appeal. ( Code Civ. Proc., § 917.7; Mancini v. Superior
Court (1964) 230 Cal.App.2d 547, 551-554 [41 Cal.Rptr. 213].) Before 1955 courts
agreed that an appeal from a child custody order stayed further proceedings in
the trial court pending appeal; emergency situations could be handled only by
the appellate courts.  ( Id., at p. 551.) The pre-1955 law with regard to child
custody orders is not analogous authority for a rule that support provisions
cannot be modified pending appeal, given the absence of any custody device
analogous to temporary support pending appeal, which enables the party seeking
modification to achieve the desired result without direct modification of the
appealed judgment.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Moreover, simple common sense demonstrates the inequities inherent in a rule
that would deprive the trial court of jurisdiction to modify, upon a showing of
changed circumstances,  an otherwise modifiable spousal support order pending
appeal. The purpose of Code of Civil Procedure section 916 is to protect the
appellate court's jurisdiction by preserving the status quo pending appeal. Upon
rendition of a permanent spousal support order under Civil Code section 4801,
the status quo includes a modifiable money judgment.  ( Civ. Code, § 4801, subd.
(a).) If the trial court lacked jurisdiction to modify the support order pending
appeal, the appeal would alter the nature of the order; the order would become
nonmodifiable until after resolution of the appeal.  The order could not be
modified retroactively after rendition of the appellate judgment, since the
trial court could not entertain a motion for modification until after the appeal
ended, and would then be precluded by statute from modifying the order as to any
amounts that accrued before the motion for modification was made.  ( Civ. Code,
§ 4801, subd. (a).) If a change of circumstances had indeed occurred, the court
could never redress inequities during the pendency of the appeal resulting from
changed needs of the supported spouse or changed ability of the supporting
spouse to pay support.  This cannot have been intended by the Legislature.

   To demonstrate the inequity which would result here if the trial court had no
jurisdiction to modify child or spousal support pending the appeals from the
interlocutory judgment, the appeals were not fully briefed until almost  two
years after the notices of appeal were filed.  This court's backlog has further
delayed the determination of this appeal for an additional two years.  Temporary
support proceedings pending appeal would have been needlessly expensive both in
terms of the cost to the litigants of legal services and of judicial economy.
Until some change in circumstances occurred, Seymour would have had no reason to
cause such proceedings to occur, since he would have had to post a bond
(probably a cash bond) staying the support provisions of the interlocutory
judgment, only to find that a judge awarding temporary support pending appeal
would most probably have fixed it at the same amount as the trial judge, in
order to avoid providing a reward or a penalty for a party having taken an
appeal. 8 Sarah could have enforced the support provisions of the interlocutory
judgment and thus, except for the possibility of its reversal on appeal, had no
need for an order for temporary support pending appeal, except for the fact of
her own appeal from the order for spousal support. (See section III, infra.) The
trial court must have the power to modify the support order.  If Seymour
inherited $ 10 million and Sarah's needs increased while the appeal was pending,
Sarah should have been able to seek a modification. Likewise, should Seymour
have become totally disabled with no income while the appeal was pending, he
should have been able to seek a modification of the amount fixed in the
interlocutory judgment, since that order was made based upon his income from his
employment.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -8   See
footnote 5, ante.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Modification of the trial judge's order for child or spousal support while
the issue of the validity of that amount is on appeal, when based upon a change
of circumstances justifying a change in amount, does not interfere with the
jurisdiction of the appellate court, since its review is based upon the record
at trial.

   In acting upon a motion for modification of support while that issue is on
appeal, or even while property issues are on appeal, the trial court should not
render an order terminating jurisdiction over the issue of support since, in the
event of a reversal of property and/or support provisions of the interlocutory
judgment requiring a retrial, the trial court must retain jurisdiction to make a
new determination on the support issue based upon the facts and circumstances of
the parties as they exist at the time of retrial.  Furthermore, as in this case,
a modification of support pending appeal would itself be subject to
redetermination upon a retrial.



   We conclude that Seymour's modifiable spousal support obligation was not a
matter embraced in or affected by the interlocutory judgment since  the trial
court reserved jurisdiction over the issue of spousal support. 9 The trial court
had jurisdiction to modify spousal support pending appeal upon a proper showing
of changed circumstances.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -9   A motion
for termination of jurisdiction over the issue of support should not be granted
while the appeal of property and support issues is pending, since the
circumstances justifying granting a motion to terminate support cannot be
ascertained until a judgment as to those issues becomes final and the financial
circumstances of the parties are known.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    II. Sufficiency of the evidence of changed circumstances.

   Sarah contends that even if the court had jurisdiction to modify the spousal
support provisions of the interlocutory judgment pending appeal, such
modification was not supported by substantial evidence of a material change of
circumstances occurring since the judgment.  (See, e.g., In re Marriage of
Kuppinger (1975) 48 Cal.App.3d 628, 633 [120 Cal.Rptr.  654].) Sarah argues that
Seymour's assertion at the postjudgment hearing that Sarah was not generating
enough income from her separate property investments did not demonstrate a
material change of circumstances, since Seymour had made this same assertion in
the prior dissolution proceedings.



   The court's order did assert that Sarah could generate more income from her
investments, but it also asserted the evidence that because of the death of
Sarah's mother the previous year, Sarah was no longer obligated to make the
monthly annuity payment of $ 2,336 and was also relieved of a $ 32,704 debt.
This evidence of changed circumstances was alone sufficient to justify the
court's modification of spousal support.

   Sarah argues that the monthly annuity obligation was only "theoretical" and
was not being paid regularly, and thus was not considered by the trial court
when it fixed the permanent spousal support obligation, so that there was no
change of circumstances when Sarah's mother died.  But Sarah's only trial
testimony in this regard was that she was 16 months behind in her payments at
the time of trial; she presented no evidence as to whether she would renew
payments in the future (and the record in the present appeal does not indicate
whether payments were made after trial).  The record of the appeals from the
interlocutory judgment does not demonstrate that the monthly annuity obligation
(which Sarah herself asserted in a financial declaration filed only two months
before trial) had been excluded from the court's consideration in fixing
permanent spousal support.

   Because substantial evidence supported the change in spousal support, the
modification order is to be affirmed.  Nevertheless, the order, like any other
spousal support order, was based in part on the trial court's division of
property in the interlocutory judgment of dissolution. (See In re Marriage  of
Brigden (1978) 80 Cal.App.3d 380, 384.) Because we reverse that property
division in part in the related appeals, and since other changes in the
circumstances of the parties have in all likelihood taken place in the four
years since trial, on remand of the present appeal we authorize the trial court
to reconsider the modification in light of any changes in the parties' assets
after remand of the appeals from the interlocutory judgment, and any other
relevant changes in circumstances, and to exercise its discretion to award
additional spousal support if deemed appropriate.

   III. Termination of the wage assignment.

   Sarah's final contention is that she was entitled to have the wage assignment
remain in effect pending the appeals from the interlocutory judgment, in order
to secure payment of the child and spousal support ordered in the judgment.

Seymour responds that because Sarah had appealed from the interlocutory judgment
she could  not have it enforced, citing Fontana v. Superior Court (1977) 72
Cal.App.3d 159 [139 Cal.Rptr.  851].

   Except to the extent of arrearages in spousal support that accumulated before
modification, Sarah's argument is rendered irrelevant by our holding that the
trial court acted properly in modifying spousal support pending appeal. To the
extent that the dispute remains alive with regard to premodification arrearages,
Seymour is correct in his contention that Sarah's appeal from the judgment
precluded her seeking its enforcement.  The court in Fontana v. Superior Court,
supra, 72 Cal.App.3d 162-163, held that where a wife appealed from "the whole"
of an interlocutory judgment awarding her spousal support she could not enforce
the spousal support order by contempt proceedings, because of the rule that one
who has appealed from a judgment should not be permitted to enforce that
judgment pending appeal. Sarah's notice of appeal from the interlocutory
judgment excluded only the portion of the judgment declaring that the parties
were entitled to have their marriage dissolved.  Thus the notice of appeal
included an appeal from the child and spousal support provisions of the
judgment.  Once it was filed, the rule of Fontana precluded Sarah from enforcing
those support provisions. 10

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -10   Sarah's
appeal did not prevent her from obtaining and enforcing payment of temporary
support pending appeal. ( Civ. Code, § 4357.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Sarah argues that the rule of Fontana should not apply here because her
appeal from the support provisions of the interlocutory judgment was simply a
protective cross-appeal filed in response to Seymour's appeal, in which she did
not challenge the permanent child or spousal support award but simply argued
that the trial court should be authorized to reconsider the  award on remand if
any of the property division portions of the judgment were reversed.  A
convincing argument can be made that the rule of Fontana should not apply once
an appeal from the support provisions of a judgment has in effect been abandoned
by filing a brief that fails to challenge those provisions.  (See Hansen v.
Hansen (1965) 233 Cal.App.2d 575, 581-582 [43 Cal.Rptr. 729] [acceptance of
benefits of portion of severable judgment from which appeal is abandoned by
failure to discuss in briefs does not preclude appeal from remaining portions of
judgment].) However, the nature of Sarah's appeal did not become evident until
she filed her first appellate brief on January 26, 1982, four months after the
hearing on the motions in the present appeal and only two weeks before the court
rendered its order terminating the wage assignment. The record does not
demonstrate that the trial court was apprised of the change in the nature of the
first appeal before it rendered its order terminating the wage assignment. Thus
Sarah waived any error by failing to assert the partial abandonment in the court
below.  (See 6 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (2d ed. 1971) Appeal, § 276 et seq.)

   Sarah also argues that this court should repudiate the rule in Fontana, based
on a recognized exception to the rule against seeking enforcement of an appealed
judgment.

Under this exception the appellant may seek enforcement if he or she "is
concededly entitled to the benefits which are accepted and a reversal will not
affect the right to those benefits." ( Mathys v. Turner (1956) 46 Cal.2d 364,
365 [294 P.2d 947].) The exception, however, applies only where the supporting
spouse does not contest the supported spouse's right to the amount of support
awarded.  (See 6 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (2d ed. 1971) Appeal, § 138, p.  4134.)
In Seymour's appeal from the interlocutory judgment he contested Sarah's right
to the amount of support awarded in the judgment; thus the exception cannot
apply. 11

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -11   Sarah
also challenges the court's imposition of certain restrictions on her management
of a security account valued at $ 108,107 which was confirmed to her as her
separate property in the interlocutory judgment. She contends the trial court
lacked jurisdiction, pending appeal, to issue such an order.  We do not reach
this issue.  The restrictions imposed on Sarah's management of the account are
operative only while the appeals from the interlocutory judgment are pending.
Accordingly, upon adjudication of the appeals from the interlocutory judgment
(in which we uphold the separate property characterization of the account), the
court's order regulating the account will no longer be in effect, and the issue
whether the court lacked jurisdiction to render the order will become moot.  (6
Witkin, Cal. Procedure (2d ed. 1971) Appeal, § 465, p. 4420.) We therefore
dismiss this appeal to the extent it challenges the court's restriction of
Sarah's management of the account.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The orders modifying spousal support and terminating the wage assignment are
affirmed.  The cause is remanded to permit the trial court to reconsider  the
modification of spousal support in light of any changes in the parties' assets
after remand of the appeals from the interlocutory judgment of dissolution or
other relevant circumstances, and to exercise its discretion to award spousal
support if deemed appropriate.  Seymour is awarded his costs on appeal.


                              23 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            ROMELLE S. ROOSEVELT, Plaintiff and Respondent, v. JAMES
                       ROOSEVELT, Defendant and Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 59462

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Three

            117 Cal. App. 3d 397; 172 Cal. Rptr. 641; 1981 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1526


                                 March 26, 1981

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Los Angeles County, No. NEC 21297, Henry W.
Shatford, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1) Exemptions § 1--Liberal Construction.  --The principal objective of
exemption statutes is to provide for the support and welfare of the debtor and
his family and to enable him to follow his vocation. Such statutes are liberally
construed to carry out these purposes and, as far as practicable, for the
debtor's benefit. This same policy requires a strict construction of any
provision that tends to limit the exemptions elsewhere extended to the debtor.
Accordingly, in construing Code Civ. Proc., § 690.18, providing an exemption for
public pensions except for court-ordered spousal support payments, the exception
must be strictly construed in favor of the judgment debtor.

(2) Exemptions § 2--Property Exempt--Public Pensions--Exception--Spousal Support
.  --Under Code Civ. Proc., § 690.18, exempting governmental pensions from
execution, the exception provided for court-ordered spousal support payments
applies only when there has been an order for periodic spousal support payments.
Because the exception limits the exemption, it comes within the rule requiring
that it be strictly construed so as to limit the extent of the exception. The
exception in Code Civ. Proc., § 690.18, is not for orders for spousal support;
it is stated rather in terms of the source of the obligation on which the
judgment being executed is based being court-ordered support. When a judgment is
based on a spousal support obligation the source of which is other than a
previous order for spousal support payments, it is not a judgment with regard to
court-ordered spousal support payments within the meaning of the exception, even
though it is a judgment with regard to spousal support.

(3) Exemptions § 2--Property Exempt--Federal Pension--Exception--Court-ordered
Spousal Support.  --Under Code Civ. Proc., § 690.18, exempting public pensions
from execution except with regard to court-ordered child or spousal support
payments, a judgment in favor of a divorced woman against her former spouse did
not provide for or enforce court ordered spousal support payments within the
exception, and the former husband's federal pension was therefore exempt from
execution on the judgment, where the judgment was rendered in an action on the
property settlement agreement providing for spousal support but where, prior to
the present judgment, no court had ever made an alimony or spousal support
order. Thus, though the judgment did enforce an obligation for support, it did
not enforce any "court ordered . . . spousal support payments," within the
meaning of the statutory exception.

COUNSEL: Joslyn, Roeth, Angerhofer, Olds & Condon and Daniel Condon for
Defendant and Appellant.

Fleming, Anderson, McClung & Finch and Lee W. Salisbury for Plaintiff and
Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Potter, J., with Klein, P. J., and Cobey, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: POTTER

OPINION

     Defendant James Roosevelt (hereinafter defendant) appeals from the judgment
of the court below denying his claim to exemption from execution.

   On June 8, 1954, defendant and plaintiff Romelle S. Roosevelt (hereinafter
plaintiff), who were then married, entered into a written contract entitled
"Separation Agreement." The separation agreement recited the parties' desire and
intent "to settle and adjust, as between themselves, their respective present
and future property rights, together with questions pertaining to support and
maintenance of Second Party [plaintiff] . . . ."

   By its terms, the agreement obligated the defendant to make monthly payments
totaling one-half of his net annual income but not less than $ 1,150 to the
plaintiff "as and for [her] support and maintenance" until her death or
remarriage.  The agreement further stipulated that "neither [party] will seek a
Court modification based upon changed financial circumstances or any other
claimed reason, at any future time . . . ." On June 23, 1955, the parties
obtained an interlocutory judgment of divorce. The judgment of that date
includes the following: "The  Separation Agreement of the parties dated June 8,
1954, offered in evidence and received as plaintiff's Exhibit 1 herein, is
hereby approved as being fair and equitable as between the parties, but is not
merged in this judgment." (Italics added.) The interlocutory judgment contained
no express provision respecting the support and maintenance of the plaintiff.

   Defendant made the monthly support payments due plaintiff under the agreement
until April 1974.  In March of 1975, defendant filed an order to show cause why
the support payments should not be modified.  The order was quashed upon the
ground that the court lacked jurisdiction since there was no support order to
modify.

   Thereafter, plaintiff brought an action on the agreement for "Breach of
Contract and Accounting" of spousal support due her pursuant to the agreement.
She won a money judgment dated May 3, 1979, which stated that the damages
awarded her represented "accumulated arrearages . . . of payments due plaintiff
from defendant . . . for her support and maintenance, under Paragraph  B.2 of
the Separation Agreement . . . ."

   Plaintiff obtained a writ of execution pursuant to the judgment and levied
upon the United States Civil Service Commission which administers and pays
defendant a monthly pension based upon his employment in various capacities with
the United States government.  The commission withheld one-half of the monthly
pension and paid it to the Los Angeles County Marshal.  Defendant filed a claim
to exemption in the manner specified in Code of Civil Procedure section 690.50.
1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Code of
Civil Procedure section 690.50 provides the procedure by which a judgment debtor
may claim, as exempt, property which has been levied upon under writ of
execution.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Defendant asserted that his pension was exempt from execution under Code of
Civil Procedure section 690.18, subdivision (a). 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2    Code of
Civil Procedure section 690.18, subdivision (a), provides: "Except with regard
to court-ordered child or spousal support payments, all money received by any
person, a resident of the state, as a pension, or as an annuity or retirement or
disability or death or other benefit, or as a return of contributions and
interest thereon, from the United States government, or from the state, or any
county, city, or city and county, or other political subdivision of the state,
or any public trust, or public corporation, or from the governing body of any of
them, or from any public board or boards, or from any retirement, disability, or
annuity system established by any of them pursuant to statute, whether the same
shall be in the actual possession of such pensioner or beneficiary, or deposited
by him."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    In response, plaintiff noticed a motion for determination of defendant's
claim to exemption.

   In support of his claim, defendant argued that his annuity was exempt under
the general rule of Code of Civil Procedure section 690.18, subdivision (a), and
that the exception therein stated "with regard to court-ordered . . . spousal
support payments" did not apply because there were no "court ordered spousal
support payments." Defendant's argument had two premises: (1) the judgment
executed upon was based on a contract obligation (i.e., the separation
agreement) and not a court order; (2) the divorce court's denial of jurisdiction
over his 1975 request for modification of support payments is res judicata that
no court order for spousal support payments was ever made.

   The trial court, however, found that plaintiff's judgment on the agreement
was "for 'court-ordered spousal support payments,' as such term is used in Code
of Civil Procedure, § 690.18(a)." Accordingly, defendant's claim to exemption
was denied.  This appeal followed.

Contentions

   Defendant contends that the trial court erred in finding that the judgment
upon which execution was issued was for court-ordered spousal support payments
because: (1) the denial of jurisdiction by the divorce court over defendant's
1975 order to show cause is res judicata that there were then no court-ordered
support payments, and (2) the subsequent judgment of May 5, 1979, awarding
plaintiff arrearages under the separation agreement, is a money judgment for
damages arising out of a contract, and not court-ordered spousal support within
the meaning of Code of Civil Procedure section 690.18, subdivision (a).

   Plaintiff concedes defendant's first contention, 3 but controverts
defendant's second contention, arguing (1) that "court-ordered" spousal support
as used in section 690.18, subdivision (a), includes any judgment based upon an
obligation to make support payments to an ex-spouse (i.e., alimony) regardless
of the source of such obligation, and (2) that the May 3, 1979, judgment is so
based.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3
Plaintiff's brief, at pages 1-2, states that: "The interlocutory judgment made
no provision for alimony," and "the order to show cause was quashed on the
ground that the Superior Court lacked jurisdiction to modify support when it had
never made a support order in the first place."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Discussion

Summary

   Exemption statutes are liberally construed in favor of the judgment debtor,
so  exceptions must be narrowly construed.  So construed, section 690.18,
subdivision (a), does not withhold exemption for public pensions unless the
judgment upon which the writ issues either itself provides for court-ordered
periodic support payments or enforces an obligation to make such payments
previously ordered.  The judgment of May 3, 1979, does neither.  Consequently,
the order denying defendant's claim of exemption must be reversed.

Exemption Statutes Are Construed in Favor of the Judgment Debtor

     Volume 30 California Jurisprudence 3d, Enforcement of Judgments, section
19, pages 44-45, states: "The principal objective of exemption statutes is to
provide for the support and welfare of the debtor and his family and to enable
him to follow his vocation.  Such statutes are liberally construed to carry out
these purposes and, as far as practicable, for the debtor's benefit.  This same
policy requires a strict construction of any provision that tends to limit the
exemptions elsewhere extended to the debtor. [Fns.  omitted.]"

   The foregoing statement is fully supported by the authorities cited.  Bailey
v. Superior Court (1932) 215 Cal. 548, 554 [11 P.2d 865], states: "The
underlying purpose of the statute exempting from execution certain property is
to provide for the support and welfare of the family of the person claiming
exemption." In Holmes v. Marshall (1905) 145 Cal.  777, 779 [79 P. 534], our
Supreme Court said: "The general rule now is to construe such statutes
liberally, so as to carry out the intention of the legislature, and the humane
purpose, designed by the lawmakers."

   The corollary proposition that exceptions to the exemption statute must be
strictly construed is stated in Los Angeles Finance Co. v. Flores (1952) 110
Cal.App.2d Supp. 850, 854 [243 P.2d 139]. There the court said: "It follows
logically that this same policy requires a strict construction of any provisions
which tend to limit the exemptions elsewhere in the statute extended to the
debtor.  In 25 Corpus Juris 10 (par. 8), the rule is thus stated: 'Conversely to
the rule of liberal construction  of the grant of an exemption, provisions which
limit or take away the exemption are strictly construed,  whether in provisos
and exceptions or in amending statutes.'"

   The foregoing principles were applied to the specific exemption for pensions
by our Supreme Court in Ogle v. Heim (1968) 69 Cal.2d 7, 9 [69 Cal.Rptr. 579,
442 P.2d 659], and in Miller v. Superior Court (1968) 69 Cal.2d 14, 16 [69
Cal.Rptr. 583, 442 P.2d 663]. In those cases, the judgment creditor sought to
extend a court-created exception to the exemption for wages (in favor of
dependents entitled to support payments) so as to apply it to the pension
exemption which was then embodied in Code of Civil Procedure section 690.23.
Section 690.23 contained no stated exception to such exemption. In rejecting
this attempt, the Ogle court said (id., at pp. 9-10): "'The general rule is that
a court is not authorized in the construction of a statute, to create exceptions
not specifically made.  If the statute announces a general rule and makes no
exception thereto, the courts can make none.' ( Stockton Theatres, Inc. v.
Palermo, 47 Cal.2d 469, 476 [304 P.2d 7]; Vallerga v. Department of Alcoholic
Beverage Control, 53 Cal.2d 313, 318 [1 Cal.Rptr. 494, 347 P.2d 909]; Wisdom v.
Eagle   Star Ins. Co., 211 Cal.App.2d 602, 605 [27 Cal.Rptr. 599]; People v.
Pacific Guano Co., 55 Cal.App.2d 845, 848 [132 P.2d 254]; see 2 Sutherland,
Statutory Construction (1943) § 4701 et seq., p. 333 et seq.) The application of
the general rule to the pension exemption was recognized in In re Smallbone, 16
Cal.2d 532, 534 [106 P.2d 873, 131 A.L.R. 222], where this court said: 'There is
no exception in the exemption laws which would authorize the satisfaction of an
alimony judgment out of exempt property belonging to the husband and it is not
the province of the courts to read such an exception into the law, . . . ' This
case held that although a husband cannot be forced to satisfy his support
obligation from exempt pension  moneys, he can be held in contempt where the
pension moneys evidence an ability to pay. Smallbone was followed in Howard v.
Howard, 166 Cal.App.2d 386 [333 P.2d 417], where plaintiff sought to satisfy a
child support order by garnishing her former husband's disability retirement
payments from the Los Angeles Fire Department.  The court observed that  Code of
Civil Procedure section 690 provides that 'The property mentioned in Sections
690.1 to 690.25, inclusive, this code, is exempt from execution or attachment,
except as therein otherwise specially provided, . . . ' (Italics added.) No
exception to the pension exemption was found, and the court concluded that the
pension was exempt from levy and that plaintiff should enforce her claim by
other remedies."

    Section 690 still contains the language italicized in the above quotation.
Consequently, in construing the current provisions of section 690.18, it is
clear that the stated exception must be strictly construed in favor of the
judgment debtor.

     The Exception to the Exemption Provided by Section 690.18 Applies Only
Where There Has Been an Order for Periodic Spousal Support Payments

   Prior to its amendment in 1975, section 690.18 made all governmental pensions
"property" "exempt from execution" pursuant to section 690.  The 1975 amendment
created an exception "with regard to court-ordered child or spousal support
payments." Since the effect of this amendment is to limit the exemption, it
comes within the rule requiring that it be strictly construed so as to limit the
extent of the exception.  Plaintiff, nonetheless, argues that the exception is
intended to be applicable wherever the obligation which is the basis for the
judgment upon which the execution is made is an obligation to provide spousal
support, i.e., to pay alimony, and that the "court-ordered" requirement is
satisfied by the fact that such judgment is itself a court order.  This argument
would be more persuasive if the statutory language were "except with regard to
an order for spousal support," since both a judgment for accumulated arrearage
of unpaid spousal support and a writ of execution based thereon would constitute
such orders.

    Avilla v. Avilla (1974) 81 Cal.App.2d 210 [183 P.2d 668], involved a claimed
exemption for the wages of a marine fisherman pursuant to section 601 of title
46 United States Code Annotated, which excepted from the exemption of such pay
the operation of "'the order by any court regarding the payment by any seaman of
any part of his wages for the support and maintenance of his wife and minor
children.'" ( Id., at p.  211.) (Italics added.) There had been an original
court order for support, which the seaman did not obey, followed by an order for
an execution and a writ for the arrearage. Holding that the exemption was not
applicable, the court said ( id., at p. 212): "The original support order was a
court order within the exception provided by this statute.  The order for an
execution and the execution itself were also such orders."

   But the exception in Code of Civil Procedure section 690.18 is not for orders
for spousal support; it is stated rather in terms of the source of the
obligation upon which the judgment being executed is based being court-ordered
support.  The entire statutory exemption scheme assumes  in section 690 that
there is a judgment and a writ of execution; otherwise the issue of exemption
would not arise, and the exemptions are stated in terms of the nature of the
property involved which is rendered "exempt from execution when claim for
exemption is made to the same by the judgment debtor." Consequently, the
reference to "court-ordered child or spousal support payments" (italics added)
is wholly redundant if intended to refer to the fact that there is a judgment
and a writ of execution. "'A cardinal rule of construction is that . . . a
construction making some words surplusage is to be avoided.'" ( People v.
Gilbert (1969) 1 Cal.3d 475, 480 [82 Cal.Rptr. 724, 462 P.2d 580].) We must,
therefore, give some meaning to the words "court-ordered"  other than that there
is a judgment being executed by a writ of execution.

   The meaning of the exception is further limited by the ordinary meaning of
the words "court-ordered . . . spousal support payments." (Italics added.) This
is an obvious reference to the usual practice in family law matters to direct
one spouse to make periodic monthly support payments to the other, not to the
equally common order for execution to enforce an arrearage in respect of a
support obligation. Where the latter type order is based upon an order of the
former type, it is a judgment with regard to court-ordered spousal support
payments which have become due.  However, when the judgment is based upon a
spousal support obligation, the source of which is other than a previous order
for spousal support payments, it is not a judgment with regard to court-ordered
spousal support payments, even though it is a judgment with regard to spousal
support.

   The interpretation thus placed upon the exemption is consistent with the
general policy of the exemption statutes to "save debtors and their families
from want by reason of misfortune or improvidence . . . ." ( Ogle v. Heim, supra
, 69 Cal.2d at p. 9.) In view of such purpose, a rational basis for exception
has been found in the fact that the judgment creditor is likewise in need.  This
was the basis of the court-created exception to the wage exemption in favor of
dependents to which the court made reference in Ogle. 4 However, even where such
exception was recognized, it was found not applicable to a judgment for
arrearage of spousal support  payments stipulated in an integrated agreement and
therefore not subject to modification by the court.  ( Rasmussen v. Rasmussen
(1969) 275 Cal.App.2d 443, 448 [79 Cal.Rptr. 842].) Except under extraordinary
circumstances ( Civ. Code, § 4811), as of the date of the enactment of the
amendment to section 690.18, subdivision (a), court-ordered spousal support
payments were subject to modification by subsequent court order.  It was fair to
assume, therefore, that so long as they were in effect, such payments continued
to represent amounts which the supported spouse needed and which the supporting
spouse could afford.  Such being the case, their exception from the exemption
was wholly logical and reasonable.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   Cases
applying this exception are collected in the opinion of Ogle v. Heim, supra, 69
Cal.2d at page 11, where the court said: "Claims of dependents are not barred by
the exemption of section 690.11.  ( Bruton v. Tearle, 7 Cal.2d 48, 53 [59 P.2d
953, 106 A.L.R. 580]; McIntosh v. McIntosh, 209 Cal.App.2d 374 [26 Cal.Rptr. 28]
; Henry v. Henry, 182 Cal.App.2d 707 [6 Cal.Rptr. 418]; Rankins v. Rankins, 52
Cal.App.2d 231 [126 P.2d 125].) [Fn. omitted.]"
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   On the other hand, nonmodifiable provisions for support in a contract entered
into 25 years ago, which may no longer be related to the supported spouse's need
or the supporting spouse's ability to pay, fall into an entirely different
category.  It is logical to assume that the Legislature did not intend that they
be given preferred status.

   Plaintiff argues that the 1975 amendment to section 690.18, subdivision (a),
was enacted to conform California law with the 1974 amendment to 42 United
States Code section 659, which gave consent to sue the United States for the
purpose of executing upon federal governmental employees' wages and pensions so
long as the claim sued upon was "for the enforcement, against such individual of
his legal obligations to provide child support or make alimony payments." 42
United States Code section 662(c) contemporaneously defined alimony as ". . .
periodic payments of funds for the support and maintenance of the spouse (or
former spouse) of such individual . . . ." It is apparent that periodic payments
provided by the separation agreement in the case at bench constitute alimony
within this definition.  It is also apparent, by virtue of their respective
dates of enactment, that the amendment to 42 United States Code section 659 may
have triggered the 1975 amendment to Code of Civil Procedure section 690.18.  It
does not follow therefrom, however, that the purpose of the latter was to
conform California law in all respects to the federal rule.

    It is obvious that an amendment to the California law was necessary before
the change in federal law could have any effect upon litigants in California
courts.  But the 1975 amendment to Code of Civil Procedure section 690.18 is
much broader in scope than plaintiff's argument suggests.  It creates an
exception with respect to all governmental pensions, not just federal pensions,
and nothing in its legislative history indicates  that it was intended to make
inoperative the pension exemption to the full extent that the federal consent to
sue would allow.  The status of nonfederal governmental pensions was equally
important.  The extent of the federal waiver is, therefore, no valid criterion
for determining the extent of the California exception; it only limited how far
the exception could be extended with respect to the federal pensions.

     The May 3, 1979, Judgment Does Not Provide for or Enforce Court-ordered
Spousal Support Payments

   The judgment of May 3, 1979, specifically states that it represents
accumulated arrearages of payments "due plaintiff from defendant, her former
spouse, for her support and maintenance under Paragraph B.2 of the separation
agreement . . . ." Defendant's argument, therefore, that in view of the
integrated character of that agreement the judgment does not represent an amount
due on account of the support obligation is unfounded.  Furthermore, the
agreement itself specifies that the minimum monthly payment shall be paid "as
and for the support and maintenance of . . ." plaintiff.  Said judgment does
not, however, either provide for or enforce any "court-ordered . . . spousal
support payments." It was rendered in an action upon the property settlement
agreement and, as plaintiff has conceded, prior to its rendition the court "had
never made an alimony or spousal support order." Thus, though the judgment did
enforce an obligation for support, it did not enforce any "court-ordered . . .
spousal support payments."

   The judgment is reversed, and the cause is remanded with directions to enter
an order upholding defendant's claim to exemption.


                              24 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            In re the Marriage of LILLIAN R. and CHARLES D. FORCUM.
              CHARLES D.  FORCUM, Appellant, v. LILLIAN R. FORCUM,
                                   Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 52028

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                 Division Five

            145 Cal. App. 3d 599; 193 Cal. Rptr. 596; 1983 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1992


                                 July 29, 1983

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Santa Clara County, No. 337664, Eugene M.
Premo, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 79 -- Property Settlement Agreements,
Stipulations, and Contracts -- Modification and Revocation -- Jurisdiction of
Trial Court to Modify -- Retention of Jurisdiction by Provision for Nominal
Support Payments.  --Under Civ. Code, § 4811, subd. (b), providing that a
spousal support agreement "shall be subject to subsequent modification or
revocation by court order . . . except to the extent that any written agreement
. . . specifically provides to the contrary," the trial court had jurisdiction
to modify the spousal support provisions in a marital settlement agreement, even
though the agreement contained general language that it was effective upon
execution and did not depend upon the court's approval for its effectiveness.
Although such general language, standing alone, would otherwise have caused
spousal support to be nonmodifiable under Civ. Code, § 4811, subd. (b), the
agreement provided for $ 425 monthly payments to the former wife for five years
and $ 1 yearly payments for an additional five years.  The legal effect of the
language specifically providing for the $ 1 yearly payments for the final
five-year term was to retain jurisdiction to modify the amount of spousal
support during that term, and the specific provision prevailed over the more
general language.

   [See Cal.Jur.3d, Family Law, §§ 526, 750; Am.Jur.2d, Divorce and Separation,
§ 909.]

COUNSEL: Daniel E. Hanley, Herman J. Mager and Keough, Cali & Hanley for
Appellant.

Gardner F. Holmes and Dale C. Mead for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by King, J., with Low, P. J., and Haning, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: KING

OPINION

     In this case we hold that where the general provisions of a marital
settlement agreement (incorporated by reference into the interlocutory judgment
of dissolution of marriage) do not permit future judicial modification, but the
agreement also contains a specific provision on spousal support the legal effect
of which is to retain the jurisdiction of the court to  modify spousal support,
the specific provision prevails and the trial court has jurisdiction to modify
spousal support.

   The interlocutory judgment of dissolution of the marriage of Charles D.
Forcum and Lillian R. Forcum incorporated by reference a property settlement
agreement between the parties which provided that Charles should pay spousal
support to Lillian in the sum of $ 425 per month for five years and  thereafter
pay spousal support of $ 1 per year for an additional five years, whereupon
spousal support would terminate. 1 Just before the first five-year period ended,
Lillian moved the court to modify the order to continue the $ 425 per month
payments for the additional five years.  The trial court ruled that it had
jurisdiction to modify the amount of spousal support payable during the second
five-year period and it granted Lillian's motion.  We affirm the judgment.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   The
marital settlement agreement was prepared by counsel for Charles and executed by
Lillian without the benefit of independent counsel.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Civil Code section 4811, subdivision (b), provides that a spousal support
agreement "shall be subject to subsequent modification or revocation by court
order . . . except to the extent that any written agreement . . . specifically
provides to the contrary." 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Except as
otherwise indicated, statutory references are to the Civil Code.  Section 4811,
subdivision (b), applies to all property settlement agreements entered into on
or after January 1, 1970.  See section 4811, subdivision (c).
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    "The evident purposes of Civil Code section 4811 were to dispose of the
abstruse and unprofitable jurisprudence which had grown up around the concepts
of integration and severability [citations] and establish a legislatively
declared social policy that contractual provisions for the support of a spouse
be subject to modification by the court in the light of changed circumstances
unless the parties explicitly agree to preclude such modification. The utility
of this policy is obvious.  Even in the absence of inflationary distortions, the
parties to a marital settlement agreement can hardly anticipate and provide for
unexpected changes of circumstance which may invalidate the expectations
reflected in the agreement.  Despite the public interest in reserving for
judicial redetermination on the basis of changed circumstances contractual
provisions for support, the Legislature left it open to marital partners to
preclude judicial modification by inserting in the agreement a specific
provision to that effect." ( In re Marriage of Nielsen (1980) 100 Cal.App.3d
874, 877-878 [161 Cal.Rptr. 272].)

   Section 4811 has been considered in several appellate court opinions.  The
most recent is Esserman v. Esserman (1982) 136 Cal.App.3d 572 [186 Cal.Rptr.
329] which held that section 4811 does apply to private agreements  made after a
final judgment of dissolution.  There the postjudgment agreement of the parties
as to spousal support made no mention of modifiability, although the
interlocutory judgment of dissolution had precluded modification.

   Two other cases, In re Marriage of Sasson (1982) 129 Cal.App.3d 140 [180
Cal.Rptr. 815], and In re Marriage of Harris (1976) 65 Cal.App.3d 143 [134
Cal.Rptr. 891], held that agreements which unequivocally provided that spousal
support was nonmodifiable could not be modified although the recipient was
cohabitating with a person of the opposite sex.  In both cases the parties used
language clearly intended to preclude modification of their agreed spousal
support and the issue was whether the nonmodifiability provision of section 4811
was overcome by section 4801.5's presumption of reduced need when the recipient
of spousal support cohabitates with a person of the opposite sex.  Both cases
held that the nonmodifiability provisions of the agreements prevented the
application of section 4801.5.  These decisions carry out the legislative intent
that spouses have the ability by written agreement to provide for spousal
support which cannot be modified by the court.

   The foregoing cases did not consider what language in an agreement or order
is legally sufficient to bring into play the provision of section 4811,
subdivision (b), that orders for spousal support are modifiable except to the
extent that a written agreement of the parties "specifically provides to the
contrary." The first case to consider this issue was In re Marriage of Kilkenny
(1979) 96 Cal.App.3d 617 [158 Cal.Rptr. 158] which held that the terms of an
agreement providing it was "absolute, unconditional, and irrevocable" precluded
later modification of spousal support, relying upon Forgy v. Forgy  (1976) 63
Cal.App.3d 767 [134 Cal.Rptr. 75]. Forgy held under former section 139, the
forerunner to section 4811, subdivision (b), that the use of the phrase,
"absolute, unconditional, and irrevocable" in the marital settlement agreement
precluded later judicial modification of spousal support.

    In re Marriage of Nielsen, supra, 100 Cal.App.3d 874, was the second case on
this subject and decided the important issue of what general boilerplate
language in marital settlement agreements, if any, is sufficient to preclude
modification of spousal support. Nielsen held where provisions for spousal
support and a general release of rights 3 in a marital settlement agreement
were each silent about the modifiability of spousal support, spousal support was
modifiable because the agreement did not "specifically" provide to the contrary
as required by section 4811, subdivision (b).  However, the court held that a
provision that the agreement did not depend upon court approval for its
effectiveness 4 was a specific provision precluding modification of spousal
support, relying upon Forgy v. Forgy, supra, 63 Cal.App.3d 767 [construing a
similar provision of a marital settlement agreement].  Shortly thereafter In re
Marriage of Aylesworth (1980) 106 Cal.App.3d 869 [165 Cal.Rptr. 389] held that
the use of prefatory language in a marital settlement agreement providing it was
"final, binding, and nonmodifiable" fulfilled the exception of section 4811,
subdivision (b), and spousal support was nonmodifiable.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   "'Release
of Rights: 1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, each party to this
Agreement does hereby release the other from any and all liabilities, debts, or
obligations, of every kind and character, heretofore or hereafter incurred, and
from any and all claims and demands, including all claims of either party upon
the other for support and maintenance as Wife or as Husband, it being understood
that this present agreement is intended to settle the rights of the parties
hereto in all respects.'" (100 Cal.App.3d at p. 877 fn. 2.)
4   "'Effective Date: This Agreement is executed on and shall be effective from
and after the 9th day of February 1972.  This Agreement may, if desired, be
submitted to the Court for its approval, but this Agreement shall not depend for
its effectiveness on such approval, nor be affected thereby.'" (100 Cal.App.3d
at p. 878.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The most recent case discussing what language is sufficiently specific to
preclude modification of spousal support was Fukuzaki v. Superior Court (1981)
120 Cal.App.3d 454 [174 Cal.Rptr. 536]. There the marital settlement agreement
contained common boilerplate provisions that the purpose of the agreement was to
make a final and complete settlement of all rights and obligations concerning
the support of the wife, 5 that the agreement contained the entire agreement of
the parties, 6 that the agreement was to be submitted to the court for
incorporation into the interlocutory judgment 7 and that there was a mutual
release of rights by both parties. 8 The court held   that these provisions,
individually and collectively, were not sufficiently specific to preclude
modification of spousal support where the paragraph reciting the agreement for
spousal support was silent on the question of modification. The court went on to
state: "The provisions for a 'final and complete' settlement coupled with a
release of all obligations and a provision that the agreement is entire and
binding on the parties and their heirs do not equate with the requirement of a
'specific' provision for nonmodification such as 'nonmodifiable.' [Citations.]
Although no particular magic words are needed to provide the exception to
nonmodifiability contemplated by section 4811, subdivision (b), some specific
unequivocal language directly on the question of modification is required.  The
subject agreement is entirely silent with respect to the power of modification
placed on the court by Civil Code section 4811.  The import of the statute may
not be 'avoided by drawing inferences as to the intention of the parties' from
general provisions of the agreement which do not contain a specific provision
concerning judicial modification." (120 Cal.App.3d at p. 458.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   "'4.
Purpose of Agreement.  The purpose of this agreement is to make a final and
complete settlement of all rights and obligations concerning the support of wife
and minor child and the custody of our minor child.'" (120 Cal.App.3d at p. 457
.)
6   "'8. Agreement Is Entire.  This agreement contains the entire agreement of
the parties on the matters it covers, and supersedes any previous agreement
between us.  No other agreement, statement or promise made by or to either of us
or the agent or representative of either of us shall be binding on us unless it
is in writing and signed by both of us or unless contained in an order of a
court of competent jurisdiction.  This agreement shall inure to the benefit of
and be binding on each of us and the heirs, personal representatives, assigns
and other successors in interest of each of us.'" (120 Cal.App.3d at p. 457.)
7   "'10. Incorporation and Merger Into Judgment.  This agreement shall be
submitted to the court for incorporation and merger into the interlocutory
judgment of dissolution of marriage in the pending proceeding between us.'" (120
Cal.App.3d at p. 457.)
8   "'17. Release of Rights.  We agree that the following clauses shall apply to
this instrument:

   "'(a) Except as otherwise provided for in this instrument, each of us
releases the other from any and all liabilities, debts, or obligations on our
marital property that have been or will be incurred, and from any and all claims
and demands, it being understood that by this present agreement we intend to
settle all aspects of our marital property rights.

   "'(b) We agree that any and all property acquired by either one of us from
and after the effective date of this instrument shall be the sole and separate
property of the one so acquiring it; and each of us waives any and all property
rights in or to such future acquisitions and hereby grants to the other all such
future acquisitions of property as the sole and separate property of the one so
acquiring the same from the effective date of this instrument . . . .'" (120
Cal.App.3d at p. 457.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    A dispute on the issue of nonmodifiability of spousal support would not
arise if the provision for spousal support within the marital settlement
agreement stated "spousal support is nonmodifiable." Section 4811, subdivision
(b), provides that spousal support is always modifiable unless the agreement of
the parties specifically provides to the contrary.  Careful draftsmen preparing
marital settlement agreements providing for spousal support should specifically
state that spousal support is nonmodifiable, if that is the agreement of the
parties.

   In the property settlement agreement executed by the Forcums and incorporated
into their interlocutory judgment of dissolution, they provided that the
agreement was entire and could not be altered, amended, or modified, except in a
writing executed by both parties, and that each party except for provisions
contained in the agreement released the other from any and all liabilities,
obligations, and claims, including all claims of either party upon the other for
support.  Under the authorities previously cited these provisions are
insufficient to cause spousal support to be nonmodifiable.

   The Forcums' marital settlement agreement did provide it was to be effective
from and after the date of execution and, although it could be submitted for
approval to the court, its effectiveness did not depend upon the court's
approval.  Under Nielsen this language would be sufficient to cause spousal
support to be nonmodifiable. However, the agreement also provided  for spousal
support payments for the final five-year term in the amount of $ 1 per year.
This language has historically been used for the purpose of reserving
jurisdiction to modify the amount of support payments.  (See, e.g., In re
Marriage of Smith (1978) 79 Cal.App.3d 725, 741 [145 Cal.Rptr. 205], and In re
Marriage of Andreen (1978) 76 Cal.App.3d 667, 672-673 [143 Cal.Rptr. 94].) There
is no reason why this language would have been included in this property
settlement agreement except to retain jurisdiction to modify the amount of
spousal support during the second five-year period.

    This more specific provision for spousal support in the Forcums' marital
settlement agreement, the legal effect of which is to retain jurisdiction to
modify the amount of spousal support during the term provided, prevails over the
more general language that the agreement was effective upon execution  and did
not depend upon the court's approval for its effectiveness, even though the
latter standing alone would otherwise have caused spousal support to be
nonmodifiable.

   Charles argues that the purpose of the $ 1 per year provision was not to
retain jurisdiction over the amount of spousal support during the second
five-year period, but to extend spousal support payments for a ten-year period
and thereby qualify them as periodic payments to assure their deductibility for
federal income tax purposes.  The Internal Revenue Code, in fact, provides the
opposite since noncontingent payments do not qualify as periodic payments unless
the payment period is for more than 10 years.  (26 U.S.C. § 71(c)(2).) 9 This
rule was adopted to assure the payments are in discharge of a legal obligation
for support and not a settlement of property.  ( Enid P. Mirsky (1971) 56 T.C.
664; Wright v. Com'r. of Int. Rev. (7th Cir. 1976) 543 F.2d 593; Adam v. United
States (D.Wyo. 1977) 429 F.Supp. 38.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -9   Charles
fails to note that his spousal support obligation terminates prior to the end of
the 10-year period upon the death of either party or Lillian's remarriage
pursuant to section 4801, subdivision (b).  This makes the spousal support
payments contingent and thus treated as periodic, even though not payable for
more than 10 years.  Treasury Regulation section 1.71 (1)(d)(3)(i), (d)(4).
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Regardless of what might be inferred from the boilerplate language, the
property settlement agreement, considered as a whole, amply demonstrates that
the parties anticipated and intended to permit future judicial modification of
the amount of the spousal support during the 10 years the court retained
jurisdiction over that issue.  The trial court did not err when it so concluded.

    The judgment is affirmed.


                              25 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             In re the Marriage of LAURIE THELEN and RICHARD ANDREW
           KACIK.  LAURIE THELEN KACIK, Respondent, v. RICHARD ANDREW
                               KACIK, Appellant.

                                    G041274

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FOURTH APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION THREE

          179 Cal. App. 4th 410; 101 Cal. Rptr. 3d 745; 2009 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1863


                            November 19, 2009, Filed

PRIOR-HISTORY:
   Appeal from an order of the Superior Court of Orange County, No. 99D005060,
Nancy A. Pollard, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(5) Dissolution of Marriage § 69--Spousal Support--Modification--Change of
Conditions--Termination of Child Support Order--Timeliness of Request.--The time
period between a request for modification of spousal support under Fam. Code, §
4326, and the termination of the child support order was 17 months, and the
order to show cause (OSC) was filed on the very day the spousal support order
was set to step down to zero. The supported spouse did not bring her OSC for
modification in the immediate wake of the termination of the child support, but
in view of the impending reduction of spousal support. So, the waiting period
was too long. Seventeen months belied any temporal relationship between the
modification request and the end of child support. Rather, the temporal
relationship was clearly between the modification request and the scheduled step
down of negotiated support to zero.

   [Kirkland et al., Cal. Family Law Practice and Procedure (2009) ch. 52, §
52.31;11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (10th ed. 2005) Husband and Wife, § 287.]

COUNSEL: Brandon & Yarc and Lisa E. Brandon for Appellant.

No appearance for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Sills, P. J., with Rylaarsdam and Moore, JJ., concurring.

OPINION BY: Sills

OPINION

    SILLS, P. J.--A spousal support order was scheduled to step down to zero in
mid-February 2008. The trial court modified the order to keep the spousal
support at the level it had been prior to mid-February 2008, based on the
"change of circumstances" that a child support order had terminated 17 months
earlier. The trial court's authority for doing so was Family Code section 4326,
a relatively new statute  in the Family Code. 1 The supporting spouse has
brought this appeal from the order of modification.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   All
undesignated statutory references in this opinion are to the Family Code.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   There are times when the definition of "is" really makes a difference. This
case is one of them. The key word in section 4326 is ... is.

   Section 4326 provides that:

   (1) when the court has jurisdiction to order spousal support and

   (2) "if a companion child support order is in effect" (italics added) then

   the termination of child support because the child reaches the age of
majority constitutes a change of circumstance that "may be the basis for a
request for modification of spousal support." 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Here is
the complete text of section 4326:

   "(a) In a proceeding in which a spousal support order exists or in which the
court has retained jurisdiction over a spousal support order, if a companion
child support order is in effect, the termination of child support pursuant to
subdivision (a) of Section 3901 constitutes a change of circumstances that may
be the basis for a request for modification of spousal support.

   "(b) This section shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2011, and as
of that date is repealed, unless a later enacted statute, that is enacted before
January 1, 2011, deletes or extends that date."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   This is a case of first impression. The question of first impression is what
the Legislature meant by the words "if a companion child support order is in
effect," and particularly what it meant by the phrase, "is in effect." Or, put
another way: How much time can elapse before is becomes was?

   As we explain in detail below, the phrase "is in effect" should not be
narrowly construed to deprive the family court of jurisdiction to make an order
under section 4326 just because the child has already reached the age of
majority, even though, under section 3601, a child support order is,
technically, no longer "in effect" the day after a child reaches the age of
majority. Thus a family law court is not deprived of jurisdiction to make an
order under section 4326 simply because a child, for example, turned 18 a few
days before the supported spouse made a request for modification under section
4326.

   Rather, the statute should be broadly construed to implement its purpose,
which was to allow for the possibility of modified spousal support generally
upon the event of the discontinuation of child support. In that regard, we
divine that the Legislature intended that reasonable contemporaneousness with
the discontinuation of child support is enough to give the family law court
jurisdiction to make a spousal support order under section 4326.

   Even so--the particular facts in this appeal force us to ask just how long a
supported spouse may wait after a child support order is no longer "in effect"
to bring a proceeding to modify spousal support under section 4326. A few
months? Under the rule of general contemporaneousness, we think we are safe to
say that a few months would be within the purview of the statute.

   But more than a year? As we show below, by comparison to other important
deadlines in the Family Code, it would do violence to the Legislature's use of
the phrase "is in effect"--present tense--to say that a modification proceeding
more than 17 months after the companion child support order ceased to be in
effect was within the purview of section 4326. The definition of "is" cannot be
stretched to include something that became past tense 17 months ago.
Consequently we conclude that the trial court's order modifying support in this
case--where the child support order ended in August 2006 and no modification
request was brought until February 2008--cannot be sustained on the basis of
section 4326. And section 4326 was the sole basis for the modification, so the
order cannot be sustained at all.

I. Background

   Laurie and Richard Kacik were married in June 1983, and separated in May
1999, for a 16-year marriage. They had one child, Alexander, then age 11, born
August 1988. They were divorced pursuant to a stipulated judgment filed June 8,
2001. Each was represented by counsel. The stipulated judgment provided for $
1,125 a month in child support from Richard to Laurie, which was to last until
Alexander reached the age of 18. Richard was also to pay Laurie $ 1,625 in
spousal support for seven years, after which spousal support was to be reduced
to zero on February 15, 2008, but the court was to retain jurisdiction over
support until death, remarriage or further order of the court. At the time of
the separation Laurie was 46 years old, not working and earning "zero," but the
stipulated judgment recited that she had "the ability to earn not less than $
1,000 per month in gross income." Richard was making $ 11,336 gross income a
month.

   The child support order terminated in August 2006, apparently as a result of
the couple's son Alexander having reached the age of 18. About 17 months later,
on February 15, 2008--the precise date that the spousal support award was
scheduled to step down to zero--Laurie, represented by counsel, filed an order
to show cause proceeding (commonly called an "OSC"), the main objective of which
was a modification of spousal support to $ 2,000. 3 Laurie's  declaration in
support of the OSC made these statements and assertions in support of her
modification request:

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   There
were two other requests: One involved a purported spousal support arrearage on
the theory that Richard had unilaterally deducted "certain things" (that is
literally the language in the declaration) against his past support payments,
and further, that, contrary to the judgment, the legal and administrative costs
of splitting certain 401(k) accounts and IRA's (individual retirement accounts)
should be borne by Richard. Neither issue is part of appellant's opening brief,
and we deem both therefore abandoned.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   (1) "In August 2006, child support for our son terminated."

   (2) "I have attempted to become self-sufficient and presently work full time.
I, however, can not find a position that pays more than my present $ 15.00 per
hour."

   (3) "If spousal support were to be reduced to zero, pursuant to the existing
judgment, I would be forced to sell my residence (in the middle of a very weak
market) and move out of Orange County. It would be impossible to live on my
current income."

   (4) "I require continued spousal support from [Richard] in order to afford
the basic necessities of life."

   By the time of Laurie's OSC in mid-February 2008, she had obtained full-time
employment in a shop in San Juan Capistrano earning $ 15 an hour, was working a
40-hour week, and was 55 years old. Her declaration in support of her OSC
provided no information (beyond the statement that she "could not find a
position" that pays more than $ 15 an hour) regarding any efforts by Laurie to
gain additional education or skills. Her income and expense declaration listed
the completion of high school as her highest level of education.

    The initial date for the hearing on Laurie's OSC was scheduled for April 21,
2008. Richard filed a responsive declaration asserting that he was paying for
all the costs of Andrew's education at Cal Poly San Luis Obispo, and had relied
on the 2001 judgment in undertaking to shoulder the cost of the couple's son by
himself. His 2007 W-2 form showed a monthly income of $ 13,907 ($ 166,887.91
divided by 12).

   The case was continued to June 23, 2008. In the meantime, on April 24,
Richard's attorneys propounded a request for production of documents, basically
asking for any documentation concerning Laurie's efforts to become
self-supporting since the 2001 judgment. The response was that no such documents
existed. That point formed the basis of a supplemental declaration  from
Richard's counsel filed about four days prior to the June 23 hearing, the
gravamen of which was that Laurie had not really done anything to become
self-supporting.

   The matter was continued again to July 24, 2008, when the hearing went
forward, with counsel having agreed to submit on the paperwork.

   The substantive hearing began with the trial judge announcing a modified
order of $ 1,625 before hearing argument. This is what she announced: She took
the $ 11,336 gross per month that Richard was making at the time of the 2001
judgment and halved it, arriving at the figure of $ 5,668. The trial judge then
declared the $ 5,668 figure to be the "marital standard of living." Then she
found that the seven-year spousal support figure in the 2001 judgment of $ 1,625
did not "meet the marital standard of living," leaving Laurie $ 3,100 "short."
That is, the $ 1,625 figure only made up the $ 3,100 shortfall by half, and that
was the court's order. 4

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   Here is
the relevant portion of transcript, beginning with the start of the hearing:

   "The Court: Have a seat.

   "In a review of the judgment in this matter, I find that father at the time
of the judgment was earning $ 11,336 gross. Mother was earning zero; although
she was imputed to have an income to earn $ 1,000 a month. I'm going to find the
marital standard of living was $ 5,668 a month--marital standard of living.

   "The support that mother was given at that time was the spousal support was,
like, $ 1160?

   "Ms. Brandon [Richard's attorney]: $ 1625.

   "Mr. Decker [Laurie's attorney]: $ 1625.

   "The Court: There was not a--there was no finding as to whether or not it met
the standard of living, but I'm going to find it did not because the marital
standard of living was just barely there with her imputed income of $ 1,000 a
month and $ 1625 that she got for spousal support and the child support. The
fact that father of his own decision deducted money from the child support,
which is not allowed by law, the court has a problem with that.

   "Needless to say, with the $ 5,668 marital standard of living and mother's
present earnings of $ 15 an hour, which gives her a gross of $ 2580, she is
short almost $ 3100; therefore, I'm going to order that the $ 1,625 spousal
support order shall remain at this point in time, and it still does not meet the
marital standard of living because she is short $ 3100, and we're only making
that up by half that amount.

   "As and for the child support arrearages, I'm going to find that it was $
13,395, which does not include the 10 percent interest. I'm going to order
counsel for the petitioner to go back and include the 10 percent per annum
interest on the shortage of the--

   "Mr. Decker: What was that figure again?

   "The Court: $ 13,395. And the 10 percent interest has to apply. We cannot
waive that.

   "As and for attorney fees, the court finds that father has paid his attorney
$ 2,500; mother paid her attorney $ 2640. I'm going to find, based on the
incomes of the parties, pursuant to Family Code section 2030, 2032, et seq, that
father shall pay as a contributory share of attorney fees to counsel for mother:
$ 1,150.

   "That can be made at the rate of $ 250 per month commencing September the
1st, continuing on the 1st of each month thereafter until paid in full. If any
two payments are more than five days late, whether consecutive or not, the whole
amount shall be immediately due and payable and shall bear interest at the rate
of 10 percent."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    At that point Richard's counsel interrupted to argue that there had been no
preliminary finding of change of circumstances. The trial judge replied that
"the child no longer lives with her" was the change in circumstances justifying
modification of the spousal support order. When Richard's counsel asserted that
the change was "over two years ago," the trial judge acknowledged the passage of
time, then changed the subject. 5

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   After
announcing that the award would be $ 1,625 a month and making an attorney fee
award (not at issue in this appeal), this exchange followed:

   "Ms. Brandon [Richard's attorney]: Your honor, did you make a preliminary
finding with regard to the change of circumstances that petitioner had to
demonstrate in order to obtain spousal support

   "The Court: The change of circumstances is that the child no longer lives
with her.

   "Ms. Brandon: That was over two years ago, your honor.

   "The Court: I understand. I understand. But we also have to worry about the
Q.D.R.O.'s. I'm going to order that she has to pay half the cost of the
preparation of the Q.D.R.O.'s [Qualified Domestic Relations Order]. Each party
is to pay one half the costs for the preparation of the Q.D.R.O.'s and that
needs to be done.

   "Ms. Brandon: But, your honor, the judgment provides she was to pay 100
percent of the cost of the Q.D.R.O.'s. That is in the judgment.

   "The Court: I know that. I'm looking at the--she earns $ 2500 a month and he
earns $ 13,000 a month. There is a substantial--he earns 83 percent of the total
combined incomes of the parties if the parties were to look at the total amount
available to them."

   No further colloquy on the change of circumstances appears in the reporter's
transcript.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   As to any efforts on Laurie's part to become self-supporting, the trial judge
said that the $ 2,580 a month Laurie was then making constituted a "substantial
increase" over what had been imputed to Laurie by way of income capacity in the
2001 judgment ($ 1,000). As far as the trial judge was concerned, the $ 2,580
itself represented a "sufficient effort" to become self-supporting. Earlier in
the argument, however, the trial judge said, in answer to Richard's counsel's
argument that there was no evidence Laurie had done anything "to improve or
become self-supporting," that Laurie "doesn't have any education." 6

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   Here is
the relevant portion of transcript, picking up at the point where footnote 4
above left off:

   "Ms. Brandon: Your honor, there is no evidence that she has tried to improve
or become self-supporting in the seven years the support has been paid.

   "The Court: She doesn't have any education.

   "Ms. Brandon: Yes, she does.

   "The Court: She is making $ 15 an hour, which is $ 2580 more--$ 2580 a month,
which is more than double of what she was making. When they imputed $ 1,000 to
her, she wasn't making anything.

   "Ms. Brandon: But she had done nothing to evidence that she searched for any
job besides that one, which was given to her two years ago by a friend.

   "The Court: Well, she is making $ 15 an hour, $ 2,580 a month, which is
two-and-a-half times what was imputed to her at the time of the judgment. The
court finds that is a substantial increase of what was imputed to her, and that
at this point in time the change of circumstances that she has made efforts to
improve is a sufficient effort."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The $ 1,625 modified spousal support order, made retroactive to February 15,
2008, was embodied in a formal order filed October 9, 2008, from which Richard
took a timely appeal on November 26, 2008. 7

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   Laurie
did not file a respondent's brief. We decide this appeal based on the record,
the opening brief and any oral argument by either party. (See In re Marriage of
Laurenti (2007) 154 Cal.App.4th 395, 403, fn. 5 [64 Cal. Rptr. 3d 449].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

 II. Section 4326

A. The History

   In In re Marriage of Lautsbaugh (1999) 72 Cal.App.4th 1131, 1133 [85 Cal.
Rptr. 2d 688], the Court of Appeal held that the circumstance of a child's
graduation from high school and "concomitant termination of husband's child
support obligations" was not a sufficient "material change of circumstances" to
justify a spousal support modification request. The court based its thinking on
the rule that "Circumstances accounted for in the previous order cannot
constitute a change of circumstances." (Ibid., citing Hogoboom & King, Cal.
Practice Guide: Family Law (The Rutter Group 1999) ¶ 17:147, p. 17-33.) Since
the "termination of child support was within the expectations of the original
order," the termination was simply not a change of circumstances. (Lautsbaugh,
supra, 72 Cal.App.4th at p. 1133.)

   In 2007, the Legislature added section 4326 (Stats. 2007,. ch. 247, § 1) to
the Family Code, with the express purpose of overturning the  Lautsbaugh
decision. The bill was Senate Bill No. 415 (2007-2008 Reg. Sess.), carried by an
Orange County state Senator (Tom Harman) and was presented as a
"non-controversial bill, sponsored by the Family Law Section of the State Bar,"
that "seeks to eliminate this so-called 'change of circumstances' courthouse
hurdle in these cases when a child support order terminates by operation of
law." (Assem. Com. on Judiciary, Analysis of Sen. Bill No. 415 (2007-2008 Reg.
Sess.) p. 1, as amended June 18, 2007.) The reports from the Assembly Judiciary
Committee, the Senate Judiciary Committee and the Senate Rules Committee are all
easily accessible online, and in any event are summarized in a comment in a
Rutter Group Practice Guide. (See Hogoboom & King, Cal. Practice Guide: Family
Law (The Rutter Group 2008) ¶ 17:150.4a, p. 17-35.) The committee reports and
the Rutter comment all tell this consistent story about the intent of the bill:

   Assume a hypothetical appropriate amount of spousal support in a case that
also involves a child support order. Further assume, however, that because of
the high levels of child support required under California child support
guidelines, there simply isn't enough money left over for the spousal support
order to reach that hypothetically appropriate amount. Under Lautsbaugh, when
the child support order terminates, the supported spouse would be left with a
subappropriate spousal support order, but no chance to go back to court and (as
the Senate Rules Committee report put it) "make a case for a modified spousal
support order based upon a change of circumstances." (Sen. Rules Com., Off. of
Sen. Floor Analyses, 3d reading analysis of Sen. Bill. No. 415 (2007-2008 Reg.
Sess.) Mar. 29, 2007, pp. 2-3.) The bill was intended to remedy that situation.
8

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -8   Here is
the rationale for the bill straight from the Senate Rules Committee third
reading analysis of March 29, 2007: "Need for the bill. According to the
author's office, because of the increased amounts of child support mandated by
Family Code 4055, the supporting spouse frequently has insufficient remaining
income to pay the supported spouse what would otherwise be an appropriate amount
of spousal support, a circumstance reflected in the spousal support order. Thus,
spousal support orders typically do not reflect the supported spouse's need or
the supporting spouse's ability to pay, both measured independently from the
children, but is an equitable division of the income remaining after the amount
of child support is set. Thus, the sponsor asserts, the supported spouse should
be permitted to return to court when a child support order terminates by
operation of law, and make the case for a modified spousal support order based
upon a change of circumstances. This permits the supported spouse's change of
circumstances to be reevaluated in the same light as a similarly situated spouse
with no children." (Sen. Rules Com., Off. of Sen. Floor Analyses, 3d reading
analysis of Sen. Bill. No. 415, supra, pp. 2-3, underscoring omitted.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The Senate Rules Committee report noted that courts do "not always consider
the  termination of a child support obligation in setting the terms of a spousal
support order" and parties in propria persona "may not have the foresight or
legal knowledge to request that a court consider the termination of a child
support obligation when setting the terms of spousal support." The report gives
the example of a supported spouse whose "children may have already graduated
from high school, but continue to reside in the home rent-free." (Sen. Rules
Com., Off. of Sen. Floor Analyses, 3d reading analysis of Sen. Bill. No. 415,
supra, p. 4.) Under such a circumstance, modification of spousal support may be
appropriate, but, under the rule of Lautsbaugh, there would be "no recourse" in
such a situation. (Ibid.)

   An interesting aspect of the legislation is that, in July 2007, the author
"agreed to accept an amendment ... adding a three-year sunset to the measure to
permit the Legislature to review the effect of this law change to ensure no
unintended results come about through this reform." (Assem. Com. on Judiciary,
Analysis of Sen. Bill No. 415, supra, p. 2.) Hence, unless extended, section
4326 will expire on January 1, 2011.

B. The Language

   The operative words of section 4326 can be readily quoted in their entirety:
"In a proceeding in which a spousal support order exists or in which the court
has retained jurisdiction over a spousal support order, if a companion child
support order is in effect, the termination of child support pursuant to
subdivision (a) of Section 3901 constitutes a change of circumstances that may
be the basis for a request for modification of spousal support."

   As we have alluded to already, the linguistic structure of section 4326 is
conditional, as shown by that big word "if." There are two conditions: (1) A
"proceeding" in which a spousal support order exists or the court has retained
jurisdiction, and (2) "a companion child support order is in effect." If the
conditions are met, then "the termination of child support pursuant to
subdivision (a) of Section 3901 constitutes a change of circumstances that may
be the basis for a request for modification of spousal support." (§ 4326, subd.
(a).) We note that section 3901, by its terms, speaks of child support
continuing until certain events, most notably a child reaching, depending on the
circumstances, the age of 18 or 19. 9

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -9   Here is
the complete text of section 3901:

   "(a) The duty of support imposed by Section 3900 continues as to an unmarried
child who has attained the age of 18 years, is a full-time high school student,
and who is not self-supporting, until the time the child completes the 12th
grade or attains the age of 19 years, whichever occurs first.

   "(b) Nothing in this section limits a parent's ability to agree to provide
additional support or the court's power to inquire whether an agreement to
provide additional support has been made."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   We confront the second condition of section 4326: What did the Legislature
mean--or intend 10--when it wrote the words, "a companion child support order is
in effect"?

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -10   Along
with the court in Leslie Salt Co. v. San Francisco Bay Conservation etc. Com.
(1984) 153 Cal.App.3d 605, 614 [200 Cal. Rptr. 575], we may sidestep, at least
for purposes of this case, the great debate between text versus
intent-behind-the-text that will probably never be completely settled. (Cf. ibid
. ["The meaning of the words of a statute or, to use the alternative approach
favored by many courts, 'the intent of the Legislature ... ."]; id. at p. 614,
fn. 11 [quoting Oliver Wendell Holmes, " 'we do not inquire what the legislature
meant; we ask only what the statute means' "].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The committee reports fail to directly address the issue. Nor do the facts
in Lautsbaugh provide a great deal of help. In Lautsbaugh, the youngest child
graduated from high school in "June 1997," and the supported spouse filed her
OSC to increase spousal support on June 3, 1997. (Lautsbaugh, supra, 72
Cal.App.4th at p. 1133.) Assuming that the child support payments were due at
the very end of one month or, more likely, the very beginning of the next, a
child support order was certainly "in effect" on June 3 when the OSC was filed.
(Also: Do any high schools who hold graduation ceremonies in June hold them as
early as June 3? Probably not.) That is, if some time had elapsed from the
"termination" of the child support order at graduation until  the supported
spouse brought her OSC, we would have a pretty good clue that the Legislature
meant something broader by "in effect" than, er, "in effect."

   That is, the Legislature's intent to overturn Lautsbaugh as it relates to
child support termination does not tell us that it meant to allow modifications
filed after the termination of the child support order. All we know for sure is
that a modification filed before the termination of the child support order, as
in Lautsbaugh, is within the meaning of the phrase "is in effect."

C. One Extreme ...

   There is another statute, however, which directly addresses when a child
support order is "in effect," section 3601. The operative language is in the
first sentence: "(a) An order for child support entered pursuant to this chapter
continues in effect until the order (1) is terminated by the court or (2)
terminates by operation of law pursuant to Sections 3900, 3901, 4007, and 4013."
(Italics added.)

   When statutes are in pari materia, similar phrases appearing in each should
be given like meanings. (People v. Lamas (2007) 42 Cal.4th 516, 525 [67 Cal.
Rptr. 3d 179, 169 P.3d 102].) Statutes are in pari materia when they are "'"on
the same subject"'" (People v. Honig (1996) 48 Cal.App.4th 289, 327 [55 Cal.
Rptr. 2d 555]), or " ' " 'dealing with the same subject matter[' "] ' " (Bonner
v. County of San Diego (2006) 139 Cal.App.4th 1336, 1351 [44 Cal. Rptr. 3d 116])
. Section 3601 is certainly in pari materia with section 4326, because not only
do section 4326 and section 3601 each deal with the topic of child support
orders, but each involves the question of when a child support order is "in
effect." Section 3601, in fact, directly answers the question: A child support
order is "in effect until the order (1) is terminated by the court or (2)
terminates by operation of law pursuant to Sections 3900, 3901, 4007, and 4013,"
that is, until the child reaches the age of majority and support is terminated
under section 3901. 11 (See also Medical Board v. Superior Court (2001) 88
Cal.App.4th 1001, 1016 [106 Cal. Rptr. 2d 381] [rule of pari materia "applies
even when, as here, one statute deals generally with the subject and another
deals with the subject with more specificity"].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -11   Here is
the complete text of section 3601:

   "(a) An order for child support entered pursuant to this chapter continues in
effect until the order (1) is terminated by the court or (2) terminates by
operation of law pursuant to Sections 3900, 3901, 4007, and 4013.

   "(b) Subject to Section 3602, subdivision (a) applies notwithstanding any
other provision of law and notwithstanding that the proceeding has not been
brought to trial within the time limits specified in Chapter 1.5 (commencing
with Section 583.110) of Title 8 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   But there's a problem with a construction of section 4326 that simply imports
the literal language of 3601 into section 4326.  The problem is the word
"termination," as in the phrase, "the termination of child support pursuant to
subdivision (a) of Section 3901 constitutes a change of circumstances ... ."
Construing the conditional words "is in effect" to exclude any time at all after
the formal "termination" of the child support order reads the words "the
termination" to mean, in practicality, "the upcoming termination" or "the
prospective termination."

   To be sure, the two readings can be literally harmonized by treating the
words "the termination" as a fixed point in time and space, regardless of
whether one is looking forward toward an upcoming termination, or backward
toward one that has already happened. Thus harmonized, one would read section
4326 to apply only to modification requests made prior to the termination of
support, that is, while the "companion child support order" was still "in
effect."

   Even so, such a reading seems at odds with the basic purpose of the statute.
The basic purpose of the statute is to allow supported spouses no longer
receiving child support to "make the case" for a modification of spousal support
because of the termination of child support. Basically, a reading that precluded
all modifications filed after formal termination would deprive trial judges of
the data they would need to make an informed decision concerning the
modification request.

   This court recently recounted the basic rules of spousal support modification
in In re Marriage of Dietz (2009) 176 Cal.App.4th 387, 396 [97 Cal. Rptr. 3d
616], alluding to the numerous factors involved: "'Modification of spousal
support, even if the prior amount is established by agreement, requires a
material change of circumstances since the last order. ... Change of
circumstances means a reduction or increase in the supporting spouse's ability
to pay and/or an increase or decrease in the supported spouse's needs. ... It
includes all factors affecting need and the ability to pay.' ... 'A trial court
considering whether to modify a spousal support order considers the same
criteria set forth in Family Code section 4320 as it considered in making the
initial order.' " (Citations omitted.)

   In other words, in considering a spousal support modification request--to be
sure, given the predicate of a change of circumstances--the trial court looks at
the various factors bearing on spousal support under section 4320. However,
under a reading of section 4326 which requires a spousal support modification
request to be made prior to the "termination" of the child support order, the
supported spouse would have to make a request for modification prior to any
actual experience of trying to live on the existing  spousal support order
absent child support. Data concerning several important factors bearing on the
modification under section 4320 would be literally unavailable.

   There would, for example, be no "data" concerning the supported spouse's
expenses--and maybe the supported spouse's income as well, depending (to use the
example from the committee report) on whether a child still living at home paid
rent or not, or could get a job with which to pay rent. There would be no data
about the needs of the supported spouse after (as in this case) the youngest
child had moved out (cf. § 4320, subd. (d)), or, by contrast, the ability of the
supported spouse, now (possibly) free from childcare responsibilities, to earn
income (§ 4320, subd. (a)(l), (2)) or obtain retraining to earn extra income
because of the prospect of more free time because of a newly empty nest (§ 4320,
subd. (1)). And there would be no data with which to otherwise gauge the balance
of hardships to each of  the parties (§ 4320, subd. (k)) in a context where a
parent, formerly a primary caregiver for a child, no longer (maybe, maybe not)
had that role. That is, under a reading that required the modification request
be brought prior to the actual termination of the child support order, a great
deal of information that a trial judge would necessarily want in order to make
an appropriate modified spousal support order would simply not yet exist.

   Moreover, there is the example given by the Senate Rules Committee: children
who have "already graduated from high school, but continue to reside in the home
rent-free." (Sen. Rules Com., Off. of Sen. Floor Analyses, 3d reading analysis
of Sen. Bill. No. 415, supra, p. 4.) A reading of "is in effect" that precluded
spousal support modifications after termination of the child support order would
mean that some such situations where the child had graduated from high school
but was continuing to reside in the home rent free would, literally, not qualify
for modification even though the Legislature explicitly intended them to
qualify. (E.g., the parent initially thought, before graduation, that the child
would pay rent because he or she had a job lined up, so didn't bring an OSC for
spousal support modification, and then, a week after graduation the child lost
the job.)

   We therefore decline to construe the words "is in effect" in pari materia
with section 3601 such that section 4326 would automatically not apply the day
after a child reached his or her majority. Given the purpose of the statute, it
seems that the Legislature wanted to treat the termination as the change of
circumstances warranting modification. It would defeat the purpose of section
4326 to require the modification be filed before the actual change even though
the literal language of section 3601 would point in that direction, and we
decline to do that. (See Rehman v. Department of Motor Vehicles (2009) 178
Cal.App.4th 581 [100 Cal.Rptr.3d 510] [construing two provisions of  Veh. Code
so as to provide for immediate suspension of a commercial truck driver's license
for driving with 0.04 percent or greater blood-alcohol level even though one
statute seemed to require reinstatement of license if level was not 0.08 percent
or greater].)

D. ... And the Other

   But if a supported spouse is not required to file a modification request
prior to the day the child support order expires, the question remains how long
after expiration may such a request be filed? Indefinitely?

   We have already rejected a reading of "is in effect" that automatically
precludes a modification request made after the expiration of the child support
order. The opposite extreme would be a reading that would allow a modification
any time there had been a child support order, no matter how much time had
passed since it was in effect.

   Courts should "give effect and significance to every word and phrase of a
statute." (Garcia v. McCutchen (1997) 16 Cal.4th 469, 476 [66 Cal. Rptr. 2d 319,
940 P.2d 906].) The words "is in effect" have to have some meaning in section
4326. Indeed: "Even when broadly construing a statute, we may not 'ignore the
plain statutory language' or reach conclusions inconsistent with this language."
(S. B. Beach Properties v. Berti (2006) 39 Cal.4th 374, 382 [46 Cal. Rptr. 3d
380, 138 P.3d 713].)

   A reading of section 4326 that would allow an unlimited amount of time to
bring a spousal support modification request after a child support order
literally went out "of effect" (under § 3601) would read the words "is in
effect" totally out of the statute. If the Legislature had wanted a rule whereby
any case in which there had ever been a child support order in effect at any
time to be a change of circumstance that could possibly justify a modified
spousal support order, it could easily have  said so--indeed, all the
Legislature needed to do was change one word: is to was, as in "was in effect."
It did not. The Legislature said: "... is in effect," not "was in effect" or
"has been in effect at any time."

   Back to the purpose of the statute: The idea was that a spousal support order
(typically in a long-term marriage) might be subpar because a child support
order essentially left insufficient money for a par spousal support order. Hence
the termination of the child support order would leave the supported spouse with
the subpar order, and no ground to correct it. That suggests that the
modification should be brought within a reasonable amount of time after the
termination of the child support order, and--given what we  have said above
about the section 4320 factors that would go into the modification
calculus--allowing for enough time for some "posttermination" data to be
collected.

   A rule requiring a reasonable relationship between the event that the
Legislature said could be a change of circumstance justifying a possible
modification--the termination of the child support order--and the modification
request both (a) satisfies the purpose of the statute while (b) respecting the
Legislature's choice of words, "is in effect." For shorthand, we might call such
a rule a requirement of reasonable contemporaneousness.

E. When Is Becomes Was

   That leaves the question of the actual facts in this case: The child support
order terminated in August 2006. The modification request was made more than 17
months later in February 2008.

   We are guided by what the Legislature has said about deadlines in other
contexts, particularly contexts where the burdened party is necessarily aware of
some need to act at the time of the event. A litigant has one year to move to
set aside a family law judgment if procured by fraud or perjury (§ 2122, subds.
(a), (b)), one year if a stipulated or uncontested judgment is the product of a
mistake or if there was a failure to comply with disclosure requirements (§
2122, subds. (e), (f)), but two years if the judgment was procured because of
duress or mental incapacity (§ 2122, subds. (c), (d)). The classic deadline to
move to set something aside because of mistake or related mishaps under Code of
Civil Procedure section 473 is "a reasonable time, in no case exceeding six
months." (Code Civ. Proc., § 473, subd. (b).)

   In light of the Legislature's concern that a given spousal support award
might be the product of the law's own (i.e., § 4055's) squeeze-out effect
because of a high level of child support, it seems hard to justify a
modification made after more time has expired than might have been the case of a
family law judgment procured through mistake, fraud or perjury. After all, to
the degree that a supported spouse entering into a stipulation, or a judge
making a spousal support order, recognized that a given spousal support was
subpar (lower than it otherwise would be absent the child support order), that
information was known to the parties at the time of the original order. They
would have less excuse than a litigant who had a suspicion that his or her
spouse had gained an unfair advantage through a fraud or perjury to sit on their
rights. 12

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -12   As for
the two-year limit in cases of duress and mental incapacity, there is simply no
analogy. Note that duress, in a family law context, often involves domestic
violence, and it may take a victim of domestic violence a certain recovery time
before the victim can fully appreciate that a given judgment was the product of
domestic violence (even just threatened). So the Legislature would have been
perfectly logical to build in considerable leniency as to time in such cases.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    In the present case, however, the time period was 17 months, and the OSC was
filed on the very day the spousal support order was set to step down to zero.
The supported spouse did not bring her OSC for modification in the immediate
wake of the termination of the child support, but in view of the impending
reduction of spousal support. So, the waiting period was too long. Seventeen
months belies any temporal relationship between the modification request and the
end of child support. Rather, the temporal relationship was clearly the
scheduled step down of negotiated support to zero.

   Nor can the trial judge's order be justified on any of the other three bases
advanced in Laurie's supporting declaration. The step down to zero, with any
attendant loss of income, was a circumstance "accounted for" in the 2001
judgment, and the Legislature did not "overrule" the "accounted for in the
previous order" principle that animated Lautsbaugh. Rather, the Legislature
simply said that, given the crowding out effect of child support orders, a
spousal support order may not truly account for the future discontinuation of
child support.

III. Memo to the Legislature

   Because of the unusual circumstance of construing a piece of legislation that
has less than 18 months before it sunsets, we address the Legislature directly:

   Section 4326 is scheduled to terminate on January 1, 2011. If you decide to
renew it, please consider saying exactly what you mean by "is in effect." One
easy solution: Specify a timeframe around the termination date of child support:
say, plus or minus six months, when a spousal support modification request based
on the termination of child support may be filed. (Cf. Code Civ. Proc., § 473.)

IV. Disposition

   The order modifying support is reversed, with directions to the trial court
to enter a new order denying the request for modification. Our decision today is
without prejudice to Laurie to bring an OSC for modification of spousal support
based on any changed circumstance other than the termination of child support in
2006 or the step down that was accounted for by the parties back in 2001.

   In light of the disparities of income and the fact that an attorney fee order
was made in Laurie's behalf at the trial level, each side will bear its own
costs on appeal.

   Rylaarsdam, J., and Moore, J., concurred.


                              26 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of DOROTHY MORSE and GUY D. HUFFORD.  GUY
          D.  HUFFORD, Appellant, v. DOROTHY MORSE HUFFORD, Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 68749

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Seven

            152 Cal. App. 3d 825; 199 Cal. Rptr. 726; 1984 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1711


                                 March 6, 1984

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Respondent's petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court
was denied May 31, 1984.  Bird, C. J., Mosk, J., and Kaus, J., were of the
opinion that the petition should be granted.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Ventura County, No. D86510, Roland N.
Purnell, Temporary Judge. *

*   Pursuant to Constitution, article VI, section 21.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1a) (1b) (1c) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 66--Support of Other Party
--Modification--Agreement Precluding Judicial Modification--Boiler Plate
Language.  --Under Civ. Code, § 4811, subd. (b), providing that a support order
or agreement is subject to court modification unless a written agreement
specifically provides to the contrary, a boiler plate provision in a marital
settlement agreement stating the agreement was entire and that "we may not
alter, amend or modify it, except by an instrument in writing . . .," did not
preclude judicial modification of spousal support. The boiler plate provision
was obviously intended to prohibit those kinds of oral modifications of a
written contract which would otherwise be permitted, and did not, even by
implication, restrict a court's power to modify. The agreement was at least
ambiguous on the issue of modification, which ambiguity was to be resolved in
favor of the general statutory rule of modifiability and against the person who
drafted the agreement.

(2) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 66--Property Rights of Parties--
Support of Other Party--Modification--Public Policy.  --Although an agreement
making spousal support nonmodifiable by a court is not contrary to public
policy, there is a general rule in favor of judicial modifiability of spousal
support provisions.

(3) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 14--Dissolution and Separation
Proceedings--Evidence--Parol Evidence--Modification of Support Agreement.
--Parol evidence is inadmissible to prove nonmodifiability of a support
agreement which contains no provision on the issue of modifiability.

(4) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 66--Support of Other Party--
Modification--Agreement Precluding Judicial Modification.  --Since a court is
vested with the power to modify spousal support unless the parties specifically
agree to preclude judicial modification (Civ. Code, § 4811, subd. (b)),
draftsmen of marital settlement agreements should specifically state that "
spousal support is nonmodifiable" in the provision for spousal support if that
is the intended agreement of the parties.

COUNSEL: Taylor, McCord, Paul & Johnson and Emily J. Andelman for Appellant.

Christine M. Yegan for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Thompson, J., with Schauer, P. J., and Johnson, J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: THOMPSON

OPINION

     In this appeal we are called upon to determine whether judicial
modification of spousal support is precluded by a boiler plate provision in a
marital settlement agreement which merely provides that the agreement is entire
and cannot be amended, altered or modified by the parties except by a writing
signed by both parties.  For the reasons to follow, we have concluded that such
a provision does not fulfill the exception of Civil Code section 4811 ,
subdivision(b), to exclude judicial modification.

   Guy Hufford (husband) appeals from the denial of his order to show cause for
modification of spousal support of his ex-wife, Dorothy Hufford (wife).

   On March 1, 1978, husband and wife filed in court a signed written
"stipulation" and waiver of rights prepared by wife's counsel, covering among
other things spousal support, division of property, attorney's fees and waivers.
Paragraph 2 of the agreement provided for husband to pay wife spousal support of
$ 1,200 per month for the first two years after entry of an interlocutory
judgment of dissolution, and thereafter $ 600 per month until wife remarried or
died.

   Paragraph 6 recited the parties' agreement that "this court shall retain
jurisdiction, after rendering the Final Judgment of Dissolution in the subject
action, to determine all issues raised by this agreement and not specifically
excluded from this reservation of jurisdiction."

   Paragraph 10 provided: "This agreement is entire.  We may not alter, amend or
modify it, except by an instrument in writing executed by both of us.  It
includes all representations of every kind and nature made by each of us to the
other.  This agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of both of
us, and of our heirs, administrators, executors, successors, and assigns."

   On March 15, 1978, the Ventura Superior Court entered an interlocutory decree
of dissolution of marriage ordering spousal support, property division,
attorney's fees and execution of further documents in substantially identical
language with the provisions of the stipulation.  The decree did not in any way
refer to the prior stipulation; nor did it contain the provisions of paragraphs
6 or 10.

   On July 14, 1982, husband filed an order to show cause for modification of
spousal support on grounds of alleged reduced ability to pay because of lesser
income and increased obligations for a new wife and five children,  coupled with
ex-wife's reduced need.  The wife opposed the motion on the ground that
paragraph 10 of the stipulation rendered the spousal support provision
nonmodifiable.

   The superior court denied husband's request for modification. The court found
that the order for spousal support contained in the judgment of dissolution was
not modifiable because the provision in paragraph 10 of the stipulation
constituted compliance with Civil Codesection 4811, subdivision (b), as to
nonmodifiability of spousal support, and the provision of paragraph 6 of the
stipulation did not constitute a reservation of jurisdiction to modify spousal
support.

   This appeal followed.

Discussion

   Civil Code 1 section 4811, subdivision (b), provides in pertinent part: "(b)
The provisions of any agreement for the support of either party shall be deemed
to be separate and severable  from the provisions of the agreement relating to
property.  All orders for the support of either party based on such agreement
shall be deemed law-imposed and shall be deemed made under the power of the
court to make such orders.  The provisions of any agreement or order for the
support of either party shall be subject to subsequent modification or
revocation by court order, . . . except to the extent that any written agreement
. . . specifically provides to the contrary." (Italics added.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Unless
otherwise indicated, all statutory references are to the Civil Code.  Section
4811, subdivision (b), applies to all property settlement agreements entered
into on or after January 1, 1970.  (See § 4811, subd.  (c).)

   For a discussion of contractual foreclosure of judicial modification under
1967 amendments to former section 139, the predecessor of section 4811, see
Knodel v. Knodel (1975) 14 Cal.3d 752, 764-766 [122 Cal.Rptr. 521, 537 P.2d 353]
.

   Also, for a thorough discussion of statutory and case law on pre-1967
agreements, see 2 The Cal. Family Lawyer (Cont.Ed.Bar. 1963) ch. 26; Propper,
The Judgment of Dissolution and the Agreement -- Incorporation, Merger,
Integration and Approval (1975) 51 L.A. Bar J. 177; Annot., Modification of
Divorce Decree -- Alimony (1975) 61 A.L.R.3d 520, 595-602.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      Thus, there is a general rule in favor of modifiability by the court of
spousal support provisions.  "The evident purposes of Civil Code section 4811
were to dispose of the abstruse and unprofitable jurisprudence which had grown
up around the concepts of integration and severability [citations] and establish
a legislatively declared social policy that contractual provisions for the
support of a spouse be subject to modification by the court in the light of
changed circumstances unless the parties explicitly agree to  preclude such
modification.  The utility of this policy is obvious.  Even in the absence of
inflationary distortions, the parties to a marital settlement agreement can
hardly anticipate and provide for unexpected changes of circumstance which may
invalidate the expectations reflected in the agreement.  Despite the public
interest in reserving for judicial redetermination on the basis of changed
circumstances contractual provisions for support, the Legislature left it open
to marital partners to preclude judicial modification by inserting in the
agreement a specific provision to that effect." ( In re Marriage of Nielsen
(1980) 100 Cal.App.3d 874, 877-878 [161 Cal.Rptr. 272].) (Italics added.)

   Although an agreement making spousal support nonmodifiable by the court is
not contrary to public policy ( In re Marriage of Hawkins (1975) 48 Cal.App.3d
208, 212-213 [121 Cal.Rptr. 681]), "[underlying] section 4811 is the policy
determination that the public interest is best served when support awards
reflect changes in need or ability to pay" ( Esserman v. Esserman (1982) 136
Cal.App.3d 572, 577 [186 Cal.Rptr. 329]).

   In determining whether the trial court properly found that the language in
the agreement herein was legally sufficient to preclude judicial modification of
spousal support under section 4811, subdivision (b), we first view, from an
historical perspective, cases considering that issue.

    In re Marriage of Smiley (1975) 53 Cal.App.3d 228 [125 Cal.Rptr.  717], held
that a general provision of an agreement incorporated into the dissolution
decree containing language "that this agreement is entire, indivisible, and
shall constitute an integrated agreement, which is not subject to modification
[and] [this] agreement may not be amended except by an instrument in writing
signed by both parties"  (at p. 231) rendered spousal support nonmodifiable
under section 4811, subdivision (b), notwithstanding the language in the spousal
support provision of the agreement that "'the support of Wife is subject to any
order, Decree or Judgment of any Court based thereon'" (at pp. 230, 233).  The
court held the latter language simply made it clear that contempt was a
permissible method of enforcement and the former language was sufficient to
satisfy the statutory requirement that written agreements specifically provide
against modifiability by the court. 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   The full
text of the general provision in Smiley was as follows: "'3. The parties hereto
acknowledge that this agreement constitutes their entire understanding and that
neither has made any promise, covenant, representation, or warranty, except as
herein expressly set forth, and that this document contains all of the
negotiations and agreements having been merged herein.  The parties further
covenant and agree that each and every promise, covenant, and undertaking herein
set forth has been made as consideration for each and all of the remaining
promises, covenants, and undertakings herein, and that this agreement is entire,
indivisible, and shall constitute an integrated agreement, which is not subject
to modification. This agreement may not be amended except by an instrument in
writing signed by both parties.'" ( Smiley, supra, 53 Cal.App.3d at pp.  230-231
.)

   The spousal support provision provided: "'1. Husband shall pay to Wife, as
alimony for her support and maintenance, the sum of $ 850.00 per month
commencing September 1, 1970 and continuing monthly thereafter for five years,
thence at the rate of $ 700.00 per month for the succeeding five years,
thereafter $ 600.00 per month until the death or marriage of Wife.  This
provision for the support of Wife is subject to any order, Decree or Judgment of
any Court based thereon.'" ( Id., at p. 230.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      Forgy v. Forgy (1976) 63 Cal.App.3d 767 [134 Cal.Rptr. 75], held under
former section 139 (the predecessor of § 4811) that the following language
precluded later judicial modification of spousal support: "'[in] the event that
either the Husband or the Wife shall hereafter obtain a decree of absolute or
limited divorce, such decree shall incorporate the provisions of this Agreement
to the extent acceptable to the Court, but such decree shall in no way affect
this Agreement or any of the terms, covenants, or conditions thereof, it being
understood that this Agreement is absolute, unconditional and irrevocable.'" (At
p. 770.)

   The Forgy court explained: "The word 'decree' used therein impliedly includes
the orders embodied in the decree and any modification of those orders.  Any
other interpretation would permit the court to comply with the agreement in its
'decree' but forthwith effect noncompliance therewith by a subsequent decree or
order.  As thus interpreted the agreement provides, a court decree incorporating
its provisions and any modification thereof shall in no way affect the spousal
support provisions thereof as to which the agreement'is absolute, unconditional
and irrevocable.' A modification of those provisions certainly would 'affect'
them and render nugatory the understanding of the parties the agreement was
absolute and irrevocable. [para. ] To comply with the nonmodifiable provisions
of section 139 it is not necessary the parties to a separation agreement state
categorically: 'The provisions of this agreement for support are not subject to
modification or magic words are needed' to provide the exception to
modifiability contemplated by the statute.  [Citations.]" ( Forgy, supra, 63
Cal.App.3d at p. 770-771.) 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   However,
parol evidence is inadmissible to prove nonmodifiability of an agreement which
contains no provision on the issue of modifiability. ( In re Marriage of Wright
(1976) 54 Cal.App.3d 1115, 1121 [126 Cal.Rptr. 894].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    In re Marriage of Kilkenny (1979) 96 Cal.App.3d 617 [158 Cal.Rptr.  158],
relying on Forgy, supra, 63 Cal.App.3d 767, held that the terms "absolute,
unconditional and irrevocable" as intended in the agreement prohibited
modification of spousal support by court decree. The Kilkenny court pointed out
that the provision in its agreement that "'[it] is the intention of the parties
that this agreement, whether or not incorporated in any decree of divorce, shall
be binding upon the parties, and shall be absolute, unconditional and
irrevocable'" presented an even stronger showing of nonmodifiability  than did
Forgy because the parties more clearly stated their intent.  ( Kilkenny, supra,
at p. 620.)

   Subsequently, In re Marriage of Nielsen, supra, 100 Cal.App.3d 874, addressed
the issue of what general boiler plate language in agreements, if any, was
sufficient to preclude judicial modification of spousal support. The court,
relying upon Forgy, supra, held that a provision in the final paragraph that the
agreement shall not depend for its effectiveness on court approval nor be
affected thereby was a specific provision rendering spousal support
nonmodifiable. (At p. 878.) 4

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   That
provision provided in full: "'. . . . Effective Date: This Agreement is executed
on and shall be effective from and after the 9th day of February 1972.  This
Agreement may, if desired, be submitted to the Court for its approval, but this
Agreement shall not depend for its effectiveness on such approval, nor be
affected thereby.'" (Ibid.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    However, the Nielsen court also held that neither the paragraph establishing
spousal support of $ 214 per month "continuing for the remainder of wife's life"
nor the general release of rights paragraph was sufficient to prohibit judicial
modification. The court explained: "The paragraph of the agreement dealing with
spousal support is silent on the question of modification.  The general release
of rights 5 . . . refers, among other items, to 'all claims of either party upon
the other for support and maintenance . . . it being understood that this
present agreement is intended to settle the rights of the parties hereto in all
respects.' So far as the contractual relations of the parties are concerned, the
general release of rights would be held to express an intention that the
obligation of support would be governed by the agreement.  [Citation.] But the
release of rights provision is entirely silent with respect to the power of
modification vested in the court by Civil Code section 4811.  Therefore, . . .
there was no specific provision in the release language precluding modification
by judicial action.  Just as parol evidence may not be received to supply a
missing provision against modification [citation], the statute cannot be avoided
by drawing inferences as to the intention of the parties from a general 'release
of rights' paragraph which contains no 'specific' provision concerning judicial
modification." ( Nelson, supra, 100 Cal.App.3d at p. 878.) (Italics added.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   "'Release
of Rigths: 1. Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, each party to this
Agreement does hereby release the other from any and all liabilities, debts, or
obligations, of every kind and character, heretofore or hereafter incurred, and
from any and all claims and demands, including all claims of either party upon
the other for support and maintenance as Wife or as Husband, it being understood
that this present agreement is intended to settle the rights of the parties
hereto in all respects.'" ( Nelson, supra, 100 Cal.App.3d at p. 877, fn. 2.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Soon thereafter, In re Marriage of Aylesworth (1980) 106 Cal.App.3d 869 [165
Cal.Rptr. 389], held that prefatory language in a marital settlement agreement,
providing that "'[with] the exception of provisions relating to  child custody
and child support, this Agreement is intended to be a final, binding, and
nonmodifiable agreement between said parties'" (at p. 873), fulfilled the
exception requirement of section 4811, subdivision (b) (at p. 874).

   More recently, Fukuzaki v. Superior Court (1981) 120 Cal.App.3d 454 [174
Cal.Rptr. 536], discussed what language in an agreement was sufficiently
specific to preclude judicial modification of spousal support. The Fukuzaki
agreement contained boiler plate provisions that (1) the purpose of the
agreement was to make a final and complete settlement of all rights and
obligations concerning the wife's support; (2) the agreement contained the
entire agreement of the parties; (3) the agreement was to be submitted to the
court for incorporation into the interlocutory judgment; and (4) mutual release
of rights by both parties. 6

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   The
pertinent provisions of the settlement agreement in Fukuzaki provided: "'4.
Purpose of Agreement.  The purpose of this agreement is to make a final and
complete settlement of all rights and obligations concerning the support of wife
and minor child and the custody of our minor child.

   "'8. Agreement is Entire.  This agreement contains the entire agreement of
the parties on the matters it covers, and supersedes any previous agreement
between us.  No other agreement, statement or promise made by or to either of us
or the agent or representative of either of us shall be binding on us unless it
is in writing and signed by both of us or unless contained in an order of a
court of competent jurisdiction.  This agreement shall inure to the benefit of
and be binding on each of us and the heirs, personal representatives, assigns
and other successors in interest of each of us.

   "'10. Incorporation and Merger Into Judgment.  This agreement shall be
submitted to the court for incorporation and merger into the interlocutory
judgment of dissolution of marriage in the pending proceeding between us.

   "'17. Release of Rights.  We agree that the following clauses shall apply to
this instrument:

   "'(a) Except as otherwise provided for in this instrument, each of us
releases the other from any and all liabilities, debts, or obligations on our
marital property that have been or will be incurred, and from any and all claims
and demands, it being understood that by this present agreement we intend to
settle all aspects of our marital property rights.

   "'(b) We agree that any and all property acquired by either one of us from
and after the effective date of this instrument shall be the sole and separate
property of the one so acquiring it; and each of us waives any and all property
rights in or to such future acquisitions and hereby grants to the other all such
future acquisitions of property as the sole and separate property of the one so
acquiring the same from the effective date of this instrument . . . .'" (
Fukuzaki v. Superior Court, supra, 120 Cal.App.3d at p. 457.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     Fukuzaki held that these provisions, individually and collectively, were
not sufficiently specific to avoid the power of the court to modify a spousal
support agreement where the paragraph reciting the agreement for spousal support
was silent on the question of modification.

   The Fukuzaki court explained: "The provisions for a 'final and complete'
settlement coupled with a release of all obligations and a provision that the
agreement is entire and binding on the parties and their heirs do not equate
with the requirement of a 'specific' provision for nonmodification such as
'nonmodifiable' [citation], or 'irrevocable' [citation].  Although no particular
magic words are needed to provide the exception to nonmodifiability contemplated
by section 4811, subdivision (b), some specific unequivocal language directly on
the question of modification is required.  The subject agreement is entirely
silent with respect to the power of modification placed on the court by Civil
Code section 4811.  The import of the statute may not be 'avoided by drawing
inferences as to the intention of the parties' from general provisions of the
agreement   which do not contain  a specific provision concerning judicial
modification.  [Citation.]" ( Fukuzaki, supra, 120 Cal.App.3d at p.  458.)
(Italics added.)

   Subsequently, in 1982, in Esserman v. Esserman, supra, 136 Cal.App.3d 572,
the court held that section 4811, subdivision (b), applies to private agreements
made after entry of a final judgment of dissolution.  The court pointed out
that, regardless of whether support provisions in the earlier agreement and
judgment were nonmodifiable, the court had authority to modify the spousal
support arrangement in the later private agreement.  The Esserman court found,
citing Fukuzaki v. Superior Court, supra, 120 Cal.Rptr. 454, that there was no
language in the later private agreement which would meet the "test of 'specific
unequivocal language directly on the question of [judicial] modification.'" (
Esserman, supra, at p.  577.)

   Finally, In re Marriage of Forcum (1983) 145 Cal.App.3d 599 [193 Cal.Rptr.
596], is the most recent case to consider in detail what language in an
agreement or order is legally sufficient to bring into play the provisions of
section 4811, subdivision (b), that orders for spousal support are
modifiableexcept to the extent that a written agreement of the parties
"specifically provides to the contrary." (At p. 604.) There, as in Nielsen, a
general provision that the agreement was effective upon execution and did not
depend upon court approval for effectiveness was involved.  The court held that
a specific provision for a dollar-a-year spousal support payments had the legal
effect of retaining the court's jurisdiction to modify spousal support. The
court reasoned that a specific provision would prevail over the more general
Nielsen-type provision to permit future judicial modification. ( Forcum, supra,
at pp. 601, 605.)

   In addition to the Nielsen-type provision, the Forcum agreement also provided
that (1) the agreement was entire and could not be altered, amended or modified
except in a writing executed by both parties, and (2) each party, except for
provisions contained in the agreement, released the other from any and all
liabilities, obligations and claims, including all claims of either party upon
the other for support. Forcum pointed out that "these provisions  are
insufficient to cause spousal support to be nonmodifiable." ( Forcum, supra,145
Cal.App.3d at p. 604.)

    Moreover, in an instructive observation, the Forcum court stressed: "A
dispute on the issue of nonmodifiability of spousal support would not arise if
the provision for spousal support within the marital settlement agreement stated
'spousal support is nonmodifiable.' Section 4811, subdivision (b), provides that
spousal support is always modifiable unless the agreement of the parties
specifically provides to the contrary.  Careful draftsmen preparing marital
settlement agreements providing for spousal support should specifically state
that spousal support is nonmodifiable, if that is the agreement of the parties."
(Ibid.)

     With this historical perspective in mind, we now turn to the agreement in
this case.  Paragraph 10 of the agreement is a classic example of general boiler
plate language which is routinely inserted in most contracts.  Such a provision
is obviously intended to prohibit those kinds of oral modifications of a written
contract which would otherwise be permitted under section 1698.  (See 14
Cal.Jur.3d, Contracts, § 222, pp. 501-503; Timbie, Modification of Written
Contracts in California (1972) 23 Hastings L.J. 1549, 1554-1564; see, e.g.,
Mitchell v. Mitchell (Me.  1980) 418 A.2d 1140, 1142.)

   Wife argues that under decisional law this paragraph precludes judicial
modification of spousal support. Wife points to the "strikingly similar"
language in Smiley, supra, 53 Cal.App.3d 228, which was held sufficient to cause
spousal support to be nonmodifiable. However, the provision herein more closely
parallels the provision in Forcum, supra, 145 Cal.App.3d 599, which was deemed
insufficient.  Thus, insofar as Smiley and Forcum can be distinguished, Forcum
is more on point.

   Furthermore, insofar as there is a conflict between the 1975 Smiley decision
and the 1983 Forcum decision, we find the rationale of the latter authority more
persuasive.  We agree with Forcum that general language that an agreement is
entire and may not be altered, amended or modified is insufficient to invoke the
exception to the statutory rule.

   Whereas the earlier cases stressed the fact that no magic words were
necessary and appeared willing to infer intent to make spousal support
nonmodifiable from general language, the most recent cases have emphasized the
need for specific unequivocal language directly on the issue of judicial
modification. We are concerned about judicial erosion of the statutory policy in
favor of modifiability of spousal support and the danger of inferring a contrary
intent of the parties from seemingly-innocuous boiler plate provisions.   (See
Cal. Family L.Rep. (1980) p. 1304.)  Since, under section 4811, subdivision (b),
the court is vested with the power to modify spousal support unless the parties
specifically agree to preclude judicial modification, draftsmen should
specifically state that "spousal support is nonmodifiable" in the provision for
spousal support if that is the intended agreement of the parties.

     Moreover, insufficiency of this boiler plate language to specifically
preclude modification by the court is even more obvious in this case than in
Forcum because here the language merely states that "we" -- that is, the parties
-- may not modify the document.  Nowhere in the paragraph is there a limitation,
even by implication, on the court's power to do so.  Thus, although the
paragraph expresses an intention regarding the contractual relations of the
parties, it does not comply with the requirement enunciated in Fukuzaki and
Nielsen that in order to foreclose the power vested in the court by section 4811
, there must be a specific provision concerning judicial modification. (
Fukuzaki, supra, 120 Cal.App.3d at p. 458; Nielsen, supra, 100 Cal.App.3d at p.
878.)

   In addition, a contract must be read as a whole with each part helping to
interpret the other.  (§ 1641.) Here, paragraph 6 of the agreement expressly
retains the jurisdiction of the court to determine all issues which are not
specifically excluded from the reservation.  Thus, this paragraph reinforces our
unwillingness to infer an intent to prohibit judicial modification of spousal
support from the boiler plate language  in paragraph 10.  We are not persuaded
by wife's argument, relying on Smiley, that this paragraph merely makes the
agreement subject to enforcement by contempt.  All such orders already are.
(See §§ 4811, subd.  (b); 4380.) Nor do we find any language in paragraph 10
that can reasonably be construed as a specific exclusion of the court's
jurisdiction.

   In any event, the agreement does not unequivocally exclude judicial
modification and, therefore, is ambiguous on that issue.  But anyambiguity must
be resolved in favor of the general statutory rule of modifiability, rather than
the exception ( Moyer v. Workmen's Comp. Appeals Bd. (1973) 10 Cal.3d 222, 232
[110 Cal.Rptr. 144, 514 P.2d 1224]) and against the wife whose counsel drafted
the agreement (§ 1654). 7

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   Our
interpretation of the agreement is not affected by the fact that paragraph 10
was not incorporated in the interlocutory decree. Section 4811 makes the
question of whether the parties and the court intended to or did merge a
settlement agreement into an interlocutory decree irrelevant to determine
whether a court may modify spousal support payments.  ( In re Marriage of
Nielsen, supra, 100 Cal.App.3d at pp. 876-877; In re Marriage of Harris (1976)
65 Cal.App.3d 143, 149-150 [134 Cal.Rptr.  891].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     Accordingly, the judgment (order) denying the motion to show cause re
modification is reversed, and the cause is remanded to the superior court to
hold a hearing on the merits.


                              27 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In re the Marriage of MARY E. and GEORGE L. OLSEN. MARY E.
               OLSEN, Respondent, v. GEORGE L. OLSEN, Appellant.

                                  No. B073657.

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SECOND APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION SIX

          24 Cal. App. 4th 1702; 30 Cal. Rptr. 2d 306; 1994 Cal. App.
          LEXIS 484; 94 Cal. Daily Op. Service 3596; 94 Daily Journal
                                    DAR 6708


                             May 18, 1994, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of San Luis Obispo County, No. CV43555, Harry
E. Woolpert, Judge.

COUNSEL: Lloyd E. Somogyi for Appellant.

Douglas C. Michie for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Stone S. J., P. J., with Gilbert and Yegan, JJ., concurring.

OPINION BY: STONE (S. J.), P. J.

OPINION

     In a partition action of the husband's military retirement benefits, the
trial court ordered that in order to receive her share of the  benefits, the
wife had to waive further spousal support, which she did. Congress later took
away her interest in her ex-husband's military retirement benefits.   Here we
affirm the trial court and hold that  the trial court had jurisdiction to order
spousal support in 1993 even though it had terminated spousal support in 1989
with no retention of jurisdiction. The trial court has inherent power to do
justice when an unforeseen change in the law destroys the effect of a prior
order.

   George Olsen appeals from a January 23, 1993 postjudgment order of the San
Luis Obispo Superior Court awarding Mary Olsen $400 in spousal support until his
death, her death, or her remarriage. He contends that the court lacked
jurisdiction to make the award due to its earlier order of termination of
jurisdiction, that the prior order terminating spousal support was res judicata,
and that nothing in the 1990 Federal Uniformed Services Former Spouse Protective
Act (FUSFSPA) amendment warranted reinstatement of spousal support. 1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   We will
refer to the parties by their first names for purposes of clarity, and not out
of disrespect.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   FACTS

   The parties were married April 25, 1947, and separated May 5, 1974. They
entered into a stipulated marital settlement agreement which was incorporated in
the interlocutory judgment. The agreement provided that George would pay $200
per month child support for the one minor child remaining at home and $400 per
month spousal support "for a period not to exceed eleven (11) years from the
date of the Interlocutory Decree of Dissolution or until the death or remarriage
of Petitioner whichever first occurs." The agreement was silent regarding
George's military pension for his service as an officer in the United States Air
Force and any pension rights he might have accrued at date of separation due to
his employment by the Federal Aeronautics Administration (FAA) as an air traffic
controller.

   May 28, 1985, Mary filed a motion to increase spousal support to $400, which
had decreased to $300 per month when their child reached majority, and to extend
George's obligation to pay for an indefinite time. The trial court found the
spousal support provision of the marital settlement agreement ambiguous and
continued George's spousal support obligation for an indefinite period. In 1988
Mary filed an independent partition action to establish her property interest in
George's military pension. 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   George
had retired and had to elect between the FAA and military pension. He chose the
military pension and received a lump sum cashout from the FAA.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   George defended against her suit on grounds that Mary had been aware of her
community interest in the pension at the time of their stipulated property
settlement agreement and had agreed she would not claim any interest in return
for other consideration. The court found Mary had a 41 percent interest in the
military pension. Since her share, then over $700 per month, was more than the
spousal support she was receiving, the court conditioned her receipt of the
pension benefit upon her waiver of spousal support. The court did not, however,
order that Mary was to receive any part of the sums already received by George.

   July 14, 1989, Mary filed a waiver of spousal support in the dissolution
action as follows: "Petitioner declares by this request that she knowingly,
intelligently, and voluntarily waives any right to spousal support she may have
after July 31, 1989, and understands that said support will be terminated and
she will never again be able to claim spousal support." The court entered the
following order: "It Is Hereby Ordered that spousal support previously ordered
shall now be modified and terminated, and that the court shall not retain
jurisdiction to modify or award spousal support after July 31, 1989. [P] This
Order is based on the judgment filed in Olsen v. Olsen , Case No. 64922."

   Congress amended the FUSFSPA of 1982 to provide that effective November 8,
1990, a court could not treat retired pay as property in any proceeding to
divide or partition any amount of retired pay of a member as the property of the
member and the member's spouse or former spouse if a final decree of divorce,
dissolution, annulment or legal separation affecting the member and the member's
spouse was issued before June 25, 1981, and did not treat, or reserve
jurisdiction to  treat, any amount of retired pay of the member as property of
the member and the member's spouse or former spouse. (10 U.S.C. § 1408(c)(1).)

   Faced with the prospect of now being without her share of the monthly pension
and having waived spousal support, Mary went back to court and asked it to
fashion a remedy to allow her to have either her share of the pension or spousal
support. The court ordered George to pay Mary $400 per month for spousal support
until the death of either party or Mary's remarriage.

   DISCUSSION

   1. Jurisdiction to Award Spousal Support

   George asserts that once an order for payment of spousal support has lapsed
or terminated with no reservation of jurisdiction to award further support, the
court has no power to modify the judgment by again awarding  spousal support.
(See generally, Tolle v. Superior Court (1937) 10 Cal.2d 95 [73 P.2d 607]; Long
v. Long (1941) 17 Cal.2d 409 [110 P.2d 383]; In re Marriage of Segel (1986) 177
Cal.App.3d 1030, 1041-1041 [223 Cal.Rptr. 430]; In re Marriage of Foreman (1986)
183 Cal.App.3d 129 [228 Cal.Rptr. 4].) Since the order of July 14, 1989,
unconditionally terminated Mary's spousal support award, George contends the
court acted in excess of its jurisdiction in making the order of January 29,
1993.

     Spousal support is modifiable unless the agreement or decree contains
specific language making it nonmodifiable. (In re Marriage of Foreman, supra,
183 Cal.App.3d at p. 131.) The California Supreme Court has held that where the
wording of an order is not explicit but a retention of jurisdiction may
reasonably be implied, a court should not terminate jurisdiction " 'unless the
record clearly indicates that the supported spouse will be able to adequately
meet his or her financial needs at the time selected for termination of
jurisdiction. . ..' " ( In re Marriage of Vomacka (1984) 36 Cal.3d 459, 467 [204
Cal.Rptr. 568, 683 P.2d 248], fn. omitted; see also In re Marriage of Benson
(1985) 171 Cal.App.3d 907, 909, 912-913 [217 Cal.Rptr. 589].) It was on this
basis that the trial court originally continued George's obligation to pay
spousal support in 1985. Mary had been a homemaker and had entered the job
market for the first time as a minimum wage earner. She had a continued need for
support, and the wording in the stipulated agreement was ambiguous.

     When Mary filed her complaint for partition and accounting, Congress had
legislatively overturned the United States Supreme Court's pronouncement in
McCarty v. McCarty (1981) 453 U.S. 210 [69 L.Ed.2d 589, 101 S.Ct. 2728], that a
state court could not divide a military pension as community property or
quasi-community property because the federal scheme of military retirement
benefits preempts state community property law. Under FUSFSPA, a state court
could treat disposable retired or retainer pay payable to a member for pay
periods beginning after June 25, 1981, either as property solely of the member
or as property of the member and his spouse according to the law of the
jurisdiction.  (10 U.S.C. § 1408(c)(1).)

   The trial court determined that Mary should not be entitled to both spousal
support and $700 per month in pension benefits as she was now gainfully employed
and George was no longer employed, nor was his present wife. Thus the court
imposed an election on Mary and reserved jurisdiction "to make such other and
further orders as are necessary to do justice." 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   We
granted Mary's request to take judicial notice of the orders and documents filed
in her partition action, case No. 64922.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     Under certain circumstances a court, sitting in equity, can set aside or
modify a valid final judgment obtained by fraud, mistake, or accident,  either
in an independent action in equity or on a motion in the original action. (
Kulchar v. Kulchar (1969) 1 Cal.3d 467, 470 [82 Cal.Rptr. 489, 462 P.2d 17, 39
A.L.R.3d 1368]; In re Marriage of Baltins (1989) 212 Cal.App.3d 66, 81 [260
Cal.Rptr. 403]; see also In re Marriage of Stevenot (1984) 154 Cal.App.3d 1051
[202 Cal.Rptr. 116].)   Mary brought her application for order to show  cause,
upon which the court's award of 1993 was based, in the original dissolution
action since it was in that action that she had agreed to waive and terminate
spousal support. Her waiver, however, was predicated upon the court's order in
the partition action. Her application was, essentially, a request for equitable
relief. Both the trial court and Mary had labored under the mistake of fact that
she would be able to collect her monthly share of the pension until her death
and the mistake of law that Congress would allow her to do so. Her election to
waive spousal support was specifically conditioned, under the court's order, on
receipt of her share of military benefits.

   The court concluded that Mary's waiver of spousal support was, for all
practical purposes, unknowing and illusory. (See In re Marriage of Moore (1980)
113 Cal.App.3d 22, 27 [169 Cal.Rptr. 619].) The court could, in its equitable
powers, set aside its former order as having been made through mistake and issue
a new order. 4 George points out that the trial court did not set aside its
former order nor did Mary specifically attack that order or request that it be
set aside. However inartful Mary's moving papers might have been, she did
request equitable relief and the court was within its discretion to grant it.
Although the court's tentative decision and judgment did not specifically set
aside the former order, it is clear from the court's ruling that that was the
court's intention. The new order supplanted the former order, a remedy for the
earlier wrong. (See Civ. Code, § 3523.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   In re
Marriage of Mansell (1989) 217 Cal.App.3d 219 [265 Cal.Rptr. 227], is
distinguishable. In Mansell, the parties believed at the time of their
interlocutory and final judgments that military disability pay was divisible as
community property, a belief at that time correct. ( Id., at p. 234.) The
reviewing court held that a mutual mistake of law alleged by the husband would
not allow him to later set aside the judgment since a "postjudgment,
nonretroactive reinterpretation of the law is not a basis for disturbing a final
judgment." (Ibid.) Here the court itself forced the waiver of spousal support to
which she would have otherwise been entitled under the court's prior order.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The prior order was not res judicata on Mary's entitlement to a further
award of spousal support.  Where exceptional circumstances require that the
consequences of res judicata be denied, the court can grant relief. ( In re
Marriage of Stevenot, supra, 154 Cal.App.3d at p. 1071.)   Mary was not
negligent in failing to discover facts or law. Neither Mary nor the court could
envision that Congress would soon take away what it had so swiftly given on the
heels of McCarty.

    2. FUSFSPA Provided Grounds for Court's Order

   George argues that nothing in the 1990 FUSFSPA amendment warranted
reinstatement of spousal support since if it were not for Congress, Mary would
not at anytime have had any basis for making claim to any part of his
retirement. He harks back to their original stipulation that Mary would receive
spousal support for 11 years and that she "improved" her situation by taking
advantage of developments in California law. He also asserts that at the time of
the court's order in January 1993, and at the time Congress effected its
amendment to FUSFSPA in 1990, the order of July 14, 1989, had long become final.
He asserts there is no legal or equitable basis for an award where jurisdiction
was given up three years earlier.

   George forgets that the trial court had extended jurisdiction over spousal
support in 1985 and that order was unchallenged. Thus the court had continuing
jurisdiction over the issue of spousal support. There is nothing inequitable in
allowing the court to set aside the order of 1989 based upon a law that later
evaporated. To paraphrase a well-known maxim, when the reason for the ruling
ceases, so should the rule itself. ( Civ. Code, § 3510.) The overall policy of
the law is fairness. (See Gardiner Solder Co. v. SupAlloy Corp., Inc. (1991) 232
Cal.App.3d 1537, 1543 [284 Cal.Rptr. 206].)

   Essentially George is in the same position in which he was before Mary filed
her action for partition of the military pension. While she may have benefited
for a short time from FUSFSPA, George has benefited by Congress's recognition
that his military benefits,  unmentioned and undivided in the 1974 final
judgment of dissolution, are now totally his. The 1990 amendment to FUSFSPA
retroactively deprived Mary of the benefits the court granted her in 1989.  Thus
it provided a basis for disturbing the court's order of 1989.

   The order is affirmed. Each party to bear his and her own costs.

   Gilbert, J., and Yegan, J., concurred.

   Appellant's petition for review by the Supreme Court was denied September 7,
1994.


                              28 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of WARREN and CAROL L. ROSENDALE.  WARREN
            ROSENDALE, Respondent, v. CAROL L. ROSENDALE, Appellant.

                                    G031925

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FOURTH APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION THREE

          119 Cal. App. 4th 1202; 15 Cal. Rptr. 3d 137; 2004 Cal. App.
            LEXIS 1018; 2004 Cal. Daily Op. Service 5824; 2004 Daily
                                Journal DAR 7878


                              June 28, 2004, Filed

NOTICE:

   NOT CITABLE--SUPERSEDED BY GRANT OF REVIEW

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:
Time for Granting or Denying Review Extended Rosendale, Marriage of, 19 Cal.
Rptr. 3d 823, 99 P.3d 1, 2004 Cal. LEXIS 9316 (Cal., 2004)
Review granted, Depublished by In re Marriage of Rosendale, 2004 Cal. LEXIS 9655
(Cal., Oct. 13, 2004)
Later proceeding at In re Marriage of Rosendale, 2004 Cal. LEXIS 11333 (Cal.,
Nov. 10, 2004)
Remanded by, Motion denied by, Review dismissed by Rosendale, Marriage of, 2005
Cal. LEXIS 7758 (Cal., July 13, 2005)

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Orange County, No. 00D000542, Sheila Fell
and Francisco F. Firmat, Judges.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports

(5) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 61--Property Rights of Parties--
Spousal Support--Premarital Waiver--Disabled or Ill Spouse.--The rule that one
spouse may be required to support an ill spouse in a manner contrary to the
terms of an interspousal agreement, is consistent with public policy as
expressed in several Family Code provisions other than Fam. Code, § 1612, subd.
(c). Fam. Code, § 4300, requires spouses to support each other, and, as stated
in Fam. Code, § 4250, subd. (a), spousal support is a serious legal obligation.
Furthermore, Fam. Code, § 4320, subds. (h) & (n), require a court, in
determining spousal support, to consider the health of the parties as well as
any  other factors the court determines are just and equitable. These statutory
provisions underscore the continued importance of spousal support in our modern
society, under appropriate circumstances. In that way, they also support the
application of that rule in the premarital agreement context. Courts cannot
permit one spouse to discard his or her disabled spouse without providing
spousal support, even when a spousal support waiver in a premarital agreement
would permit the same, if it would be unconscionable to do so at the time
enforcement of the waiver is sought.

   [11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (9th ed. 1990) Husband and Wife, § 16.]

COUNSEL: Carol L. Rosendale, in pro. per.; Domestic Law Project and Merritt L.
McKeon for Appellant.

Family Law Appellate Associates, Jeffrey W. Doeringer; Law Offices of Jeffrey W.
Doeringer and Jeffrey W. Doeringer for Respondent.

JUDGES: Moore, J., with Sills, P. J., and O'Leary, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: MOORE

OPINION

    MOORE, J.--A man and a woman entered into a premarital agreement shortly
before their marriage. Eight years later, the woman was in a life-shattering
automobile accident. At one point pronounced dead, the woman survived the
accident. However, she suffered brain damage, internal injuries and numerous
broken bones. She underwent fifteen reconstructive surgeries and is slated to
have many more.

   A couple of years after the accident, her husband decided to move on. He
filed a petition for dissolution of marriage. He also filed a motion to
determine the validity and enforceability of the premarital agreement. In
particular, he sought a determination that the waiver of spousal support was
enforceable. 1 The court entered an order granting the husband's motion.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1    The
provision at issue states: "In the event that the Parties terminate their
present cohabitation arrangement or initiate dissolution of marriage
proceedings, neither Party shall be liable to the other for living expenses,
food, shelter, medical, dental or pharmaceutical expenses, or other necessities
of life except as provided in this Agreement, and each Party waives and releases
all rights and claims to receive money, property, or support from the other
Party."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The wife later sought reconsideration of the order on the basis of a newly
enacted amendment to Family Code section 1612. The amendment added a new
subdivision, subdivision (c), to section 1612. The subdivision provides that a
premarital waiver of spousal support will not be enforced if enforcement would
be unconscionable at the time sought. The court denied the wife's motion and
entered judgment.

   The wife appeals. She contends that it is unconscionable to treat her as a
"disposable  spouse"--to cast her off without spousal support once she has been
damaged. She argues that it is against public policy to deny her spousal support
when she is mentally and physically devastated and unable to earn a living. We
agree. Family Code section 1612, subdivision (c) is a codification of existing
law. A court will not enforce a premarital waiver of spousal support, whether
the premarital agreement is executed before or after the effective date of
Family Code section 1612, subdivision (c), if at the time of enforcement it
would be unconscionable to do so. We reverse the order enforcing the spousal
support waiver and remand to the trial court. We affirm an order concerning the
status of certain jewelry and an order and a portion of the judgment concerning
attorney fees.

I

FACTS

A. Carol's Condition

   The wife, Carol Rosendale, in her declaration dated June 29, 2001, declared
in part as follows: "3. On August 23, 1997, while still married to [Warren], I
suffered a horrendous automobile accident due to no fault of mine. I suffered
life threatening injuries, I was unconscious for 11 days and the doctors gave me
survival odds of less than 1%. I was on life support full-time for 5 days. The
doctors don't even know how many bones I broke, because there were just too many
to count. I suffered permanent injuries that [require] continuous reconstructive
surgeries. As of today, I have medical bills [totaling] more than $
1,000,000.00. [¶] 4. Among my several injuries, I suffered a broken jaw bone,
which was split and lengthened, wrapped in [titanium] and screwed securely. This
is a permanent injury. [¶] 5. I also suffered a permanent retina damage to my
right eye, which is inoperable. I also have a [titanium] rod, the length of my
left leg with vertical and horizontal [titanium] staples screwed in place. As
for my right leg, all ligaments were severed and I have an Achilles tendon
cadaver implanted. [¶] 6. One of my most serious [injuries] is [damage] to the
frontal lobes, which has caused me to suffer from ... memory loss. I now have
[a]  terrible memory and have a difficult time retaining any information. [¶] 7.
I also suffer from acute pain continuously [which] requires continuous physical
therapy. All the injuries I suffered are permanent and I have had numerous
reconstructive surgeries, [and others] are yet to be performed. [¶] ... [¶] 9. I
have a lot of medical bills and [they] will probably increase as time goes on. I
am required to have several surgeries, however I am unable to afford them, since
[Warren] left me." 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2
Throughout this opinion, we refer to the parties, Carol and Warren Rosendale, by
their first names. This is done for the ease of the reader. No disrespect is
intended. (In re Marriage of Smith (1990) 225 Cal. App. 3d 469, 475-476, fn. 1
[274 Cal. Rptr. 911].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In addition, in her February 12, 2002 declaration, Carol stated: "2. In
August 1997 I was in a terrible traffic accident. [¶] 3. I was declared
clinically dead but, by a true medical miracle, I survived and have had to
endure 15 surgeries to date and still need more." She further declared: "7. I
incur about $ 5000.00 drug costs per year and insurance pays about $ 3000.00. My
husband does not pay anything toward the unpaid costs. [¶] 8. I need three to
four sessions of physical therapy per week but cannot afford them and my husband
refuses to pay them. [¶] 9. I have listed below the injuries I received in the
accident: [¶] a. skull-brain trauma ... damage which has  resulted in loss of
memory and the inability to concentrate. [¶] b. My face  was decloved (crushed)
which has resulted in my having to endure over $ 100,000.00 in reconstructive
surgery. I have continuing problems with my jaw (it had to be literally
rebuilt), inoperable damage to my retina, reduced vision, constant sinus
drainage, loss of smell, and partial hearing loss. [¶] c. chipped vertebrae, 3
herniated disks, and now it has been discovered that my neck actually was
broken. [¶] d. both arms were torn from their sockets and I am still undergoing
surgery to repair this. ... [¶] e. left wrist was crushed and as was my right
thumb. [¶] f. My chest was crushed with one lung collapsed. [¶] g. My breast
tissue was also injured and deformed due to open heart massages. [¶] h. I
endured abdominal surgeries for bleeding internally, a potentially fatal
condition. [¶] i. I suffered severe injuries to my lower back. [¶] j. My left
leg has extensive titanium parts now and my knee was rebuilt. [¶] k. I have over
104 inches of scarring. [¶] 1. I lost 2 centimetres [sic] from my leg. [¶] m.
All the tendons in my right leg were severed, part of my knee was replaced, and
I have an Achilles tendon implant. [¶] n. The arch of my left foot was broken
and I am required to wear special shoes. My right foot has constant and chronic
pain from a broken ankle. [¶] o. I have had to have extensive dental work
because of the accident. [¶] 10. I can no longer work, I am in need of constant
medication, and I am in constant and sometimes unbearable pain."

   Carol's own declarations are not the only information in the record
concerning her injuries. Her mental impairment was obvious to the court. In
denying Warren's request for attorney fees, the court stated that while Carol's
"conduct would otherwise be sanctionable, her less than coherent state of mind,
her confusion and the ensuing interruptions and delays of trial were caused by a
brain injury that occurred from an auto accident during the marriage." The court
also noted that there was "no conscious misconduct" on Carol's part. In a
separate order, the court found that Carol "had an accident in August of 1997
and that she suffered injury and was left with physical and mental injuries."

B. Procedural History

   On June 28, 2001, the court bifurcated the issue of the validity of the
premarital agreement 3 in an action for the dissolution of the marriage of Carol
and Warren. On August 24, 2001, the court ruled the premarital  agreement was
valid. The court neither ruled on whether the premarital agreement was
unconscionable at the time enforcement was sought nor ordered that a hearing
should be conducted on that issue.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3    Warren
contends that the appeal is untimely because Carol "refused" to seek an
interlocutory appeal. He cites former California Rules of Court, rule 1269.5 as
in effect in 2001. The version of the rule then in effect permitted a party to
seek either an order certifying that there was probable cause for immediate
appellate review of a bifurcated issue or writ review in the event a certificate
of probable cause was denied. We see nothing in that rule indicating that unless
a party sought a certificate of probable cause, he or she would lose the right
to file a postjudgment appeal. Furthermore, we observe that Carol filed a writ
petition (Rosendale v. Superior Court (Oct. 17, 2002, G031308) [nonpub. opn.])
with respect to the unconscionability of enforcement of the spousal support
waiver. This court declined to hear the writ petition because Carol had an
adequate remedy at law in the form of an appeal. Carol's appeal is not untimely.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Carol asked the court to reconsider the August 24, 2001 ruling under Code of
Civil Procedure section 1008, subdivision (c). 4  She also requested the court
to retroactively apply Family Code section 1612, subdivision (c), which became
effective on January 1, 2002. (Stats. 2001, ch. 286, § 1.) On April 5, 2002, the
court heard Carol's requests. The court declined to apply Family Code section
1612, subdivision (c) retroactively and refused to change the prior ruling. Once
more, although again requested to do so, the court neither ruled on whether the
premarital agreement was unconscionable at the time enforcement was sought nor
ordered that a hearing should be conducted on that issue. Judgment on reserved
issues was entered on February 11, 2003.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4    Code of
Civil Procedure section 1008, subdivision (c) provides: "If a court at any time
determines that there has been a change of law that warrants it to reconsider a
prior order it entered, it may do so on its own motion and enter a different
order."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Carol filed a notice of appeal from the judgment on reserved issues, the
August 24, 2001 ruling, and certain other rulings. She now asks this court to
review the trial court's interpretation of Family Code section 1612, subdivision
(c). She also argues the court never conducted a hearing on whether or not it is
unconscionable to enforce the premarital agreement under the circumstances at
the time of enforcement. In addition, Carol contends that the court erred in
finding a $ 15,000 necklace was Warren's separate property and asserts that she
should have been awarded attorney fees.

II

DISCUSSION

A. Uniform Premarital Agreement Act

   The Uniform Premarital Agreement Act (UPAA) as adopted in California, Family
Code section 1600 et seq., applies to premarital agreements executed on or after
January 1, 1986. (Fam. Code, § 1601.5) Of particular importance to this case are
sections 1612 and 1615.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5    All
subsequent statutory references are to the Family Code, unless otherwise
indicated.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Section 1612, subdivision (a) provides in pertinent part: "Parties to a
premarital agreement may contract with respect to all of the following: [¶]  ...
[¶] (7) Any other matter, including their personal rights and obligations, not
in violation of public policy or a statute imposing a criminal penalty."

   Section 1615, subdivision (a) provides: "A premarital agreement is not
enforceable if the party against whom enforcement is sought proves either of the
following: [¶] (1) That party did not execute the agreement voluntarily. [¶] (2)
The agreement was unconscionable when it was executed and, before execution of
the agreement, all of the following applied to that party: [¶] (A) That party
was not provided a fair, reasonable, and full disclosure of the property or
financial obligations of the other party. [¶] (B) That party did not voluntarily
and expressly waive, in writing, any right to disclosure of the property or
financial obligations of the other party beyond the disclosure provided. [¶] (C)
That party did not have, or reasonably could not have had, an adequate knowledge
of the property or financial obligations of the other party."

   Warren contends that the spousal support waiver contained in the premarital
agreement was not in violation of public policy, under section 1612, subdivision
(a)(7), and satisfies the requirements of section 1615, subdivision (a), because
it was not unconscionable when executed. Carol, on the other hand, says that it
is neither section 1612, subdivision (a)(7) nor section 1615, subdivision (a)
that governs in this instance. She contends it is section 1612, subdivision (c),
which was added by amendment in 2001, that is key. (Stats. 2001, ch. 286, § 1.)

   Section 1612, subdivision (c) provides: "Any provision in a premarital
agreement  regarding spousal support, including, but not limited to, a waiver of
it, is not enforceable if the party against whom enforcement of the spousal
support provision is sought was not represented by independent counsel at the
time the agreement containing the provision was signed, or if the provision
regarding spousal support is unconscionable at the time of enforcement. ..."
While both Warren and Carol were represented by independent counsel when the
premarital agreement was signed, Carol says the agreement is unenforceable under
subdivision (c) because enforcement would be unconscionable at this time. Carol
urges us to apply subdivision (c) to the premarital agreement at issue, even
though it was executed before the date subdivision (c) was added by amendment.
Warren says that the retroactive application of the provision is unwarranted.

   Warren is correct that "statutes do not operate retrospectively unless the
Legislature plainly intended them to do so. [Citations.]" (Western Security Bank
v. Superior Court (1997) 15 Cal.4th 232, 243 [62 Cal. Rptr. 2d 243, 933 P.2d
507].) Carol has provided no citation to any authority or legislative history to
show that the Legislature intended a retroactive application.  However, there
was no need for the Legislature to indicate such an intent. As we shall show,
the common law in effect at the time section 1612 was amended already provided
that a court would not enforce a premarital waiver of spousal support if at the
time enforcement was sought enforcement would be unconscionable. (See ibid.
[Legislature may amend statute to clarify, rather than change, existing law].)

B. Common Law

(1) Spousal support waivers not unenforceable per se

   In arguing the common law applicable to the enforceability of premarital
spousal support waivers, both parties cite the recent California Supreme Court
decision of In re Marriage of Pendleton & Fireman (2000) 24 Cal.4th 39 [99 Cal.
Rptr. 2d 278, 5 P.3d 839] (Pendleton). In that case, the court considered
whether premarital agreements containing spousal support waivers are
unenforceable per se. (Id. at p. 41.) It held that they are not. (Ibid.)

   In addressing the question before it, the court undertook a review and
analysis of the history of the UPAA. The court noted "that the Legislature had
deleted subdivision (a)(4) from section 3 of the Uniform Premarital Agreement
Act (Uniform Act) prior to adopting the act in 1985. The omitted subdivision
would have expressly permitted the parties to a premarital agreement to contract
with respect to modification or elimination of spousal support. [Citation.]" (
Pendleton, supra, 24 Cal.4th at p. 43, fn. omitted.) "When first introduced on
March 7, 1985, Senate Bill No. 1143 (1985-1986 Reg. Sess.) (Senate Bill 1143),
the California version of the Uniform Act, included subdivision (a)(4), and thus
listed among the permissible subjects of a premarital agreement 'the
modification or elimination of spousal support.' The spousal support waiver
provision was deleted by amendment. (Assem. Amend. to Sen. Bill No. 1143
(1985-1986 Reg. Sess.) Aug. 28, 1985.) The amendment of Senate Bill 1143 that
deleted subdivision (a)(4) simultaneously deleted a provision, subdivision (b)
of section 6 of the Uniform Act, which provided: 'If a provision of a premarital
agreement modifies or eliminates spousal support and that modification or
elimination causes one party to the agreement to be eligible for support under a
program of public assistance at the time of separation or marital dissolution, a
court,  notwithstanding the terms of the agreement, may require the other party
to provide support to the extent necessary to avoid that eligibility.' (Sen.
Bill No. 1143 (1985-1986 Reg. Sess.) Mar. 7, 1985; Assem. Amend. to Sen. Bill
No. 1143 (1985-1986 Reg. Sess.) Aug. 28, 1985.) As enacted, Senate Bill 1143
became Civil Code former section 5315, now Family Code section 1612.)" (Id. at
pp. 44-45.)

   In reflecting on the significance of the Legislature's deletion of
subdivision (a)(4) of section 3 of the Uniform Act, the Pendleton court made
mention of "two reports by the Assembly Subcommittee on Administration of
Justice. The first was prepared for an August 19, 1985, hearing on Senate Bill
1143. Senate Bill 1143 repealed prior statutory law governing premarital
agreements and enacted the Uniform Act. In the first report staff advised that
California courts did not permit enforcement of premarital agreements on spousal
support and recommended deletion 'to allow California case law to continue to
prevail on the issue of spousal support in premarital agreements.' (Assem.
Subcom. on Admin. of Justice, Rep. on Sen. Bill No. 1143 (1985-1986 Reg. Sess.)
for Aug. 19, 1985, hearing, p. 3.) [¶] The second report, prepared after the
amendment passed,  stated that as a result of the amendment 'California case law
would ... prevail on the issue of spousal support in premarital agreements. [¶]
There is a split in authority among the states as to whether a premarital
agreement may control on the issue of spousal support. Some states, such as
California, do not permit a premarital agreement to control this issue. ...'
(Assem. Subcom. on Admin. of Justice, Rep. on Sen. Bill No. 1143 (1985-1986 Reg.
Sess.) as amended Aug. 28, 1985, p. 3.)" (Pendleton, supra, 24 Cal.4th at p. 45
.)

   After reviewing this information, the Pendleton court stated that neither of
the two legislative reports provided an adequate explanation as to the
legislative purpose in omitting subdivision (a)(4) of section 3 of the Uniform
Act. (Pendleton, supra, 24 Cal.4th at p. 47.) The court pondered two
possibilities: "The Legislature may have intended to deny couples the right to
enter into any premarital agreement regarding spousal support by adopting what
the committee report erroneously described as the existing case law under which
premarital waivers would be per se unenforceable. Alternatively, the Legislature
may have concluded that policy governing spousal support agreements, having been
established by the court in the past, should continue to evolve in the court." (
Ibid.) Ultimately, the court concluded that the Legislature intended to permit
the common law governing premarital waivers of spousal support to evolve in the
courts. (Id. at p. 49.)

   The Pendleton court then examined the applicable common law. It completed its
analysis by stating that "the common law policy, based on assumptions that
dissolution of marriage is contrary to public policy and that premarital waivers
of spousal support may promote dissolution, is anachronistic." (Pendleton,
supra, 24 Cal.4th at p. 49.) "[W]hen entered into voluntarily by parties who are
aware of the effect of the agreement, a premarital waiver of spousal support
does not offend contemporary public policy. Such agreements are, therefore,
permitted under section 1612, subdivision (a)(7) ... ." (Id. at p. 53.) The
court then concluded: "We need not decide here whether circumstances existing at
the time enforcement of a waiver of spousal support is sought might make
enforcement unjust.  It is enough to conclude here that no public policy is
violated by permitting  enforcement of a waiver of spousal support executed by
intelligent, well-educated persons, each of whom appears to be self-sufficient
in property and earning ability, and both of whom have the advice of counsel
regarding their rights and obligations as marital partners at the time they
execute the waiver. Such a waiver does not violate public policy and is not per
se unenforceable ... ." (Id. at pp. 53-54, fn. omitted.)

(2) Spousal support waivers unenforceable when unconscionable

   So, according to Pendleton, premarital waivers of spousal support may be
valid. Warren states that Pendleton represents the applicable law in effect at
the time the premarital agreement at issue was executed and that it does not
provide an out for Carol. He does not read the case very closely, however. The
Pendleton court specifically stated that "[it was] not necessary to decide in
[the] case [before it] whether all such agreements are enforceable regardless of
the circumstances of the parties at the time enforcement is sought." (Pendleton,
supra, 24 Cal.4th at p. 41.) In other words, the court simply did not address
whether a spousal support waiver contained in an otherwise valid and enforceable
premarital agreement might be held unenforceable if it would be unconscionable
to enforce it at the pertinent time. That issue was not before the court.

   That does not mean that there was no answer to that question in existing case
law. The parties have ruminated as to the state of the common law before the
effective date of section 1612, subdivision (c), but have provided little
discussion of relevant cases other than Pendleton, supra, 24 Cal.4th 39.
Nonetheless, we observe that there are cases of interest that help us answer the
question.

   Wright v. Wright (1957) 148 Cal. App. 2d 257 [306 P.2d 536] (Wright) is one
of them. In that case, the wife had suffered from tuberculosis since the age of
16. The disease was far advanced and had taken a substantial toll on her. It
affected both of her lungs and resulted in the loss of a kidney. She was placed
in a sanatorium for a period of time. At some point, however, the disease became
arrested. (Id. at p. 259.)

   After dissolution proceedings were commenced, the husband and wife, with the
assistance of separate legal counsel, entered into a property settlement
agreement. Among other things, the parties agreed that the husband would pay the
wife $ 50 per month in spousal support for six months, and $ 25 per month
thereafter. Within the month following the execution of the agreement, the wife
saw a doctor, who informed her that a spot had appeared on her lung and that she
might be incapacitated. He opined that she would not be able to support herself.
The wife sought to be relieved of the spousal  support provision to which she
had agreed just the preceding month.  (Wright, supra, 148 Cal. App. 2d at pp.
261-262.)

   The court agreed to her request. It stated, generally, that " 'in actions for
divorce there is a very large discretion vested in the trial court in the
allowance of permanent support for the wife, where she is granted a divorce,
even in the face of contracts of settlement between the parties. Such contracts
must be subjected to the examination of a court in the divorce action and derive
their sanction from a decree made by the court with knowledge of all the facts.'
" (Wright, supra, 148 Cal. App. 2d at p. 268.) The  court held that it would be
unconscionable to enforce the spousal support provision against the wife under
the circumstances. (Id. at p. 271.) (See also Moog v. Moog (1928) 203 Cal. 406
[264 P. 490] [wife contracted tuberculosis and became blind].)

   Of course, property settlement agreements, such as the one in Wright, supra,
148 Cal. App. 2d 257, are distinct from premarital agreements, such as the one
before us, and the two are not treated identically under the law. (In re
Marriage of Friedman (2002) 100 Cal.App.4th 65, 72 [122 Cal. Rptr. 2d 412].)
Indeed, "[i]t is well settled that property settlement agreements occupy a
favored position in California. [Citation.]" (Ibid., italics added.) So, since
the spousal support provision contained in the property settlement agreement at
issue in Wright, supra, 148 Cal. App. 2d 257 was held unconscionable, a fortiori
the spousal support waiver found in the premarital agreement that Carol and
Warren signed may be held unconscionable. In Wright, the wife knew at the time
that she signed the agreement that she had suffered severe consequences from
tuberculosis, which was then dormant but able to recur. She was relieved of the
spousal support provision contained in that agreement shortly after executing
it. Here, Carol had no reason to foresee the occurrence of a debilitating
automobile accident some eight years after signing the agreement. The wife in
Wright had far more reason to anticipate the return of her tuberculosis than
Carol had to anticipate the horrendous turn of events in her life. It would
appear to be even more unconscionable to enforce a spousal support waiver
against Carol in her situation, than to enforce the spousal support provision to
which the wife in Wright agreed, considering that the wife in Wright had reason
to know she could have major medical needs and be unable to work in the future.

   The rule of Wright, supra, 148 Cal. App. 2d 257, that one spouse may be
required to support an ill spouse in a manner contrary to the terms of an
interspousal agreement, is consistent with public policy as expressed in several
Family Code provisions other than section 1612, subdivision (c). Section 4300
requires spouses to support each other, and, as stated in section 4250,
subdivision (a), spousal support is a serious legal obligation. Furthermore,
subdivisions (h) and (n) of section 4320, require a court, in determining
spousal support, to consider the health of the parties as well as any other
factors the court determines are just and equitable. (See also In re Marriage of
Cheriton (2001) 92 Cal.App.4th 269, 302 [111 Cal. Rptr. 2d 755] [trial court
must consider section 4320 factors]; Borelli v. Brusseau (1993) 12 Cal.App.4th
647, 651, 654 [16 Cal. Rptr. 2d 16] [one spouse must care for the other who is
ill].) These statutory provisions underscore the continued importance of spousal
support in our modern society, under appropriate circumstances. In that way,
they also support the continued application of the rule of unconscionability as
reflected in Wright, supra, 148 Cal. App. 2d 257 and the application of that
rule in the premarital agreement context. Courts cannot permit one spouse to
discard his or her disabled spouse without providing spousal support, even when
a spousal support waiver in a premarital agreement would permit the same, if it
would be unconscionable to do so at the time enforcement of the waiver is
sought.

C. Alternative Performance

   Yet Warren argues he has not failed to provide spousal support for Carol.
Rather, he says that while the premarital  agreement contains a waiver of
ongoing spousal support, it also contains an "alternative performance" in the
form of a $ 100,000 payment to Carol. However, as Carol points out, the
premarital agreement does not state that the payment to her of $ 100,000, if the
parties remained married for 10 years, was intended as lump sum payment in lieu
of ongoing spousal support. Rather, the provision in question specifically
states that "as consideration for CAROL'S prompt execution and transmittal to
WARREN of any and all documents reasonably necessary to confirm WARREN'S
separate property (including, but not limited to, quitclaim deeds), WARREN shall
make a lump sum payment to CAROL in the amount of $ 100,000.00 upon receipt of
all requested documents." The premarital agreement on its face shows that the
lump sum payment was intended to make certain that Carol relinquished any
conceivable claim to Warren's vast separate property holdings and executed any
documents necessary to tidy up title in his favor. 6 Nothing in the provision at
issue indicates that the lump sum was intended as an "alternative" method of
providing spousal support.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6    As the
premarital agreement reflects, when Carol and Warren married Warren owned five
real properties, substantial stock holdings in three companies, a 52 percent
interest in a general partnership, cash, and a "pleasure vessel."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

D. Characterization of Jewelry

   Carol also complains about the court's finding that a $ 15,000 necklace was
Warren's separate property. She says the court erred in holding that under
section 852 a writing would have been required in order to effectuate the
transmutation of the necklace from the separate property of Warren to the
separate property of Carol.

   As stated in section 852, subdivision (a), "[a] transmutation of ... personal
property is not valid unless made in writing by an express declaration that is
made, joined in, consented to, or accepted by the spouse whose interest in the
property is adversely affected." However, a writing is not required with respect
to a gift of jewelry that does not have a substantial value considering the
parties' marital circumstances and is used principally by the spouse to whom the
gift is made. (§ 852, subd. (c).) The court ruled: "Based on the circumstances
and the income of the parties, I find that this gift would have been a
substantial gift and so there should have been a writing. In the absence of a
writing, it came from separate property, it remains separate property,
especially since there's some evidence that she gave the gift back to him to
give to somebody else." In other words, the court found that the exception to
the writing requirement, as contained in section 852, subdivision (c), was
inapplicable because the gift was one of substantial value.

   Carol challenges this finding. She contends that the $ 15,000 necklace was
not of substantial value, by comparison to Warren's total assets. Without
citation to the record, Carol asserts his estate is worth "millions." While it
is evident from the schedules attached to the premarital agreement that Warren's
assets at the time of marriage were substantial, we do not have any information
on their total value, either then or at the time Warren offered the necklace to
Carol. "It is the appellant's burden to demonstrate the existence of reversible
error. [Citation.]" (Del Real v. City of Riverside (2002) 95 Cal.App.4th 761,
766 [115 Cal. Rptr. 2d 705].) It is also the appellant's burden to cite the
portions of the record that support his or her argument. (Schubert v. Reynolds
(2002) 95 Cal.App. 4th 100, 109 [115 Cal. Rptr. 2d 285].) In this case, Carol
has done neither.  Her testimony that the necklace was worth $ 15,000, unopposed
by any evidence of the dollar-value of Warren's assets, constitutes substantial
evidence to support the trial court's finding that the gift had substantial
value. (See In re Marriage of Dick (1993) 15 Cal.App.4th 144, 160 [18 Cal. Rptr.
2d 743] [substantial evidence standard applied to trial court findings].)

   Because we uphold the ruling of the trial court on the basis of section 852,
we need not address Warren's additional reasons why the ruling should be
affirmed.

E. Carol's Request for Attorney Fees

   At the trial court, Carol requested attorney fees in her favor and against
Warren under sections 271 and 2030. In her opening brief on appeal, Carol,
citing a minute order dated January 13, 2003, contends the trial court never
considered her request for attorney fees based on section 271 and fees should
have been awarded given her injury and disability. We disagree. The minute order
denying her fee request states in pertinent part: "Now [Carol] is requesting
attorney fees under [Family Code section] 2030. Her request for attorney fees is
denied on several grounds." While the minute order does not specifically
reference section 271 , in addition to section 2030, the order was clearly
intended to address each aspect of Carol's request.

   Section 271 enables a court to award attorney fees as sanctions based on the
conduct of a party during litigation. As one of the grounds for denying Carol's
fee request, the court, in its minute order, stated that "the vast majority of
the legal expenses were caused by [Carol's] litigation of the prenuptial
agreement and by her erratic conduct during the course of this litigation.
Though this court would not consider her conduct in granting an award of
attorney fees against her, this court is considering her conduct in exercising
its discretion. Accordingly, [Warren] will not be saddled with her attorney
fees." In other words, as to Carol's request that attorney fees be awarded to
her under section 271 due to Warren's conduct during litigation, the court found
that it was Carol's conduct, not Warren's, that caused the bulk of the
litigation expenses. The minute order is clear even without reference to section
271. However, we observe that the judgment on reserved issues, entered February
11, 2003, specifically states that the court denied Carol's request for attorney
fees under section 271. The record does not back up Carol's assertion that the
court did not consider her request.

   To the extent Carol may be basing her assertion of error on the court's
denial of her attorney fees request under section 2030, she has also failed to
show error on that ground. One of the bases for the court's denial of fees was
the attorney fees waiver contained in the premarital agreement. Carol has cited
no legal authority to show why the waiver of attorney fees should not be
enforced.

F. Pending Motion

   This court requested supplemental briefing with respect to the state of the
law prior to the amendment of section 1612 to include subdivision (c). In
addition to filing two supplemental letter briefs, Carol filed a motion to
augment the record to include two items, i.e., a copy of the minute order
pursuant to which the court denied her attorney fees request and a copy of a law
review article. She filed a prior motion to augment with respect to the same
minute order and this court granted the motion. Therefore, the request with
respect to that item is moot. The law review article is not an appropriate
subject for augmentation under California Rules of Court, rule 12(a),  inasmuch
as there is no indication that a copy was ever filed or lodged with the  trial
court. In the alternative to augmentation, Carol requests that we take judicial
notice of the law review article. We decline to do so. However, we deem the
article to be a part of Carol's supplemental briefing on appeal.

III

DISPOSITION

   We affirm the order with respect to the characterization of the jewelry and
the judgment and order with respect to Carol's request for attorney fees. We
reverse the order enforcing the waiver of spousal support. The matter is
remanded to the trial court to determine whether or not it is unconscionable to
enforce the waiver of spousal support against Carol considering her present
circumstances. The request to augment is moot as to the minute order and denied
as to the law review article. The request for judicial notice is also denied as
to the law review article, which we deem to be a part of Carol's supplemental
briefing on appeal. The trial court, in its discretion, shall determine whether
to award to Carol her attorney fees and costs incurred on appeal.

   Sills, P. J., and O'Leary, J., concurred.


                              29 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In re the Marriage of ROBERTA W. and WALTER E. OUSTERMAN,
             JR. WALTER E. OUSTERMAN, JR., Appellant, v. ROBERTA W.
                             OUSTERMAN, Respondent.

                                  No. A070817.

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FIRST APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION TWO

          46 Cal. App. 4th 1090; 54 Cal. Rptr. 2d 403; 1996 Cal. App.
          LEXIS 591; 96 Cal. Daily Op. Service 4730; 96 Daily Journal
                                    DAR 7493


                             June 25, 1996, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Alameda County Superior Court. Super. Ct. No. 497387-6. Hon.
Roderic Duncan, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports

(1a) (1b) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 67--Spousal Support--
Modification--Jurisdiction--After Last Date Original Order Required Support to
Be Paid.  --The trial court had jurisdiction to entertain a former wife's
request to modify spousal support in February 1995, under Fam. Code, § 4336
(except upon written agreement or court order terminating support, court retains
jurisdiction indefinitely for dissolution of marriage of long duration),
notwithstanding that the support order provided for monthly support payments
from Feb. 1, 1986, until Jan. 31, 1995, and was not modifiable "on or before
January 31, 1995" except by written agreement. Fam. Code, § 4336, applies to
cases "pending on January 1, 1988, in which the court order is subject to
modification," and an order may be modified unless prohibited by agreement (Fam.
Code, § 3651, subds. (a), (d)). The lack of a specifically demonstrated intent
to preclude modification required a finding that the agreement was modifiable
after the date specified. Although the husband asserted that requests for
extensions beyond the date specified had to be made before that date, the
agreement had no clear termination date. Moreover, the trial court would not
have been without jurisdiction even if the order was interpreted under Civ.
Code, former § 4801, subd. (b), which stated that support terminated at the end
of the period specified unless an order retained jurisdiction; as long as
retention could reasonably be implied, the order would be interpreted as
retaining jurisdiction.

   [See 10 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (9th ed. 1989) Parent and Child, § 326Y;
11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (9th ed. 1990) Husband and Wife, § 289.]

(2) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 67--Spousal Support--Modification--
Jurisdiction--Policy Reasons for Retention.  --A spousal support order should be
interpreted to retain jurisdiction where retention of jurisdiction can
reasonably be implied. First, especially in the case of marriages of long
duration, orders providing for termination of spousal support on a specified
date are disfavored unless the record clearly indicates the supported spouse
will be able to adequately meet his or her financial needs at the time specified
for termination. Second, where there is an ambiguity in the language of a
marital property agreement it must be decided in favor of the right to spousal
support. Finally, language in a spousal support order suggesting that
modification of its terms will be permitted is routinely interpreted as a
retention of the court's fundamental jurisdiction to modify and, upon a proper
factual showing, to extend the spousal support provisions contained therein.

COUNSEL: John E. Manoogian and Bryce C. Anderson for Appellant.

Diana Richmond and M. Dee Samuels for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Kline, P. J., with Lambden, J., and Hitchens, J., *
concurring.

*   Judge of the San Francisco Superior Court, assigned by the Chief Justice
pursuant to article VI, section 6 of the California Constitution.

OPINION BY: KLINE

OPINION

     KLINE, P. J.

   The question presented by this appeal is whether, under the circumstances of
this  case, the trial court has jurisdiction to entertain a motion to modify
spousal support brought after the last date the original order required support
to be paid. We conclude the trial court does have jurisdiction to proceed.

   STATEMENT OF THE CASE AND FACTS

   The 25-year marriage of Roberta and Walter Ousterman, Jr., was dissolved on
December 18, 1978, at which time respondent wife was awarded $ 3,500 per month
as spousal support. Respondent unsuccessfully sought a modification of spousal
support in 1980. Another motion for modification in 1985 resulted in a
stipulated order filed on February 21, 1986. This order provides for monthly
support payments of $ 5,250, "commencing February 1, 1986, . . . and continuing
until either party's death, [respondent's] remarriage, or January 31, 1995,
whichever first occurs." After provisions regarding cost of living adjustments
to the support payments, a loan from appellant to respondent to be repaid out of
the support payments, and maintenance of insurance on appellant's life with
respondent as the beneficiary, the order provided in paragraph 6: "The spousal
support payments provided for hereinabove and the requirements of paragraphs 1
through 5 shall not be modifiable on any ground by [respondent] on or before
January 31, 1995, by any  means, including court order, except by the written
agreement of both parties. Said spousal support payments shall be subject to
subsequent downward modification or revocation by [appellant] on or before
January 31, 1995 by court order only upon [appellant's] voluntary or involuntary
retirement or upon [appellant's] voluntary or involuntary termination of
employment by   Kaiser Cement Corporation."

   On February 21, 1995, after receiving a letter dated February 1, 1995, in
which appellant indicated he considered his spousal support obligation
terminated, respondent filed a motion for modification of spousal support
seeking support of $ 7,000 per month. Appellant contended the trial court's
jurisdiction to award spousal support terminated on January 31, 1995, and
discovery was stayed pending resolution of this jurisdictional question. After a
hearing on May 2, 1995, the trial court concluded it had jurisdiction under
Family Code section 4336 because there was no written agreement of the parties
providing for termination of spousal support. On July 7, 1995, the court issued
a certificate of probable cause for immediate appellate review of the
jurisdictional issue.

   DISCUSSION

      Family Code section 4336 1 provides in pertinent part: "(a) Except on
written agreement of the parties to the contrary or a court order terminating
spousal support, the court retains jurisdiction indefinitely in a proceeding for
dissolution of marriage or for legal separation of the parties where the
marriage is of long duration." This statute applies to proceedings "filed on or
after January 1, 1988" and to proceedings "pending on January 1, 1988, in which
the court has not entered a permanent spousal support order or in which the
court order is subject to modification." (§ 4336, subd. (d)(2).)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   All
statutory references are to the Family Code unless otherwise specified.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Section 4336 continues without substantive change former Civil Code section
4801, subdivision (d), as amended in 1987. (Stats. 1987, ch. 1086, § 2, p.
3678.) Prior to January 1, 1988, the effective date of the 1987 amendments,
Civil Code section 4801, subdivision (d), provided, "An order for spousal
support terminates at the end of the period provided in the order and shall not
be extended unless the court in its original order retains jurisdiction."
(Stats. 1985, ch. 1358, § 3, p. 4822.) This was the version of the statute in
effect at the time the 1986 spousal support order was entered in the present
case.

   The support order in this case does not contain language expressly
terminating support at a stated time but rather provides for a period of support
and  prohibits respondent from modifying its terms "on or before" the end of
that period. Appellant concedes that under current law the trial court would
have jurisdiction to extend spousal support because the spousal support order
does not expressly terminate jurisdiction. He contends, however, that
jurisdiction cannot be found under section 4336 because retroactive  application
of this statute is not authorized by its terms and would unconstitutionally
impair his contract rights under the 1986 stipulated order. According to
appellant, by providing for payments until January 31, 1995, without expressly
retaining the court' jurisdiction over support, under the law in effect at the
time it was entered, the support order terminated on January 31, 1995, and could
not be extended after that date.

   As noted above, section 4336 applies to cases "pending on January 1, 1988, in
which the court has not entered a permanent spousal support order or in which
the court order is subject to modification." (Italics added.) A spousal support
order may be modified or terminated unless a written agreement or oral agreement
entered into in open court between the parties prohibits modification or
termination. (§ 3651, subds. (a), (d).  2 ) Appellant takes the view that the
support order in this case was not modifiable within the meaning of section 4336
because the order prohibits respondent from obtaining a modification of its
terms. What the order states, however, is that its provisions "shall not be
modifiable on any ground by [respondent] on or before January 31, 1995, by any
means, including court order, except by the written agreement of both parties."
The inclusion of the date in this provision must be given significance. Had the
parties intended to preclude any possibility of modification either before, on
or after January 31, 1995, they could have said so by simply stating the
agreeement was nonmodifiable. By providing for nonmodifiability until a certain
date, the order appears to allow the possibility of modification after the
specified date.  3 (See In re Marriage of Brown (1995) 35 Cal. App. 4th 785, 787
[41 Cal. Rptr. 2d 506] [provision in support order that after payment of the
required 60th monthly installment of support " '[husband's] obligation to pay
spousal support to [wife] shall terminate forever and no Court shall have any
jurisdiction to extend the within award of spousal support either as to amount
or duration after said date' " interpreted as necessarily acknowledging
jurisdiction was retained before expiration of the specified period to modify
support to extend beyond the period].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   At the
time the parties' spousal support order was entered, Civil Code section 4811,
subdivision (b), similarly provided for continuing jurisdiction to modify a
spousal support order absent a contrary written agreement or oral agreement
entered in open court.
3   Additionally, as respondent points out, the order was expressly modifiable
by appellant under certain circumstances. That appellant chose not to exercise
his right to seek modification upon his retirement does not render the order
itself nonmodifiable.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In In re Marriage of Jones (1990) 222 Cal. App. 3d 505 [271 Cal. Rptr. 761],
the parties' agreement set out a schedule of declining amounts of   support to
be paid through specified dates ending on October 1, 1989, then stated that all
payments would terminate " 'on the death of either party, the remarriage of the
recipient, or October 1, 1989.' " ( Id. at p. 508.) The agreement did not
expressly contemplate or preclude modification. Although an intent to forbid
modification might have been inferred from comparison of the absence of
reference to modification in the spousal support section of the agreement with a
reference in the child support section of the agreement to the " 'power of the
court to modify,' " the court concluded that under former Civil Code section
4811 an agreement could be found nonmodifiable only if there was a specific
expression of an intent to prevent modification. (222 Cal. App. 3d at pp.
509-511.) Similarly, in the present case, while the absence of specific
reference to modification after January 31, 1995, leaves the order somewhat
ambiguous, the lack of a specifically demonstrated intention to preclude
modification requires a finding that the agreement was in fact modifiable after
the specified date. It follows that the trial court properly found jurisdiction
under section 4336.  4

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4
Appellant's contention that retroactive application of section 4336
unconstitutionally impairs his contract rights under the stipulated support
agreement is based on his interpretation of the agreement as providing for
absolute termination of support no later than January 31, 1995. Given our
interpretation of the agreement as allowing modification after January 31, 1995,
appellant's argument necessarily fails.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    In any event, we cannot agree with appellant's conclusion that the trial
court  would have been without jurisdiction if the support order was interpreted
under former Civil Code section 4801, subdivision (b). While that statute stated
that spousal support would terminate at the end of the period specified in the
order unless the order retained jurisdiction, case law made clear that the
retention of jurisdiction did not have to be express; on the contrary, as long
as a retention of jurisdiction could reasonably be implied, a support order
would be interpreted as retaining jurisdiction. ( In re Marriage of Vomacka
(1984) 36 Cal. 3d 459, 467 [204 Cal. Rptr. 568, 683 P.2d 248].) A termination of
spousal support would be found only where there was " 'explicit language' " of
termination. ( Id. at p. 465; In re Marriage of Zlatnik (1988) 197 Cal. App. 3d
1284, 1290, fn. 7 [243 Cal. Rptr. 454].)

   In In re Marriage of Vomacka, supra, the support agreement provided for
payment of a specified monthly sum " 'until further order from the Court, the
death of either party, the remarriage of [wife], or August 1, 1982, whichever
first occurs. The Court shall retain jurisdiction regarding spousal support
until September 1, 1984, at which time [wife's] right to request spousal support
from [husband] shall terminate forever.' " (36 Cal. 3d at pp. 461-462, italics
omitted.) Before September 1, 1984, the wife sought and obtained a modification
extending support beyond that date. The court rejected the  husband's argument
that jurisdiction over support ended on the date specified in the original
agreement, finding that the court had jurisdiction until that date to modify the
award, including to extend the duration of support. Vomacka found that although
the agreement did not expressly retain jurisdiction to extend support beyond the
termination date specified, it allowed for future modification by permitting the
wife to request support until September 1, 1984, and by providing for support to
continue " 'until further order from the Court.' " (36 Cal. 3d at p. 470.)

     Vomacka discussed several policy reasons for its conclusion that a support
order should be interpreted to retain jurisdiction where retention of
jurisdiction can reasonably be implied. First, especially in the case of
marriages of long duration, orders providing for absolute termination of spousal
support on a specified date are disfavored unless the record clearly indicates
the supported spouse will be able to adequately meet his or her financial needs
at the time specified for termination. (36 Cal. 3d at p. 467.) Second, "where
there is an ambiguity in the language of a marital property agreement it must be
decided in favor of the right to spousal support." ( Id. at p. 469.) Finally,
"language in a spousal support order suggesting that modification of its terms
will be permitted is routinely interpreted as a retention of the court's
fundamental jurisdiction to modify and, upon a proper factual showing, to extend
the spousal support provisions contained therein." ( Id. at p. 470.)

     These policies militate in favor of finding a retention of jurisdiction in
the present case. Undisputedly, this was a marriage of long duration. We have
already determined that the language of the order can and should be interpreted
as allowing modification after January 31, 1995, and this provision for
modification necessarily implies a retention of jurisdiction. Vomacka was extant
at the time the 1986 support agreement was drafted and appellant's attorney was
thus aware, or should have been, that retention of jurisdiction to extend
support did not have to be expressly stated as long as it could be reasonably
found in the language of a support order. 5 Thus, for example, in In re Marriage
of Benson (1985) 171 Cal. App. 3d 907 [217 Cal. Rptr. 589], the wife obtained an
extension of support beyond the eight year period originally specified in the
parties' support agreement even though the original agreement did not expressly
retain jurisdiction. There, the agreement provided for a monthly amount to be
paid until the death of either party, the wife's remarriage, " 'until modified
by a court of competent jurisdiction,' " or until the expiration of eight years.
The court viewed its decision that support could be extended as compelled by
Vomacka and  supported by policy considerations.  6 (In re Marriage of Benson,
supra, 171 Cal. App. 3d at p. 914.) As described more recently, Vomacka and its
progeny "reached the conclusion that, to be effective, language in a marital
agreement intended to preclude jurisdiction to extend support had to be stated
rather explicitly. Implications drawn from the agreement suggesting possible
intention to reserve jurisdiction would be favored." (In re Marriage of Jones,
supra, 222 Cal. App. 3d at p. 512.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   Since the
support agreement was drafted by appellant's attorney, ambiguity in it should be
construed against appellant. ( Civ. Code, § 1654.)
6   Benson explained the policies supporting extension of support: "While
compelled by Vomacka, our conclusion is grounded in sound public policy as well:
It is wholly unrealistic to expect 'the parties to a marital settlement
agreement [to] anticipate and provide for unexpected changes of circumstances
which may invalidate the expectations reflected in the agreement.' (In re
Marriage of Hufford [(1984)] 152 Cal. App. 3d 825, 829 [199 Cal. Rptr. 726].)
Flexibility in the administration of judgments which will affect the lives of
the parties far into the future, especially after very lengthy marriages, is to
be encouraged; in few other fields do the equities scream quite so loudly as
they do in family law. Moreover, the state's own interests are involved: The
elderly and infirm and those otherwise unable to support themselves should not
become burdens on society where it is just and proper for former spouses to
provide support." (In re Marriage of Benson, supra, 171 Cal. App. 3d at p. 913.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Appellant construes Vomacka as establishing the limiting rule that requests
for extensions of support beyond the date specified in the original agreement
must always be made before that date. Indeed, where a support order contains a
termination date, the court loses jurisdiction on that date and cannot
afterwards award further support.  (36 Cal. 3d at p. 474; In re Marriage of Katz
(1988) 201 Cal. App. 3d 1029, 1035 [247 Cal. Rptr. 562] [where spousal support
agreement contained provision that support obligation would " 'fully and finally
terminate automatically' " on specified date, court lacked jurisdiction to award
further support on motion brought after specified date]; In re Marriage of Segel
(1986) 177 Cal. App. 3d 1030 [223 Cal. Rptr. 430] [agreement provided for an
expressly nonmodifiable total amount of spousal support, payable over a period
of five years; court without jurisdiction to reinstate support on motion brought
after support obligation fully satisfied]; 7 Maben v. Superior Court (1967) 255
Cal. App. 2d 708, 710 [63 Cal. Rptr. 439] [where spousal support was to continue
for 11 months " 'at which time alimony shall terminate,' " court without
jurisdiction to order support on  motion brought after expiration of specified
period].) In the present case, however, the spousal support agreement does not
contain a clear termination date. Although it provides for payments to be made
until a specified date, it nowhere states that no support may be ordered after
that date. Rather, as discussed above, by stating that no modification of its
terms could be sought by respondent "on or before January 31, 1995," the order
implies that modification could be sought after that date. Unlike the orders in
Vomacka, Segel, or Maben, the order in the present case prohibited modification
before the date specified in the order but allowed modification after that date.
8

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   The trial
court found In re Marriage of Segel, supra, to be the case closest on its facts
to the present one, and specifically distinguished Segel in its order finding
jurisdiction. The support agreement in Segel was similar to the one in this case
in that it provided for payment of support until the death or remarriage of the
wife or expiration of five years, whichever occurred first. In Segel, however,
the parties had agreed to a lump sum of support, to be paid in installments over
the five years, and the record contained a discussion in the trial court which
made clear that both parties considered the support obligation to be
nonmodifiable except for termination by death, remarriage or complete
performance.  (177 Cal. App. 3d at p. 1032, fn. 1.) The existence of this
evidence that the parties intended termination of support after the five-year
period was significant to the Segel court's determination that there was no
jurisdiction to entertain a motion for support brought after expiration of the
period. ( Id. at p. 1040, 1032, fn. 1.) The present case does not similarly
involve clear language of termination.
8   Appellant attempts to interpret the prohibition against modification "on or
before January 31, 1995" not as a retention of jurisdiction but as a
"recognition" that if respondent brought "a timely motion to extend support" she
could not modify the payments due between February 1, 1986, and January 31,
1995. The premise of this argument--that respondent could have sought extension
of the duration of support by moving before expiration of the specified
period--is faulty. Paragraph 6 of the support order provides: "The spousal
support payments provided for hereinabove and the requirements of paragraphs 1
through 5 shall not be modifiable on any ground by [respondent] on or before
January 31, 1995, by any means, including court order, except by the written
agreement of both parties." Since extension of the period of support would have
entailed a modification of the requirements of paragraph 1 of the order
(providing for payments until either party's death, respondent's remarriage, or
January 31, 1995), paragraph 6 necessarily precluded respondent from seeking
extension of support during the specified period.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     In sum, the trial court properly determined it had jurisdiction to
entertain respondent's request for modification of spousal support under section
4336, but its determination that it retained jurisdiction would have been proper
even under the law as it existed at the time the support agreement was reached.

   The judgment is affirmed and the matter remanded to the trial court for
further proceedings.

   Lambden, J., and Hitchens, J., * concurred.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*   Judge of
the San Francisco Superior Court, assigned by the Chief Justice pursuant to
article VI, section 6 of the California Constitution.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Appellant's petition for review by the Supreme Court was denied October 2,
1996. Chin, J., did not participate therein.


                              30 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In re the Marriage of SHANNAN AVIS and STEVE SHALOM LISS.
              SHANNAN AVIS LISS, Appellant, v. STEVE SHALOM LISS,
                                  Respondent.

                                  No. B056133

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SECOND APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION FIVE

          10 Cal. App. 4th 1426; 13 Cal. Rptr. 2d 397; 1992 Cal. App.
          LEXIS 1312; 92 Cal. Daily Op. Service 9203; 92 Daily Journal
                                   DAR 15203


                           November 10, 1992, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Los Angeles County, No. D243230, Dana Senit
Henry, Judge.

COUNSEL: Capretz & Kazdan and Andrew D. Weiss for Appellant.

Bernard Grossman for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Jackson, J., star1 with Boren, Acting P. J., and Grignon, J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: JACKSON, J.

OPINION

     In this marital dissolution action, appellant Shannan Avis Liss (Wife)
appeals from the trial court's further judgment on reserved issues. She contends
the court improperly retained jurisdiction to award spousal support to
respondent Steve Shalom Liss (Husband).  Finding no merit to this argument, we
affirm.

   Wife's petition for dissolution of marriage and Husband's response were filed
on Judicial Council official forms.  In Wife's petition, by checking the
appropriate boxes, Wife requested that spousal support be awarded to her. In his
response, by leaving the boxes blank, Husband failed to request that  spousal
support be awarded to him.  On November 1, 1989, the court filed judgment
dissolving the marriage. Pursuant to the parties' marital settlement agreement
and stipulations the court at that time decided certain property and other
issues.  That judgment expressly "reserve[d] jurisdiction over the issue of
spousal support" and other issues.

   Trial of the reserved issues came on for hearing October 1, 1990.  In his
trial brief, Husband urged that despite a marriage of over 13 years, the court
should not award spousal support nor retain jurisdiction to do so. Husband's
argument was that both parties were employed during the marriage, and indeed
that Wife's employment history was more stable than Husband's.

   At trial, the court on its own motion suggested that in light of the length
of the marriage the court should retain jurisdiction as to spousal support for
either party.  Wife objected to retaining jurisdiction over spousal support for
Husband, on the ground Husband had not requested spousal support in his initial
response to Wife's petition.  Wife argued the court had no "jurisdiction" to
retain jurisdiction over spousal support for Husband.  The court indicated it
would retain jurisdiction unless there was a clear-cut waiver from Husband.
Husband stated he would not waive the right to ask for support in the future.

    The court did not award spousal support but retained jurisdiction over the
issue of spousal support for each party until either party's death, remarriage
or further order of the court.  The court's statement of decision explained that
it retained jurisdiction over the issue of spousal support for each party based
on the length of the marriage, and despite Husband's prior failure to request
spousal support in his response, because Husband did not waive spousal support.

    DISCUSSION

     In arguing that the court had no jurisdiction to retain jurisdiction over
spousal support for Husband, Wife misplaces reliance on In re Marriage of Lippel
(1990) 51 Cal.3d 1160 [276 Cal.Rptr. 290, 801 P.2d 1041]. Lippel was a default
case.  The court applied the rule of Code of Civil Procedure section 580 that
the relief granted upon default cannot exceed what was demanded in the
complaint.  The court held that child support could not be ordered by default
where the wife failed to request it in her judicial council form petition for
dissolution. ( In re Marriage of Lippel, supra, 51 Cal.3d at p. 1169.) The
instant case does not involve a default. Both parties were represented and
involved in preparation of the November 1, 1989, dissolution judgment and in the
October 1, 1990, trial of the reserved issues. Due process, the concern in the
Lippel case, was satisfied by Wife's presence and opportunity to object to the
court's retention of jurisdiction. ( In re Marriage of Wells (1988) 206
Cal.App.3d 1434, 1440 [254 Cal.Rptr. 185].)

   Unlike a default case, a trial court has wide discretion in a nondefault
matter to permit parties to amend their pleadings in furtherance of justice or
to conform to proof.  ( Code Civ. Proc., § 469, 473, 576; Cal. Rules of Court,
rule 1215(d) [amendment of family law pleadings]; 5 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (3d
ed. 1985) Pleadings, § 1121, 1139, pp. 537-539, 553-554.) The trial court did
not abuse its discretion in concluding that in light of the lengthy marriage,
jurisdiction should be retained as to each party despite Husband's initial
failure to request spousal support. Of course, a trial court also has discretion
to deny amendments to pleadings if amendment would not be in furtherance of
justice.  The trial court could have limited retention of jurisdiction to
spousal support for Wife, if it found Husband waived spousal support by failing
to request it and by opposing retention of jurisdiction in his trial brief. The
instant appeal, however, involves only Wife's erroneous contention that the
trial court had no jurisdiction to exercise its discretion.

   Wife contends the court's reservation of jurisdiction in the November 1,
1989, judgment must be interpreted as limited to spousal support for Wife,
since, as of that date, Husband had not requested spousal support. This argument
is not persuasive.  The 1989 dissolution judgment expressly reserved
jurisdiction "over all other issues," including "the issue of spousal support."
( Civ. Code, § 4515, subd. (c).) 1 Having expressly reserved jurisdiction, the
court retained jurisdiction to permit Husband to amend his pleading in
furtherance of justice.   Reservation of jurisdiction over  spousal support
after a lengthy marriage is supported by strong  policy.  ( In re Marriage of
Vomacka (1984) 36 Cal.3d 459, 467-473 [204 Cal.Rptr. 568, 683 P.2d 248]; In re
Marriage of Jones (1990) 222 Cal.App.3d 505, 513-514 [271 Cal.Rptr. 761]; Civ.
Code, § 4801, subd. (d).) Ambiguous orders should be interpreted in favor of
reservation of jurisdiction. ( In re Marriage of Vomacka, supra, at p. 469.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Civil
Code section 4515, subdivision (c) provides: "A judgment granting a dissolution
of the status of the marriage shall expressly reserve jurisdiction for later
determination of all other pending issues."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     A case cited by Wife, Cochran v. Cochran (1970) 13 Cal.App.3d 339, 344 [91
Cal.Rptr. 630], is distinguishable.  In Cochran, a prior interlocutory judgment
of divorce failed to provide for alimony.  The appellate court held the
interlocutory judgment had become final and, absent a reservation of
jurisdiction in that judgment, the trial  court lacked jurisdiction to vacate or
modify the prior judgment.  Here the court did expressly reserve jurisdiction in
the 1989 judgment.

   The judgment is affirmed.

   Boren, Acting P. J., and Grignon, J., concurred.


                              31 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             In re the Marriage of KARLENE I. and WILLIAM C. LAUBE.
          WILLIAM C. LAUBE, Respondent, v. KARLENE I. LAUBE, Appellant

                                  No. H001247

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

           204 Cal. App. 3d 1222; 251 Cal. Rptr. 745; 1988 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 898


                               September 30, 1988

NOTICE:     Certified for partial publication - Pursuant to California Rules of
Court, rules 976 and 976.1, this opinion is certified for publication with the
exception of part B.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Santa Clara County, No. 391086, Mark E.
Thomas, Jr., Judge.

COUNSEL: Kathryn Carey, Jerry Y. Fong and Carey & Carey for Appellant.

Gerald Z. Marer, Alan G. Marer, John F. Schuck and Marer, Marer & Schuck for
Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Kline, P. J., with Benson, J., and Rouse, J., + concurring.

+   Retired Associate Justice of the Court of Appeal sitting under assignment by
the Chairperson of the Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: KLINE

OPINION

     Appellant Karlene I. Laube appeals from the trial court's refusal to
reinstate her spousal support payments or to award her attorney's fees and
costs.

I.  Background

   Appellant (hereinafter, Karlene) and her ex-husband, William Laube
(hereinafter, William), were married in 1961 and separated in February of 1977.
During the marriage Karlene worked outside the home only occasionally; William
provided the primary source of support.  The couple had five children, three of
whom were minors at the time of the hearing below.

   The parties' interlocutory decree for dissolution of marriage, entered on
February 4, 1980, ordered William to pay $ 150 per child each month as child
support. It further provided that William pay $ 750 per month spousal support
for a two-year period, or until August 1, 1981; thereafter, spousal support was
to be reduced to $ 600 per month and to continue indefinitely at that rate until
further order of the court, remarriage or cohabitation by Karlene.

    William lost his job in August 1982.  He continued to pay child and spousal
support until March 1983 when he sought a reduction in his spousal support
obligation. On April 18, 1983, spousal support was reduced to $ 100 per month
for the months of May and June 1983; the matter came on for further proceedings
on July 13, 1983, at which time the support payments were suspended.

   William's spousal support obligation was stayed until the order could be
reviewed in September 1983.  By the time of the hearing on September 23, 1983,
William had purchased and begun operating a restaurant in Pleasanton.  He had
remarried and his new wife, a partner in the restaurant venture, was earning $
2,000 a month.  The court ordered William to pay $ 175 per child per month in
child support, refused to award any spousal support, but reserved jurisdiction
over the support issue.

   Karlene subsequently filed a motion seeking an increase in child support,
restoration of her spousal support and an award of attorney's fees and costs.
The motion was heard on February 26, 1985.  Karlene's expert testified that
William's 1984 income -- based on his salary as an employee of the restaurant
and the additional cash available to him as a partner in the business --
amounted to $ 56,000.  He further asserted that William's new wife earned $
52,000 in 1984.  In comparison, William's expert witness stated that the 1984
income for William and his new wife totalled $ 48,000 -- $ 2,000 per month for
each of them.

   Additional testimony revealed that Karlene's income was approximately $ 1,500
per month; the monthly expenses for herself and the children totalled nearly $
5,000. 1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Karlene's
expenses had increased dramatically after she was forced to sell the family
home, which cost approximately $ 450 a month, and rent a home at a cost of $
1,825.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     William testified that, pursuant to a prenuptial agreement, he and his new
wife each maintained their property as separate property.  His income and
expense declaration listed monthly expenses of $ 3,778 for himself, his new wife
and her 19-year-old son who lived at home.

   The court determined that William's net monthly income was $ 4,500.  It
ordered William to pay increased child support of $ 500 per month for each of
the three minor children, but refused to reinstate spousal support or to award
attorney's fees and costs to Karlene.

   On July 24 the court conducted a hearing concerning Karlene's objections to
its decision and thereafter issued an order affirming its child support award.
It took under submission the issues of spousal support and attorney's fees
pending the court's receipt of letters setting forth the parties' contentions.

    On August 14, 1985, the court issued an order affirming its reservation of
spousal support and its denial of attorney's fees and costs to Karlene.  Karlene
filed a timely notice of appeal on October 11, 1985; William cross-appealed on
November 11, 1985, but thereafter abandoned the appeal.

II.  Discussion

   A.  Failure to Reinstate Spousal   Support



    A trial court has broad discretion to order appropriate spousal support. (
In re Marriage of Morrison (1978) 20 Cal.3d 437, 454 [143 Cal.Rptr. 139, 573
P.2d 41].) However, that discretion is not unlimited: "In order not to be
arbitrary, discretion must be exercised along legal lines, taking into
consideration the circumstances of the parties, their necessities and the
financial ability of the [supporting spouse.] Discretion is abused whenever, in
its exercise, the court exceeds the bounds of reason, all circumstances before
it being considered.  ( In re Marriage of Lopez (1974) 38 Cal.App.3d 93, 114 . .
. .)" ( In re Marriage of Melton (1980) 107 Cal.App.3d 559, 564 [165 Cal.Rptr.
753].)

   The interlocutory decree issued at the termination of the marriage provided
for two years of support at $ 750 a month and $ 600 a month thereafter.  In 1983
William sought and received a reduction of his spousal support obligation based
on his inability to pay due to the loss of his job.  The record does not
definitely indicate whether the ultimate suspension of support was based in part
on  Karlene's decreased need for such assistance.  When in September 1983
William once again appeared able to afford the support payments the court
refused to restore the spousal support, despite its apparent recognition (as
evidenced by the increase in child support) that Karlene's expenses had
increased, not diminished, since the initial support award was made.

   For purposes of simplification, there are, then, four relevant trial court
rulings: (1) the interlocutory judgment of February 4, 1980, providing, inter
alia, that William was to pay spousal support of $ 750 per month for two years
and $ 600 per month thereafter; (2) the orders of April 18, 1983, and July 13,
1983, temporarily reducing and then superseding William's obligation to provide
spousal support but reserving jurisdiction; (3) the order of September 23, 1983,
denying Karlene's motion to reinstate and increase spousal support; and (4) the
court's order of April 14, 1985, again refusing to reinstate spousal support.

   Karlene's principal contention on appeal is that the most recent refusal to
reinstate spousal support was error "because the sole reason for the temporary
suspension of the original indefinite spousal support award [i.e., the  order of
July 13, 1983], William's unemployment status, was no longer applicable at the
hearing [on the 1985 motion to reinstate spousal support]."

    The main problem with this argument is that it ignores the intervening order
of September 23, 1983, denying Karlene's initial motion to reinstate. In regard
to this order, Karlene requested neither a statement of decision ( Code Civ.
Proc., § 632) nor "appropriate factual determinations with respect to the
circumstances" ( Civ. Code, § 4801, subd. (a)).  Nor did Karlene appeal the
order, which must therefore be treated as a final judgment.  Consequently, there
is no evidentiary yardstick with which to measure Karlene's claim that the sole
reason for eliminating spousal support was William's temporary unemployment and
that her needs never diminished during any material time.

   Karlene also made no request for a statement of decision or "factual
determinations" under Civil Code section 4801, subdivision (a), regarding the
1985 denial of spousal support that is the subject of this appeal.

   Considering that the record is silent regarding Karlene's needs in 1983 2 and
whether they were any different in 1985, Karlene's failure to request findings
is fatal, because it means the judgment appealed from must be presumed correct
and that "[all] intendments and presumptions are indulged to support it on
matters as to which the record is silent, and error must be affirmatively
shown." (9 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (3d ed. 1985) Appeal, § 268, p. 276; accord In
re Marriage of Flaherty (1982) 31 Cal.3d 637, 645 [183 Cal.Rptr. 508, 646 P.2d
179].) Without specific findings from the court below we are compelled to assume
the court determined Karlene was no longer entitled to support (perhaps because
her asserted financial needs were unrealistic) despite William's renewed ability
to pay. Accordingly, despite the discomforting failure of the record to
satisfactorily explain the trial court's reasoning, we are compelled to affirm
its order denying Karlene's motion to reinstate spousal support.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Though,
as respondent points out, in refusing to reinstate spousal support, the judge
presiding at the 1983 hearing labelled Karlene's expense declaration "totally
unrealistic" and observed that she had "an unrealistic grasp of the financial
situation."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    As an obiter dictum, we think it appropriate to suggest a method by which
trial judges can help avoid the problem that materialized in this case and
facilitate the adjudication of motions to modify spousal or child support
payments due to unemployment or some other economic setback that is not likely
to permanently restrict the supporting spouse's ability to pay. Where this is
so, and where the modification is not ordered on the basis of a changed level of
need, the trial judge can order that support payments be  decreased by an
appropriate amount only for the duration of the disability. 3 For example, where
support is reduced because of the unemployment of the supporting spouse, the
court could make an order for the reduced amount, specifying that the original
amount will be reinstated upon his or her reemployment.  Such an order should be
without prejudice to either party to seek support in a higher or reduced amount
should the new employment justify such a change.  The virtue of this procedure
is not only that it will eliminate the need for subsequent hearings in many
instances, and thereby conserve judicial resources, but that it relieves the
supported spouse of the burden of going forward and the burden of proof that the
supporting spouse's ability to pay the amount of spousal support originally
decreed has been restored, burdens it is ordinarily unfair to impose on that
party.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Such an
approach is similar to that urged by the Legislature when a trial court allows
certain income deductions for hardship expenses.  As provided in Civil Code
section 4725, subdivision (c), "Whenever possible, the court shall specify the
duration that any deduction shall be in effect."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   B.  Denial of Attorney's Fees and Costs

   [Text Omitted.] NOT CERTIFIED FOR PUBLICATION.

   The judgment is affirmed.


                              32 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In re the Marriage of GEORGINA J. and CHARLES W. MAXFIELD.
           GEORGINA J.  MAXFIELD, Appellant, v. CHARLES W. MAXFIELD,
                                   Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 50536

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                 Division Four

            142 Cal. App. 3d 755; 191 Cal. Rptr. 267; 1983 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1683


                                  May 6, 1983

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Santa Clara County, No. 344486, James
Duvaras, Jr., Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1a) (1b) Judgments § 93--Res Judicata--Collateral Estoppel--Judgment by
Stipulation--Failure to Appeal Order or Move to Set Aside.  --An order of
modification in the spousal support component of an interlocutory judgment of
dissolution, which had been entered in reliance upon the parties' stipulation,
became res judicata where no party appealed the order or made a timely motion to
set it aside pursuant to Code Civ. Proc., § 473.

(2a) (2b) Judgments § 64--Void Judgments and Collateral Attack--Recitals--Order
by Stipulation--Order of Modification in Spousal Support Component of
Interlocutory Judgment of Dissolution--Findings of Changed Circumstances.  --In
a contempt proceeding by a former wife to enforce spousal support, the trial
court erred in vacating an order of modification in the support component of an
interlocutory judgment of dissolution, which had been entered in reliance upon
the parties' stipulation, where the basis of such vacation was that the order of
modification failed to recite findings of changed circumstances. Such findings
need not be made where the parties have stipulated to the terms of the
modification and their attorneys have drafted and submitted to the court the
order ultimately entered. Failure to recite findings of changed circumstances
did not render the order void, since the court had jurisdiction over the parties
and subject matter, and the defect was merely a nonjurisdictional mistake of
law.

(3a) (3b) Judgments § 43--Opening and Vacating Judgments and Defaults--Grounds--
Extrinsic Mistake--Complaining Party Contributing to Mistake.  --A judgment or
order which has become final may be set aside upon grounds of extrinsic fraud or
mistake but not upon intrinsic fraud or mistake. Accordingly in a contempt
proceeding by a former wife to enforce spousal support, an order of modification
in the support component of an interlocutory judgment of dissolution, which had
been entered in reliance upon the parties' stipulation, could not be set aside
on the ground there was no finding of changed circumstances. Where the husband
had every opportunity during the modification proceedings to require the wife to
show changed circumstances, the absence of proof and findings on this subject
was intrinsic mistake. Even were it possible to characterize the mistake as
extrinsic, the husband was not entitled to equitable relief, since by his
stipulation to the modification order he contributed to the fraud or mistake
giving rise to the judgment thus obtained, and his attack on the order was
barred by equitable estoppel as well as by res judicata.

(4a) (4b) (4c) Judgments § 66--Void Judgments and Collateral Attack--Grounds--
Excess Jurisdiction.  --In a marital proceeding in which the court rendered an
interlocutory judgment of dissolution reserving "jurisdiction to award spousal
support" until July 15, 1978, the court did not exceed its jurisdiction by
issuing an order of modification in the spousal support component of the
interlocutory judgment, pursuant to the parties' stipulation, on July 11, 1978,
which modification extended spousal support well beyond July 15, 1978. The
interlocutory judgment provided the court's authority to take new judicial
action concerning spousal support would expire on July 15, 1978. It did not
purport to limit the nature of relief it could grant provided it acted within
that jurisdictional period. The term "award" as used in the 1976 interlocutory
judgment included the concept of extension of support. A court "awards" spousal
support through a discrete judicial act and the "award" is consummated upon the
entry of the order or judgment, although the obligations and entitlement
established in that order may continue for a substantial period thereafter.

(5) Judgments § 63--Void Judgments and Collateral Attack--Presumptions--Judicial
Error.  --Judicial error in rendering judgments is never presumed.

(6) Judgments § 65--Void Judgments and Collateral Attack--Adjudication of
Jurisdiction.  --In a marital proceeding, in which the court rendered an
interlocutory judgment of dissolution reserving "jurisdiction to award spousal
support" until July 15, 1978, the court necessarily determined that an extension
of support constituted an "award" within the meaning of the interlocutory
judgment, when it rendered an order modifying spousal support on July 11, 1978.
As so construed, the interlocutory judgment authorized the court to extend
support beyond July 15, 1978, provided it acted before that date.

COUNSEL: John F. Foley for Appellant.

Edward S. Miller for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Christian, J., with Caldecott, P. J., and Poche, J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: CHRISTIAN

OPINION

     Georgina J. Maxfield appeals from an order in this marital proceeding
dismissing a contempt proceeding and vacating a prior order for  modification of
the interlocutory judgment of dissolution. Reversal is required as to both
actions.

   The procedural sequence must be related in detail.  On August 3, 1976, the
superior court rendered an interlocutory judgment of dissolution of the marriage
of Georgina and Charles Maxfield, reserving jurisdiction to award spousal
support for a period of two years.

   The judgment recognized a community property interest in husband's pension
from Lockheed, his employer at that time.  It provided that wife was entitled to
a portion of payments ultimately received by husband according to the following
formula:

   One-half of each payment received by respondent upon his retirement from
Lockheed computed as follows:

   13/Total months employed by Lockheed X Monthlypayment from Lockheed

   The decree also awarded wife "$ 425.00 per month as spousal support beginning
on July 15, 1976, for three months, and $ 325.00 per month beginning on October
15, 1975 [sic] for three months." The court reserved "jurisdiction to award
spousal support" until July 15, 1978.

   On July 11, 1978, pursuant to a stipulation executed by the spouses and their
attorneys, the court modified the interlocutory judgment. The stipulated
modification provided that husband pay wife a lump sum of $ 1,000 immediately
and spousal support of $ 750 per month commencing July 1, 1978.  It further
stated that monthly spousal support "shall be increased by 8 percent" each year.
The wife waived all interest in husband's pension "including the right to
receive any portion thereof as set forth in . . .  the Interlocutory Judgment"
of 1976.

   Initially husband complied with the support provisions of the modification.
But in December 1979 he ceased making spousal support payments and, on advice of
counsel, informed wife that he considered the 1978 modification void and
nonbinding.  Wife sought a contempt sanction to enforce the decree as modified.
After hearing testimony the court terminated the contempt hearing and vacated
the order of modification on the ground that "the order of modification was
entered in reliance upon the partys' [sic] stipulation and not upon a showing of
substantial change of circumstances." The present appeal followed.

    I

     Where no party appeals or otherwise directly attacks, within the applicable
statutory periods, a modification in the spousal support component of an
interlocutory judgment of dissolution, that modification becomes final for
purposes of res judicata and collateral estoppel. ( Wodicka v. Wodicka (1976) 17
Cal.3d 181, 188-189 [130 Cal.Rptr. 515, 550 P.2d 1051].)   The court
nevertheless vacated the order of modification, because the order failed to
recite findings of changed circumstances.  It is true that such findings are
ordinarily a prerequisite for a modification of spousal support. ( In re
Marriage of Clements (1982) 134 Cal.App.3d 737, 745-746 [184 Cal.Rptr. 756].) It
is not error, however, to make no findings of changed circumstances where the
parties have stipulated to the terms of the modification and their attorneys
have drafted and submitted to the court the order ultimately entered.  (Compare
In re Marriage of Davis (1983) 141 Cal.App.3d 71, 75-76 [190 Cal.Rptr. 104]
[findings mandatory "where requested"].)   Doctrines of waiver and invited error
will generally bar even direct attack upon an order or judgment entered pursuant
to stipulation.  Here, husband did not appeal the order or make a timely motion
under Code of Civil Procedure section 473 to set it aside.  The stipulated
modification thereby became res judicata. ( In re Marriage of Buckley (1982) 133
Cal.App.3d 927, 934-936 [184 Cal.Rptr. 290]; see also In re Marriage of Mahone
(1981) 123 Cal.App.3d 17, 21-22 [176 Cal.Rptr. 274].)

     The claimed error does not render the order void. The court had
jurisdiction over the parties and subject matter. In the sense that any error is
contrary to law, the court arguably exceeded its "authority," as husband claims,
by not expressly finding changed circumstances before modifying spousal support.
The defect, however, is merely a nonjurisdictional mistake of law and the order
remains immune from collateral attack. Haldane v. Haldane (1962) 210 Cal.App.2d
587 [26 Cal.Rptr. 670], is instructive.  There, the husband maintained that an
interlocutory dissolution decree was void due to the wife's failure at trial to
introduce corroborative evidence of her residency.  The court found this
deficiency in the showing of the prevailing party at the prior proceeding did
not prevent that determination from being res judicata. "Although this oversight
was judicial error which would have required a reversal if an appeal had been
taken from the judgment [citation], it does not follow that the interlocutory
decree was void." ( Id., at p.  597.) Similarly, in Badillo v. Badillo (1981)
123 Cal.App.3d 1009 [177 Cal.Rptr. 56], a court ordered an allegedly unequal
division of community property and thereby exceeded its jurisdiction by awarding
relief in excess of that demanded in the complaint.  "The relief awarded is
within the scope of the prayer for disposition of property 'according to law,'
even though the offset failed to comply with Civil Code section 4800.  The error
is subject to reversal or modification on appeal, but is not void or subject to
collateral attack [citations]." ( Id., at p. 1012.)

     A judgment or order which has become final may be set aside upon grounds of
extrinsic fraud or mistake.  ( In re Marriage of Park (1980) 27 Cal.3d 337, 342
[165 Cal.Rptr. 792, 612 P.2d 882]; Kulchar v. Kulchar (1969) 1 Cal.3d 467,
471-473 [82 Cal.Rptr. 489, 462 P.2d 17, 39 A.L.R.3d 1368]; In re Marriage of
Carletti (1975) 53 Cal.App.3d 989, 992-993 [126 Cal.Rptr. 1]; In re Marriage of
Nicolaides (1974) 39 Cal.App.3d 192, 198 [114 Cal.Rptr. 56].) "Intrinsic fraud
or mistake, on the other hand, is not grounds for relief.  When the fraud or
mistake '"goes to the merits of the prior proceedings, which should have been
guarded against by the plaintiff at that time,"' relief is denied in deference
to the stronger policies of finality of judgments and res judicata.
[Citations.]" ( In re Marriage of Wipson (1980) 113 Cal.App.3d 136, 141-142 [169
Cal.Rptr. 664].)  As husband had every opportunity during the modification
proceedings to require the wife to show changed circumstances, the absence of
proof and findings on this subject is intrinsic mistake.  Even were it possible
to characterize any mistake here as extrinsic, equitable relief of this sort
would be unavailable to husband here as, by his stipulation to the modification
order, "the complaining party has contributed to the fraud or mistake giving
rise to the judgment thus obtained." ( Kulchar v. Kulchar, supra, 1 Cal.3d 467,
473; In re Marriage of Carletti, supra, 53 Cal.App.3d 989, 992-993.)

   II

   Husband maintains this court should affirm the order vacating the
modification as the court lacked jurisdiction to extend  spousal support beyond
July 15, 1978. 1 Because the disposition, if proper, must be affirmed even if
the ground upon which the court relied was not correct, we now examine husband's
argument.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   During
the hearing on the matter, husband contended, as he has here, that the 1976
decree barred any extension of support beyond the two-year period in which
jurisdiction was reserved. Wife maintained the 1978 modification was nonetheless
res judicata. The court discussed neither argument but included in its order the
following finding: "That this court has jurisdiction to modify obligations to
pay spousal support."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The interlocutory judgment of 1976 states that "jurisdiction to award
spousal support is reserved for a period of two years commencing July 15, 1976."
The modification order providing for monthly support payments of $ 750 (to be
increased 8 percent each year) was filed July 11, 1978.  Husband, relying upon
Civil Code section 4801, subdivision (d), as construed in In re Marriage of
Morrison (1978) 20 Cal.3d 437 [143 Cal.Rptr. 139, 573 P.2d 41], argues that the
court, by its 1976 decree, divested itself of jurisdiction to extend spousal
support beyond July 15, 1978.

     "Collateral attack is proper to contest lack of personal or subject matter
jurisdiction or the granting of relief which the court has no power to grant
[citations]." ( Armstrong v. Armstrong (1976) 15 Cal.3d 942, 950 [126 Cal.Rptr.
805, 544 P.2d 941]; see also Becker v. S.P.V. Construction Co. (1980) 27 Cal.3d
489, 493 [165 Cal.Rptr. 825, 612 P.2d 915]; Moffat v. Moffat (1980) 27 Cal.3d
645, 654 [165 Cal.Rptr. 877, 612 P.2d 967].) There is a jurisdictional aspect to
the alleged error in the 1978 modification. But the claimed defect does not
necessarily open the order to collateral attack. "[Even if] the defect in the
divorce judgment was jurisdictional, . . . in the absence of unusual
circumstances 'collateral attack will not be allowed where there is fundamental
jurisdiction [i.e. of the person and subject matter] even though the judgment is
contrary to statute.' [Citation.] Where some of the parties have relied on, or
changed their position in accordance with the former judgment, a court may deny
collateral attack. [Citations.]" ( Armstrong v. Armstrong, supra, 15 Cal.3d 942,
951; see also Moffat v. Moffat, supra, 27 Cal.3d 645, 657.) The court in 1978
had "fundamental jurisdiction": it had personal jurisdiction over the parties
and it had subject matter jurisdiction over spousal support. (Compare In re
Marriage of Smith (1982) 135 Cal.App.3d 543 [185 Cal.Rptr. 411] [judgment set
aside where personal jurisdiction lacking due to defective service of process].)
The fault, if any, was in the extent of the relief granted.  Finally, there was
detrimental reliance upon the validity and finality of the stipulated
modification in the form of the wife's waiver of her community property interest
in husband's Lockheed pension.

   Courts have frequently applied the principle articulated in Armstrong to
accord res judicata finality to judgments defective in more serious respects
than the 1978 modification assertedly was.  In In re Marriage of Steiner (1979)
89 Cal.App.3d 363 [152 Cal.Rptr. 612], it was alleged that Colorado statutes
precluded a court of that state from entertaining a petition for modification of
a California support decree as Colorado was not the "home state" of the wife and
child.  Even if the Colorado court had no authority to order modification, its
decision was res judicata. "A violation of such statutory provisions rises only
to the level of judicial error within the Colorado court's fundamental
jurisdiction. Since it appears the Colorado decree is final, such
nonjurisdictional error does not subject that decree to collateral attack.
[Citation.]" ( Id., at p.  373; see also In re Marriage of Toth (1974) 38
Cal.App.3d 205 [113 Cal.Rptr. 131].) Similarly, in Frank v. Frank (1969) 275
Cal.App.2d 717, 718 [80 Cal.Rptr. 141], a court, in direct contravention of then
applicable statutes had entered an interlocutory judgment of divorce which
provided for alimony for a period of four years "irrespective" of whether the
wife remarried.  The appellate court adhered to "the general rule in this state
that a judgment or order is res judicata even though  contrary to statute where
the court has jurisdiction of both the subject matter and the parties." ( Id.,
at p. 722.) Frank continued that in failing to appeal the alimony portion of the
judgment, the husband had accepted its benefits. "By failing to challenge the
alimony award on appeal, he encouraged plaintiff to rely upon its validity,
preserved for his own benefit the automatic  four-year termination provision
which would obviously have been highly favorable to him had plaintiff not
remarried within that period and, at the same time, gambled upon the fact that
if she did remarry within four years, he could attack the alimony award
collaterally and prevail in any event." ( Id., at p. 723.) In re Marriage of
Toth, supra, 38 Cal.App.3d 205, echoes the equitable reasoning of Frank .  "The
rationale of all of these cases is that California public policy will not permit
a litigant 'to blow hot and cold.' He cannot take the benefits of a divorce
decree when it suits his purpose and then reverse his position and repudiate the
divorce decree on the ground that it is void for want of jurisdiction (even
though it may be) when it is no longer profitable or to his advantage to do so."
( Id., at p. 212.)

   Even more compelling equitable considerations than those present in Steiner,
Frank or Toth, preclude collateral attack in this case.   Husband did not merely
neglect to appeal a determination in a contested proceeding, he stipulated to
the disposition and thereby helped procure the alleged error.  Consequently,
both res judicata and equitable estoppel bar his attack upon the 1978
modification.

     Even were collateral attack permitted here, examination of the 1976 and
1978 orders establishes that the court did not exceed its jurisdiction when it
extended spousal support. In re Marriage of Morrison, supra, 20 Cal.3d 437, 453,
disapproves the reasoning of In re Marriage of Patrino (1973) 36 Cal.App.3d 186
[111 Cal.Rptr. 367], and In re Marriage of Lopez (1974) 38 Cal.App.3d 93 [113
Cal.Rptr. 58] (upon which husband relies in part) that  Civil Code section 4801,
subdivision (d), evidences a policy favoring termination of jurisdiction over
spousal support. Unless it is very clear that the supported spouse will be able
to meet his or her needs in the future, "the court should not 'burn its bridges'
and fail to retain jurisdiction." ( In re Marriage of Morrison, supra, 20 Cal.3d
437, 453; see also In re Marriage of Dennis (1973) 35 Cal.App.3d 279, 285 [110
Cal.Rptr. 619]; In re Marriage of Rosan (1972) 24 Cal.App.3d 885, 896 [101
Cal.Rptr. 295].) The purpose of section 4801, subdivision (d), (like its
predecessor, former § 139.7) is to ensure that a court puts both spouses on
notice concerning whether or not jurisdiction is retained.  "The trial court was
required to expressly indicate in its order if it wished to retain jurisdiction
. . . .  If the court retained jurisdiction for only a limited period of time,
that time period was expressly set forth in the order, so the supported spouse
knew the time within which he or she had to petition for additional relief." (
In re Marriage of Morrison, supra, 20 Cal.3d 437, 446-447.) The 1976 decree,
unlike that in Morrison, did not provide that all spousal support obligations
"terminate absolutely" upon a certain date ( id., at p. 441); instead, it
reserved "jurisdiction to award spousal support" until July 15, 1978.  The court
thereby provided that its authority to take new judicial action concerning
spousal support would expire on that date.  It did not purport to limit the
nature of relief it could grant provided it acted within that jurisdictional
period.

   It is preferable that a reservation of jurisdiction unambiguously indicate
that the authority to extend support beyond the period originally provided is
among the powers retained.  (See In re Marriage of Richmond (1980) 105
Cal.App.3d 352 [164 Cal.Rptr. 381].) Nonetheless, we are confident that "award"
as used in the 1976 interlocutory judgment includes the concept of extension of
support.  A court "awards" spousal support through a discrete judicial act; the
"award" is consummated upon the  entry of the order or judgment although the
obligations and entitlements established in that order may continue for a
substantial period thereafter.

     Error is never presumed.  Husband, however, asks us to do so in two
respects: First, he urges, in effect, that the trial court ignored the judicial
policy disfavoring arbitrary termination of jurisdiction and intended by its
1976 order to foreclose the possibility of any spousal support obligations
beyond July 15, 1978.  (See In re Marriage of Morrison, supra, 20 Cal.3d 437; In
re Marriage of Keeva (1977) 66 Cal.App.3d 512 [136 Cal.Rptr. 82].) Husband's
argument requires us to conclude further that in 1978 the court misinterpreted
its own prior decree. Wodicka v. Wodicka, supra, 17 Cal.3d 181, provides a
useful comparison.  There, the original interlocutory judgment provided for
child support "until the child reaches her majority." A subsequent order
provided that support payments would terminate when the child reached the age of
21.  The Supreme Court held the father could not obtain collateral relief from
the latter order on the ground that "majority" was legislatively defined as the
age of 18.  "In the case at bench, the issue of the intent of the court in its
use of the word 'majority' in the July 5, 1972, order increasing child support
payments was before the court in a proceeding to increase support payments in
April 1974.  The court's order that child support was to continue until Kimberly
reached 21 years of age was a determination that the word 'majority' in the July
5, 1972, order meant 21 years. Although the order of April 26, 1974, was
appealable [citations], defendant did not take an appeal from it.  Accordingly,
when the order became final, the issue of the meaning of the word 'majority' in
the order of July 5, 1972, became res judicata between the parties." ( Id., at
pp. 188-189.)    In modifying spousal support in 1978, the court necessarily
found that an extension of support constituted an "award" within the meaning of
its 1976 decree. Its resolution of this legal question is itself a determination
to which res judicata and collateral estoppel attach.  As so construed, the 1976
decree authorized the court to extend support beyond July 15, 1978, provided it
acted before that date.

   We conclude that it was error to vacate the 1978 modification and to withhold
enforcement of the decree as modified.

    Reversed.


                              33 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             In re the Marriage of BETTY and SALVADOR ANSARA CHALA.
          BETTY CHALA, Respondent, v. SALVADOR ANSARA CHALA, Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 54225

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Five

            92 Cal. App. 3d 996; 155 Cal. Rptr. 605; 1979 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1741


                                  May 14, 1979

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Ventura County, No. D81884, Marvin H.
Lewis, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 101--Permandent Child Support Orders--
Determination of Amount--Adequacy of Excessiveness.  --In a dissolution
proceeding, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in ordering the husband
to pay $ 125 per month child support for the wife's minor child adopted by the
husband during the course of the marriage, where, although the husband was 62
years of age and unemployed at that time, the husband could be gainfully
employed by his sons at their service station and would receive Social Security
benefits, and where he resided with one of his sons who paid all of his
expenses, and there was no charge to the husband for rent.

(2) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 48--Division of Community and
Quasi-community Property--Equal Division.  --Under the California Family Law Act
( Civ. Code, § 4800 et seq.), community property assets and community
obligations must be divided equally on dissolution of marriage when the
community assets exceed the community obligations.

(3) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 61--Support of Other Party--Payment of
Obligations.  --It is correct in appropriate cases to include in spousal support
orders a provision that the payments, or portions thereof, may be paid to third
parties for overdue or future debts. Since an order of spousal support is for
future living expenses of the supported spouse, payment of continuing
obligations to third parties related to such needs is clearly a form of spousal
support. Also, past unpaid debts for living expenses can be ordered paid so that
future payments of spousal support will not be depleted by creditors demanding
payment of the spouse receiving support award. Finally, payments of such debts
without reimbursement from the community are authorized if they constitute in
reality a discharge of the paying spouse's duty t0 support the other spouse.

   [See Cal.Jur.3d, Family Law, § 735; Am.Jur.2d, Divorce and Separation, § 609
.]

(4) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 63--Support of Other Party--Guiding
Considerations--Discharge of Community Obligations.  --In a dissolution of
marriage proceeding, the trial court committed reversible error in requiring the
husband to pay all of the community liabilities consisting of past due
obligations incurred by the community business, and in labeling one-half of the
payments as spousal support for the wife, where the award of spousal support did
not meet the guidelines established by Civ. Code, § 4801, in that there was no
relationship of the award to the wife's future needs, the husband's ability to
pay the debts, or other standards listed in the statute. The trial court should
have first ordered the debts paid from the community cash on hand, divided the
balance remaining equally, and then have considered the issue of spousal support
using the statutory guidelines and appropriate case law.

COUNSEL: Michael J. Movius for Appellant.

Anita H. Dymant for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Hastings, J., with Kaus, P. J., and Ashby, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: HASTINGS

OPINION

     Betty Chala (wife), respondent, and Salvador Ansara Chala (husband),
appellant, were married for six years and three months.  The minor child of
wife, Heather, was adopted by husband during the course of the marriage. At the
conclusion of the dissolution proceeding, wife was awarded as her half of the
community property a 1966 Cadillac, valued at $ 200, miscellaneous household
furniture and furnishings valued at $ 4,000, and cash of $ 10,186.50.  Husband
was awarded cash of $ 14,386.50.  Husband was ordered to pay child support of $
125 per month.

   The community obligations of the parties totalled $ 19,971.10. 1 In
connection with these obligations, the court made the following order:
"Respondent [husband] is ordered to assume, pay and hold Petitioner [wife]
harmless from 100% of the said community obligations . . . .  Respondent
[husband] is ordered to pay to Petitioner [wife] as and for  spousal support, a
lump sum payment in the amount of $ 9,985.55, which shall satisfy any and all
obligations of Respondent to Petitioner for spousal support, and neither party
shall thereafter be entitled to any further or other award for spousal support."


- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   These
debts were a) Board of Equalization $ 3,378.29; b) Internal Revenue Service $
7,732.84; c) Harry Clark $ 532.77; d) Chala Enterprises, Inc. $ 8,327.20.  This
last debt consisted primarily of advances made by husband's sons from their
corporation to pay for gasoline purchases from Shell Oil for the Calabasas
station in the amounts of $ 4,450 and $ 3,877.20 paid to Board of Equalization
for delinquent sales taxes on the same station.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Other facts will be set forth when pertinent to the issues on appeal.

     1. Husband's first issue on appeal is that the court abused its discretion
in ordering him to pay child support in the amount of $ 125 per month.  Evidence
introduced at the trial showed that husband was 62 years of age and unemployed
at that time.  Husband had owned and operated the Calabasas Shell Station from
1972 through 1975, and was employed through December 1976 as a manager for Chala
Enterprises, a corporation owned by his sons.  He testified that he spends a
portion of his time at his sons' service station in Hollywood, and that he
occasionally helps out with the customers.  He had applied for social security
benefits approximately two weeks prior to the date of trial, and these benefits
were expected to begin within one month.  He resides with one of his sons who
pays all of his expenses, and there is no charge to husband for rent.  He
testified that he suffers from high blood pressure.

   He claims that these facts do not justify the $ 125 per month child support
award. He concedes the liberal discretion given to the trial court in fixing
child support ( In re Marriage of Muldrow, 61 Cal.App.3d 327, 332 [132 Cal.Rptr.
48]), but he feels the court abused its discretion in considering his ability to
pay. We disagree.  The facts disclose that husband can be gainfully employed by
his sons at their service station and he will receive social security benefits.
The award is not so excessive or exorbitant as to be an abuse of discretion as a
matter of law.  There was sufficient evidence before the trial court to support
its conclusion that husband's needs were being met, that he was able to work and
he could afford the child support award.

   2. Husband's second issue on appeal is more challenging.  After dividing $
28,773 (mostly cash) of community assets equally,  the court found that there
remained $ 19,971.10 in community liabilities.  It then created a plan requiring
husband to pay all of these liabilities, but labelled one-half of the payments
to wife as spousal support. Wife seems to be satisfied with the order, but
husband is not.  He claims the order was merely a device to make him pay all of
the community debts of the  parties, which is contrary to California's Family
Law Act, Civil Code section 4800 et seq., and current California case law.

     It is true that California decisional law has interpreted the California
Family Act to mean that community property assets and community obligations must
be divided equally when the community assets exceed the community obligations.
( In re Marriage of Fonstein, 17 Cal.3d 738, 748 [131 Cal.Rptr. 873, 552 P.2d
1169]; In re Marriage of Barnert, 85 Cal.App.3d 413, 420-421 [149 Cal.Rptr. 616]
; In re Marriage of Smith, 79 Cal.App.3d 725, 746, fn. 9 [145 Cal.Rptr. 205];
and In re Marriage of Eastis, 47 Cal.App.3d 459, 463 [120 Cal.Rptr. 861].) If,
as husband claims, the form of the award was solely a means for subverting this
now established law, we would agree that the court abused its discretion.

     However, it is also correct in appropriate cases to include in spousal
support orders a provision that the payments, or portions thereof, may be paid
to third parties for overdue or future debts.  In the very recent case of In re
Marriage of Epstein, 24 Cal.3d 76, 85 [154 Cal.Rptr. 413, 592 P.2d 1165], the
Supreme Court noted: "'Payment of a debt, of course, may constitute payment of
spousal or child support. (See Gay v. Gay, 146 Cal. 237, 243 [79 P. 885];
Bushman v. Superior Court, 33 Cal.App.3d 177, 181-183 [108 Cal.Rptr. 765]; In re
Hendricks, 5 Cal.App.3d 793, 797-798 [85 Cal.Rptr. 220] . . .).'"

   In our present case the debts (see fn.  1, ante) were past due obligations
incurred by the community business.  It appears that the key issue is whether
these debts can be shifted to the husband in the form of spousal support when
there were sufficient community liquid assets to pay them at the time that the
marriage was dissolved.  It therefore becomes necessary to review prior case law
to determine, if possible, what kind of debts can be ordered paid as spousal
support. In Gay, supra, the earliest case cited by the Supreme Court in Epstein,
the court ordered husband to pay $ 300 to wife as a form of reimbursement for
costs incurred by her in the past but after separation for support.  The court
said (at p. 243): "If it should appear to the court that it was necessary, in
order to insure the support of the wife upon the amount to be paid to her
periodically in the future, that existing wants or expenses incurred by her
should be provided for, the court, within the qualification announced above,
would have the right to do so." Later in the opinion, the court states that the
lump sum payment of $ 300 was justified "in order that the respondent might be
placed in a situation so that in the future she would be enabled  to live upon
the allowance provided to be paid her." ( Id., at p. 243.) In In re Hendricks,
supra, 5 Cal.App.3d at page 795, husband was ordered to pay wife as temporary
alimony $ 300 per month, with the added proviso, "'[pursuant] to the further
stipulation of counsel, the court orders that defendant shall pay all community
debts and obligations incurred prior to date of separation; . . .'" A contempt
action was brought against the husband for failure to pay the community debts,
and the husband argued that if found in contempt of court, he could be
imprisoned for a debt in violation of California Constitution article I, section
15.  The court concluded it was not such a debt, but was a valid spousal support
order, stating at page 797: "The court may include an amount for the payment of
past community debts so that the spouse seeking support 'might be placed in a
situation so that in the future she would be enabled to live upon the allowance
provided to be paid her.' ( Gay v. Gay [supra], 146 Cal. 237, 243 [79 P. 885].)"
In Bushman, supra, husband was ordered to pay mortgage payments on the residence
as  a portion of spousal support.  Husband was cited for contempt for not making
these payments and the court followed Hendricks, supra, in holding that these
payments were a form of spousal support and that husband could be found in
contempt for failure to pay.

   In In re Marriage of Epstein, supra, 24 Cal.3d 76, the court considered the
problem of reimbursing a spouse from the community who paid community debts
after the separation.  The opinion frowns upon payment of these debts by one
spouse when community property is available for this purpose, unless the
payments are directly related to spousal or child support. The court states:
"'[When] after separation, one of the spouses makes payments on preexisting
community debts out of earnings or other separate funds, if the no-reimbursement
rule is applied, the result is that community obligations which would otherwise
be charged against community property and borne by the parties equally are
charged exclusively to the paying spouse.  Thus, application of the
no-reimbursement rule will discourage payment of community debts after
separation, exacerbate the financial and emotional disruption which all too
frequently accompanies the breakup of a marriage and, perhaps, result in
impairing the credit reputations of both spouses.

   "'So, we are persuaded the rule disallowing reimbursement in the absence of
an agreement for reimbursement should not apply and that, as a general rule, a
spouse who, after separation of the parties, uses earnings or other separate
funds to pay preexisting community obligations should be reimbursed therefor out
of the community property upon dissolution . . . .

    "'Likewise, reimbursement should not be ordered where the payment on account
of a preexisting community obligation constituted in reality a discharge of the
paying spouse's duty to support the other spouse or a dependent child of the
parties.'" ( Id., at pp. 84, 85; italics added.)

   The California Family Law Act, as interpreted by Fonstein and Eastis
requiring equal division of the community property assets and obligations when
the assets are greater than the debts, requires us to consider carefully orders
that transfer more debts to one spouse as spousal support. Either by
happenstance or design, there is a growing tendency on the part of the trial
courts to use all or portions of spousal support awards for this purpose.  What
appears to be happening is that trial courts, reluctant to equalize the
community property as required by Fonstein and Eastis, seek refuge by labelling
an unauthorized differential as "spousal support."

   An order of spousal support is for future living expenses of the supported
spouse. Payment of continuing obligations to third parties related to such needs
is clearly a form of spousal support, and in most situations the propriety of
the award will be obvious; for example, if the wife is living in the home and
the husband is not, an award that he pay $ 500 a month spousal support, payable
$ 300 in cash to wife and $ 200 directly to the beneficiary of the home
mortgage, is justifiable without a special finding.  The same would be true in
many other typical third-party payment orders.  Then there is the situation
recognized in Gay, supra, that past unpaid debts for living expenses can be
ordered paid so that future payments of spousal support will not be depleted by
creditors demanding payment of the spouse receiving the support award. Finally,
we have Epstein, supra, that authorizes payments of such debts without
reimbursement from the community if they "constituted in reality a discharge of
the paying spouse's duty to support the other spouse."

   In 1977 the Legislature, in Civil Code section 4801, 2 set the standards for
the  courts to follow in making spousal support orders.  In re Marriage of
Morrison, 20 Cal.3d 437, 442-454 [143 Cal.Rptr. 139, 573 P.2d 41],  addressed
the issue of the length of the award.   It does not appear that the alleged
support award in our present case followed these guidelines. It purported to be
a one shot discharge of all spousal support obligations by paying 50 percent of
all community debts.  Assumption of these debts by husband, and delivery to wife
of a hold-harmless agreement, terminated the spousal support. Such quick
termination of spousal support may or may not have been appropriate under the
circumstances.  Wife testified she had been a secretary, but that her skills had
become "very rusty." She intended to return to school to replenish these skills
so that she could find employment.  It is not unusual under these circumstances
for the court to retain jurisdiction, at least for a longer period than it did
here, to determine if she can become self-supporting.  (In re Marriage   of
Morrison, supra, 20 Cal.3d 437, 453.) We realize this was not a long marriage,
and a lump sum award may be sufficient; but here there seems to be no
relationship of the award to the wife's future needs, the husband's ability to
pay the debts, or to other standards listed in section 4801.  In the long run,
it might not benefit wife at all.  The creditors of the community debts are not
bound by the husband's agreement, and if he does not pay the debts, there is a
very good chance that these creditors will turn to wife for payment.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   The
pertinent provisions of section 4801, subdivision (a) are:

   "(a) In any judgment decreeing the dissolution of a marriage or a legal
separation of the parties, the court may order a party to pay for the support of
the other party any amount, and for such period of time, as the court may deem
just and reasonable.  In making the award, the court shall consider the
following circumstances of the respective parties:

   "(1) The earning capacity and needs of each spouse.

   "(2) The obligations and assets, including the separate property, of each.

   "(3) The duration of the marriage.

   "(4) The ability of the supported spouse to engage in gainful employment
without interfering with the interests of dependent children in the custody of
the spouse.

   "(5) The time required for the supported spouse to acquire appropriate
education, training, and employment.

   "(6) The age and health of the parties.

   "(7) The standard of living of the parties.

   "(8) Any other factors which it deems just and equitable."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    We conclude that under the facts of this case, the court's order was not a
correct award of spousal support. It does not meet the standards established by
Gay, Epstein, Morrison, and section 4801, supra.  The result was an unequal
division of the community property. We are sure the court was trying to be fair
with both parties, but we believe the law as cited narrows the discretion that
the court now has in ordering debts paid in the form of spousal support. It
should have first ordered the debts paid from the community cash on hand, and
divided the balance remaining equally.  The court should then have considered
the issue of spousal support using the guidelines of section 4801, Morrison, and
any other appropriate case law.

   The order of child support is affirmed.  The order of spousal support is
reversed.  Both parties to pay their own costs on appeal.


                              34 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of SCOTT and KAREN NICKLES BLAZER.  SCOTT
             BLAZER, Appellant, v. KAREN NICKLES BLAZER, Appellant.

                                    H031574

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SIXTH APPELLATE DISTRICT

          176 Cal. App. 4th 1438; 99 Cal. Rptr. 3d 42; 2009 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1409


                             August 25, 2009, Filed

NOTICE:    CERTIFIED FOR PARTIAL PUBLICATION *

*   Pursuant to California Rules of Court, rules 8.1105(b) and 8.1110, this
opinion is certified for publication with the exception of (1) all but the first
two and the last two paragraphs of the section entitled "Background," and (2)
parts II.A, II.C, and III of the section entitled "Discussion."

PRIOR-HISTORY:
   Superior Court of Monterey County, No. DR38292, Adrienne M. Grover, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Dissolution of Marriage § 61--Spousal Support--Trial Court's Authority.--The
trial court is authorized to order and to modify temporary and permanent spousal
support, as provided in the Family Code.

(5) Dissolution of Marriage § 61--Spousal Support--Income--Diversification of
Business.--Under Fam. Code, § 4320, it was within the trial court's discretion
to calculate a husband's income without regard to funds derived from the
husband's company that were used to diversify the business.

   [Cal. Forms of Pleading and Practice (2009) ch. 225, Dissolution of Marriage:
Spousal Support, § 225.111; 11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (10th ed. 2005)
Husband and Wife, § 236.]

COUNSEL: Sucherman Insalaco, Michelene Insalaco, Lowell H. Sucherman and  Janet
Simmonds for Appellant Scott Blazer.

C. Michael McClure for Appellant Karen Nickles Blazer.

JUDGES: Opinion by McAdams, J., with Bamattre-Manoukian, Acting P. J., and
Duffy, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: McAdams

OPINION

    McADAMS, J.--In this marital dissolution case, both parties challenge a
spousal support order. In her appeal, the wife asserts that the trial court
abused its discretion in reducing temporary spousal support and in setting
permanent support. She contends that the court failed to account for all of the
husband's income and that it erred in imputing investment income to her. In his
cross-appeal, the husband contends that the permanent spousal support order
unfairly charges him a second time for earnings from the business that he
operates. In his view, since the wife received half of the business's
going-concern value in the property division, the court should not consider the
entire stream of business income in assessing his ability to pay support. The
husband asks us to announce a new rule in California prohibiting such "double
dipping."

   Rejecting both parties' contentions, we affirm the challenged order. In the
published part of the opinion, we conclude that the trial court acted within its
discretion in determining the husband's income for purposes of spousal support.

BACKGROUND

   The parties to this appeal are Scott Blazer (husband) and Karen Nickles
Blazer (wife). Husband and wife married in November 1982 and separated in
January 2002. There are two children of the marriage, both now adults.

   The principal marital asset was a company created in 1996 by husband and a
business partner, called Blazer-Wilkinson LLC (BW). BW is a brokerage company
that buys and sells produce, principally strawberries and bush berries. In 2004,
the court valued the community interest in BW at $ 5.6 million.

2002--Dissolution; Temporary Support* [NOT CERTIFIED FOR PUBLICATION]

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*   See
footnote, ante, page 1438.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

2007--Order; Appeals

   In March 2007, the court entered a formal order that was consistent with its
August 2006 statement of decision, entered after the trial held in December 2005
and January 2006. The order reduces temporary spousal support from $ 52,000 per
month to $ 30,000 per month, effective August 15, 2004 (consistent with the
parties' prior stipulation permitting modification retroactive to that date); it
sets permanent spousal support at $ 20,000 per month, effective January 1, 2006.

   In May 2007, wife filed a notice of appeal and husband filed a notice of
cross-appeal. The following month, husband asked this court to dismiss wife's
appeal as untimely on the ground that the March  2007 order merely formalized
the court's earlier ruling. We denied husband's dismissal motion.

CONTENTIONS

   In her appeal from the May 2007 spousal support order, wife argues that the
trial court abused its discretion (1) in excluding part of husband's income when
considering his ability to pay support and (2) in imputing investment income to
her.

   In response to wife's appeal, husband defends the order against the two
arguments that she offers. He also asserts that wife has forfeited her claims by
failing to comply with appellate rules. In his cross-appeal, husband challenges
the order on the same ground offered below--that it permits wife to unfairly
"double dip" into the income stream from his business. He posits this challenge
as an issue of first impression in California and a question of law.

DISCUSSION

   To establish the proper framework for our analysis, we begin by summarizing
the applicable legal principles before turning first to wife's appeal and then
to husband's cross-appeal.

I. Legal Principles

A. Spousal Support

   The trial court is authorized to order and to modify temporary and permanent
spousal support, as provided in the Family Code. 1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1
Unspecified statutory citations in this opinion are to the Family Code.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

1. Temporary Support

   The trial court has statutory authority to order temporary spousal support
while a marital action is pending. (§ 3600.) "Temporary support ... usually is
higher than permanent support because it is intended to maintain the status quo
prior to the divorce." (In re Marriage of Schulze (1997) 60 Cal.App.4th 519, 522
[70 Cal. Rptr. 2d 488].) The trial court has broad discretion to determine the
amount of temporary spousal support, considering both the supported spouse's
need for support and the supporting spouse's ability to pay. (In re Marriage of
Dick (1993) 15 Cal.App.4th 144, 165 [18 Cal. Rptr. 2d 743].)

2. Permanent Support

   Permanent spousal support "is governed by the statutory scheme set forth in
sections 4300 through 4360. Section 4330 authorizes the trial court to order a
party to pay spousal support in an amount, and for a period of time, that the
court determines is just and reasonable, based on the standard of living
established during the marriage, taking into consideration the circumstances set
forth in section 4320." (In re Marriage of Nelson (2006) 139 Cal.App.4th 1546,
1559 [44 Cal. Rptr. 3d 52]; see In re Marriage of Cheriton (2001) 92 Cal.App.4th
269, 302 [111 Cal. Rptr. 2d 755].) The statutory factors include the supporting
spouse's ability to pay; the needs of each spouse based on the marital standard
of living; the obligations and assets of each spouse, including separate
property; and any other factors pertinent to a just and equitable award. (§
4320, subds. (c)-(e), (n).) "The trial court has broad  discretion in balancing
the applicable statutory factors and determining the appropriate weight to
accord to each, but it may not be arbitrary and must both recognize and apply
each applicable factor." (In re Marriage of Ackerman (2006) 146 Cal.App.4th 191,
207 [52 Cal. Rptr. 3d 744].)

B. Appellate Review

   As a general rule, we review spousal support orders under the deferential
abuse of discretion standard. (In re Marriage of Nelson, supra, 139 Cal.App.4th
at p. 1559.) We examine the challenged order for legal and factual support. "As
long as the court exercised its discretion along legal lines, its decision will
be affirmed on appeal if there is substantial evidence to support it." (In re
Marriage of Duncan (2001) 90 Cal.App.4th 617, 625 [108 Cal. Rptr. 2d 833]; see
In re Marriage of Geraci (2006) 144 Cal.App.4th 1278, 1286 [51 Cal. Rptr. 3d
234].) "To the extent that a trial court's exercise of discretion is based on
the facts of the case, it will be upheld 'as long as its determination is within
the range of the evidence presented.'" (In re Marriage of Ackerman, supra, 146
Cal.App.4th at p. 197.)

   Where a question of law is presented on undisputed facts, appellate review is
de novo. (See, e.g., Elsenheimer v. Elsenheimer (2004) 124 Cal.App.4th 1532,
1536 [22 Cal. Rptr. 3d 447] [interpretation of child support statute presents
question of law]; In re Marriage of von der Nuell (1994) 23 Cal.App.4th 730, 736
[28 Cal. Rptr. 2d 447] [on undisputed facts, date of separation is a question of
law]; cf. In re Marriage of Duncan, supra, 90 Cal.App.4th at p. 625, fn. 5
[rejecting wife's bid for de novo review where the evidence was in conflict].)

   With those principles in mind, we consider the issues raised here. We begin
with wife's appeal.

II. Wife's Appeal

A. Forfeiture* [NOT CERTIFIED FOR PUBLICATION]

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*   See
footnote, ante, page 1438.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

B. Exclusions from Husband's Income

1. Pertinent Facts

   In assessing husband's income for spousal support purposes, the court
excluded funds used to capitalize BW and to vertically integrate the business.
In the court's words: "The need to maintain higher capitalization in the company
and the need to diversify the company's work are reasonable expenses that should
not be charged against [husband's] income but rather should be taken out of the
company before assessing what his reasonable income is for purposes of support."
Wife assigns this determination as error.

   On the question of capitalization, the court heard testimony from two
experts.

   Husband's expert witness was certified public accountant Richard Wilkolaski.
Wilkolaski described BW as "very thinly capitalized for a business" with such
high gross revenue. Husband had drawn down his capital account at BW by more
than $ 1 million in the three years from January 2002 to December 2004.
Wilkolaski opined that the company was "endangered" by the level of capital,
which instead "should be building back up again." Based on some 30 years of
forensic accounting, Wilkolaski understood that capital account withdrawals are
not income available for spousal support.

   Wife called certified public accountant Jeffrey Wriedt as her expert witness.
Wriedt agreed that husband's BW capital account had declined. He characterized
BW as "probably slightly undercapitalized." And Wriedt agreed with Wilkolaski
that "probably more money should have been left in the business." Since he is
not "a legal expert," Wriedt could not say whether spousal support should be
based on money withdrawn from husband's BW capital account. But Wriedt did
state: "Withdrawals from the partnership capital account are not taxable
income."

    Concerning vertical integration, the court heard testimony from the same two
expert witnesses, and from husband.

   Husband testified about his postseparation actions to expand and vertically
integrate BW. Explaining the need for these actions, husband said "we had to
change the way we did business because the retail side was looking to cut out
the middle man ... to lower their costs. ... So we have had to change and accept
the fact that the buying broker entity is no longer a viable business plan."
Explaining the nature of the change, husband testified that the company expanded
in two directions, transforming from a middleman to include both distribution
and growing operations. BW thus expanded by getting "into the warehouse side,
which is a distribution arm," and by getting into the berry-growing business.
The warehouse was an east coast facility operated by Blazer-Wilkinson-Salins,
with BW in partnership with a third person; it had been profitable. The
berry-growing operation, Camarillo Berry Farms, had not yet been profitable.
Husband testified that he was willing to use his BW  capital account to continue
with the "Camarillo investment" since "the only way" to "keep Blazer-Wilkinson
in existence, is to maintain some type of ground up relationships."

   Husband's expert witness, Wilkolaski, testified about husband's investments
in Blazer-Wilkinson-Salins and in Camarillo Berry Farms, based on information
gleaned from husband's tax returns. Both businesses were started in 2003. For
Camarillo Berry Farms, husband contributed capital totaling about $ 342,000 in
2003 and about $ 1,086,000 in 2004. Those sums, which came to husband from BW
cash flow, were "monies that were disposable to him to invest" in Camarillo
Berry Farms.

   Wife's expert, Wriedt, testified that BW generated cash flow for 2002, 2003,
and 2004 in the millions of dollars. Wriedt stated that it was husband's choice
to "spend the money on his vertical integration."

   On appeal, wife argues that by excluding "income that was used by [husband]
to diversify into other areas of his business to establish a more vertically
integrated business," the court "failed to use the total of [husband's] income
in setting support which is an abuse of ... discretion." Wife challenges only
the nature of these expenditures, not the amount.

2. Legal Authority

   Under the spousal support statute that governs here, the trial court is
required to assess the "ability of the supporting party to pay spousal support,
taking into account the supporting party's earning capacity, earned and unearned
income, assets, and standard of living." (§ 4320, subd. (c).)

   The spousal support statute does not define income. "There are no statutes
that address the computation of income for the purpose of determining spousal
support." (2 Kirkland et al., Cal. Family Law: Practice and Procedure (2009)
Spousal Support Orders, § 51.33, p. 51-31.)

   This is in contrast to the statutory provisions governing child support. 2 As
one commentator notes, "there is not yet any authority" applying the child
support definition to spousal support. (Kirkland et al., Cal. Family Law:
Practice and Procedure, supra, § 51.33, p. 51-31.)  Despite that dearth of
authority, and without discussing the point, the parties offer argument based
on section 4058, which defines income for child support purposes. As a general
proposition, we question how well child support concepts translate to spousal
support. 3 Nevertheless, to the extent that the child support provision defining
income may have some relevance to the issue before us, we address it below.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   The child
support statute defines income broadly. (§ 4058; In re Marriage of Cheriton,
supra, 92 Cal.App.4th at pp. 285-286.) With stated exceptions, the statutory
definition covers "income from whatever source derived," including: "Income from
the proprietorship of a business, such as gross receipts from the business
reduced by expenditures required for the operation of the business." (§ 4058,
subd. (a)(2).)
3   Child support and spousal support serve different purposes, implicate
different policies, and are governed by different rules. (Compare § 4053, subd.
(e) [concerning child support, the legislative policy is to treat "the interests
of children as the state's top priority"] with § 4320, subd. (l) [concerning
spousal support, the legislative policy is for the supported spouse to become
"self-supporting within a reasonable period of time"]; compare § 4052 [for child
support, "court shall adhere to the statewide uniform guideline"] with § 4320,
subd. (n) [for spousal support, court shall consider enumerated circumstances
including "other factors the court determines are just and equitable"]; see
also, e.g., In re Marriage of Pendleton & Fireman (2000) 24 Cal.4th 39, 49 [99
Cal. Rptr. 2d 278, 5 P.3d 839] [public policy prohibits waiver of child support
but not spousal support]; In re Marriage of Lynn (2002) 101 Cal.App.4th 120,
130, fn. 7 [123 Cal. Rptr. 2d 611] [same]; In re Marriage of Cheriton, supra, 92
Cal.App.4th at p. 308 [when imputing income to the payee spouse, child support
order must "consider the children's best interests" but no such requirement
applies to spousal support order]; In re Marriage of Kerr (1999) 77 Cal.App.4th
87, 95-96 [91 Cal.Rptr.2d 374] ["child support awards must reflect a minor
child's right to be maintained in a lifestyle and condition consonant with his
or her parents' position in society after dissolution of the marriage" while
spousal support orders require "consideration of the parties' standard of living
during marriage" only]; In re Marriage of Schulze, supra, 60 Cal.App.4th at pp.
528, 527 [guideline child support is highly regulated and "relatively fixed"
whereas permanent spousal support orders must be "the product of a truly
independent exercise of judicial discretion"]; but see Kirkland et al., Cal.
Family Law: Practice and Procedure, supra, § 51.33, p. 51-31 [considering it
"reasonable that the same rules" defining income for child support purposes
"would apply to spousal support"].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   So far as we are aware, there is no case law directly addressing the question
before us here. While acknowledging that there are no reported cases "analogous"
to the situation presented here, wife nevertheless cites two appellate decisions
in support of her argument. The first case proffered by wife is In re Marriage
of Ostler & Smith (1990) 223 Cal.App.3d 33 [272 Cal. Rptr. 560]. In that case,
the husband was required to pay spousal support based on a percentage of future
bonuses. (Id. at pp. 41-42; see also, e.g., In re Marriage of Mosley (2008) 165
Cal.App.4th 1375, 1387 [82 Cal. Rptr. 3d 497] ["any bonus actually received must
be counted as part of [obligor's] annual gross income for the purposes of
spousal and child support"].) The second case cited by wife is In re Marriage of
Kerr, supra, 77 Cal.App.4th 87. There, the husband was required to pay spousal
support based on income that could include a percentage of future stock options.
(Id. at p. 95 [on remand, "a percentage support award based on [the husband's]
exercised option income would be permissible as long as the court sets a maximum
amount proportionate to its findings of the marital standard of living"].) But
as husband correctly observes, in both cases, the supporting spouse was an
employee, not a business owner. (In re Marriage of Ostler &  Smith, supra, 223
Cal.App.3d at p. 37; In re Marriage of Kerr, supra, 77 Cal.App.4th at p. 91.) We
agree with husband that the two cases proffered by wife are inapposite.

   The question before us thus is one of first impression.

 3. Analysis

   Applying the governing statute to the case at hand, our analysis turns on the
trial court's assessment of "the ability of the supporting party to pay spousal
support, taking into account the supporting party's ... income ... ." (§ 4320,
subd. (c).) As explained above, we affirm the trial court's decision if it is
supported in fact and law. (In re Marriage of Duncan, supra, 90 Cal.App.4th at
p. 625.)

a. The court's determination is supported by substantial evidence.

   As pertinent to wife's appellate claim, the trial court determined that there
was a "need to diversify the company's work" and that funds spent for that
purpose were "reasonable expenses" properly chargeable to the business, not to
husband.

   The court's factual finding is supported by substantial testimonial evidence.
4 Husband testified that unless the company diversified, BW "will not exist, it
will be gone." The testimony of husband's expert supported the need for
diversification, given the changing business environment and the risk inherent
in BW's dependence on two major clients.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   The
evidence cited by husband concerning "the reasonable business expenditures of
BW" includes a number of trial exhibits. But no exhibits were transmitted to
this court. (See Cal. Rules of Court, rule 8.224.) For that reason, the trial
exhibits are not part of the appellate record, and we do not consider them here.
(Dominguez v. American Suzuki Motor Corp. (2008) 160 Cal.App.4th 53, 55, fn. 2
[72 Cal. Rptr. 3d 354].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Since the court's determination on this point enjoys substantial evidentiary
support, there is no abuse of discretion. (In re Marriage of Ackerman, supra,
146 Cal.App.4th at p. 197.)

b. The court's determination is legally proper.

   The trial court's determination also comports with applicable law.

   Under the spousal support statute that governs here, it was within the
court's discretion to calculate husband's income without regard to funds derived
from BW that were used to diversify the business. The court  must consider the
"earned and unearned income" and the "assets" of the supporting party. (§ 4320,
subd. (c).) Here, the trial court acted within its discretion in attributing the
reinvested funds to the business instead of husband. The court may "look past
the apparent form of ownership in which husband's assets were held to determine
the extent of husband's true interest in them and the availability of those
assets in assessing husband's ability to pay." (In re Marriage of Dick, supra,
15 Cal.App.4th at p. 162; cf. In re Marriage of Imperato (1975) 45 Cal.App.3d
432, 438, 440 [119 Cal. Rptr. 590] [in property division, court could disregard
corporate entity when divorcing parties had "not treated the corporation as a
separate entity"].)

   More broadly, in the face of an ambiguity as to whether disputed sums
represent income available for support, that determination is committed to the
court's discretion. For example, "the trial court possesses broad discretion to
determine whether to consider as income available for spousal support purposes
contributions made by a participant to his or her retirement plan, as well as
accruals or accrued earnings of that plan which are not withdrawn." (In re
Marriage of Olson (1993) 14 Cal.App.4th 1, 13 [17 Cal. Rptr. 2d 480].)

   To the extent that the child support statute may offer guidance, it likewise
sustains  the trial court's decision here. That statute excludes from income
"expenditures required for the operation of the business." (§ 4058, subd. (a)(2)
; but see Afsaw v. Woldberhan (2007) 147 Cal.App.4th 1407, 1425-1426 [55
Cal.Rptr.3d 323] [based on statutory interpretation, child support obligor could
not deduct rental property depreciation from income]; In re Marriage of
Calcaterra & Badakhsh (2005) 132 Cal.App.4th 28, 36 [33 Cal. Rptr. 3d 246]
[trial court did not err in using child support obligor's "gross rental income
without deducting expenses" where ruling was "occasioned by [obligor's]
perjury"]; In re Marriage of Chakko (2004) 115 Cal.App.4th 104, 109 [8 Cal.
Rptr. 3d 699] [trial court properly rejected business owner's "structuring of
income and expenses" as "an attempt to minimize child support obligations"].)

   Under the circumstances presented here, the court "exercised its discretion
along legal lines" in making the challenged determination. (In re Marriage of
Duncan, supra, 90 Cal.App.4th at p. 625.) We therefore reject wife's claim
concerning husband's income.

C. Imputation of Investment Income to Wife* [NOT CERTIFIED FOR PUBLICATION]

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*   See
footnote, ante, page 1438.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

III. Husband's Cross-appeal* [NOT CERTIFIED FOR PUBLICATION]

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*   See
footnote, ante, page 1438.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

DISPOSITION

   The March 2007 order is affirmed. The parties shall bear their own costs.

   Bamattre-Manoukian, Acting P. J., and Duffy, J., concurred.


                              35 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              In re the Marriage of WALTER P. IBERTI and CHRISTINE
           PATRICIA FLANNERY IBERTI. WALTER P. IBERTI, Respondent, v.
                 CHRISTINE PATRICIA FLANNERY IBERTI, Appellant.

                                  No. B105345.

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SECOND APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION FIVE

          55 Cal. App. 4th 1434; 64 Cal. Rptr. 2d 766; 1997 Cal. App.
          LEXIS 516; 97 Cal. Daily Op. Service 5080; 97 Daily Journal
                                    DAR 8107


                             June 25, 1997, Decided

NOTICE:     Opinion certified for partial publication. *

*   Pursuant to California Rules of Court, rules 976(b) and 976.1, this opinion
is certified for publication with the exception of the indicated portions of
part III.

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:    Rehearing Denied July 14, 1997.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Los Angeles County, Super. Ct. No. BD070866.
H. Ronald Hauptman, Temporary Judge. **

**   Pursuant to California Constitution, article VI, section 21.

COUNSEL: Simon Taub for Appellant.

Jacqueline Fox for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Turner, P. J., with Grignon and Armstrong, JJ., concurring.

OPINION BY: TURNER

OPINION

     TURNER, P. J.

I. INTRODUCTION

   Walter P. Iberti (husband) brought an order to show cause in the trial court
to terminate spousal support. The court concluded Christine Patricia Flannery
Iberti (wife) was not entitled to spousal support after April 30, 1995. Wife
appeals from the order. We affirm.

 II. BACKGROUND

   The parties were married on September 2, 1989, and separated on December 15,
1991. A judgment of dissolution of marriage was entered on August 12, 1992. The
judgment incorporated the parties' marital settlement agreement. Regarding
spousal support, the judgment provided as follows: "[Husband] shall pay to
[wife] as permanent spousal support the sum of $ 2,100.00 per month payable in
full on the first day of each month commencing August 15, 1992 and continuing
for a period of forty eight (48) months through and including July 15, 1996.
Except as expressly herein provided, said spousal support shall not be subject
to modification as to amount or duration regardless of when application is made
therefor. Said spousal support shall irrevocably terminate no later than July
15, 1996 and shall terminate prior thereto upon the first occurrence of any of
the following events: . . . [P] (3) After July 15, 1993, if [wife] is not a full
time student at an accredited college or university successfully completing 10
units each semester or quarter and is actively pursuing a Bachelors degree."
(Italics added.) The judgment recites: "The Court finds that the parties have
carefully bargained in this Judgment concerning all issues relating to spousal
support, including the amount and duration.  The termination date(s) concerning
spousal support specified herein are absolute. Upon occurrence of any of the
termination date(s) herein set forth, this Judgment cuts off forever the right
of [wife] to ask for spousal support, the power of the Court to order spousal
support, and the right of [wife] to receive spousal support. No Court shall have
jurisdiction to extend or order any spousal support beyond the dates herein set
forth and [wife] shall not make application therefor." (Italics added.)

   The court retained jurisdiction as follows: "Except as otherwise specifically
provided herein, the parties shall be subject to the continuing jurisdiction of
the Court to settle any disputes arising from or to interpret this Judgment and
to make any further orders necessary to enforce the provisions of this Judgment.
However, nothing contained in this paragraph shall be deemed to modify the
provisions re spousal support contained herein." (Italics added.)

    On December 21, 1995, husband filed an order to show cause to terminate
spousal support. He also sought to obtain a partial reimbursement of spousal
support paid. The ground for the order was that wife had not been and was not
enrolled in college. It was undisputed wife had dropped out of college as of May
1995. Husband stopped paying spousal support as of November 1, 1995. Wife
presented evidence she had dropped out of college because of her mother's mental
illness and subsequent suicide, in August 1995. Further,  wife argued she had
returned to college in January 1996.  1 Husband disputed wife's assertion she
left school to spend time with her mother. With respect to the parties
intentions, wife stated: "In all of the discussions leading up to the Judgment,
it was understood that the spousal support would only terminate if I went to
work and earned money instead of attending school." HUSBAND STATED: "[W]ife
admits the spousal support is non-modifiable for forty eight months contingent
on her going to school. The Judgment makes no reference to contingencies such as
illness, because that was not stipulated to. [Wife] is aware of this. This is
why we agreed to the ten (10) units versus a normal load of twelve (12) to
sixteen (16) units. The Judgment took into account all of those issues." The
trial court ruled spousal support was terminated as of April 30, 1995.  Wife was
ordered to reimburse husband for spousal support paid in the months of May
through October 1995 in the sum of $ 12,600. The court concluded, "Pursuant to
the [marital dissolution judgment], the court has no jurisdiction as to the
issue of spousal support . . . ."

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Wife also
asserts husband harassed and threatened her causing her to drop out of college.
However, wife's declaration does not support that claim. It states, instead,
that she left college to spend time with her ailing mother.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The order was entered on May 31, 1996. On June 10, 1996, wife requested a
statement of decision. The request was denied as untimely.

III. DISCUSSION

      *

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*   See
footnote, ante, page 1434.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     Wife contends the trial court had jurisdiction to consider her reasons for
leaving school. She further asserts: "What has to be read into the language of
the Judgment is that [wife] receives spousal support while she is a full-time
student at an accredited college, but if for some reason she is unable in good
faith to attend college, then her time is extended." It is argued the spousal
support provision is ambiguous as to the circumstances surrounding wife's
ability to stay in school. Wife explains the purported ambiguity as follows:
"What is meant by the language in the Judgment that says that spousal support
terminates after July 15, 1993 if [wife] is not a full-time student at an
accredited college? [P] Does it mean that the spousal support terminates if
[wife] is involved in an automobile accident and in the hospital for an extended
period of time? [P] Does it mean that spousal support terminates if [wife] has a
mental breakdown? What if one of her children becomes ill and she has to leave
school for an extended period of time in order to nurse the child? [P] To reduce
the argument to absurdity,  what if [wife] is on a vacation and her bus is
hijacked and she is made a prisoner for a period of 90 days and is no longer a
full-time student at an accredited college[?]" We find that while the trial
court retained jurisdiction to interpret the judgment incorporating the marital
settlement agreement, 2 no interpretation was required; there was no ambiguity
and no evidence of a meaning as to which the language of the agreement was
reasonably susceptible which was favorable to wife.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   As noted
above, the trial court expressly retained jurisdiction "to interpret this
Judgment . . . ."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     When, as here, no conflicting extrinsic evidence is offered of an
interpretation as to which the language of a marital settlement agreement is
reasonably susceptible, and the facts are otherwise undisputed, we apply the
unambiguous contract terms to the undisputed facts as a matter of law. (
Messenger v. Messenger (1956) 46 Cal. 2d 619, 626 [297 P.2d 988]; Fox v. Fox
(1954) 42 Cal. 2d 49, 52 [265 P.2d 881]; Lucas v. Elliot (1992) 3 Cal. App. 4th
888, 892 [4 Cal. Rptr. 2d  746]; Estate of Butler (1988) 205 Cal. App. 3d 311,
317 [252 Cal. Rptr. 210]; In re Marriage of Williams (1972) 29 Cal. App. 3d 368,
377 [105 Cal. Rptr. 406].) Marital settlement agreements incorporated into a
dissolution judgment are construed under the statutory rules governing the
interpretations of contracts generally. ( Civ. Code, § 1635 et seq.; In re
Marriage of Benjamins (1994) 26 Cal. App. 4th 423, 429 [31 Cal. Rptr. 2d 313];
Verner v. Verner (1978) 77 Cal. App. 3d 718, 724 [143 Cal. Rptr. 826]; e.g., In
re Marriage of Trearse (1987) 195 Cal. App. 3d 1189, 1192 [241 Cal. Rptr. 257];
cf.  In re Marriage of Garrity and Bishton (1986) 181 Cal. App. 3d 675, 683 [226
Cal. Rptr. 485] [premarital agreement]; see Hogoboom & King, Cal. Practice
Guide: Family Law (The Rutter Group 1997) P 9:115, p. 9-30; contra, In re
Marriage of Katz (1988) 201 Cal. App. 3d 1029, 1036, fn. 4 [247 Cal. Rptr. 562];
In re Marriage of Benson (1985) 171 Cal. App. 3d 907, 912 [217 Cal. Rptr. 589].)

   Any ambiguity in the language of such an agreement must be construed in favor
of the right to spousal support. ( In re Marriage of Vomacka (1984) 36 Cal. 3d
459, 469 [204 Cal. Rptr. 568, 683 P.2d 248]; In re Marriage of Ousterman (1996)
46 Cal. App. 4th 1090, 1096 [54 Cal. Rptr. 2d 403]; In re Marriage of Brown
(1995) 35 Cal. App. 4th 785, 790 [41 Cal. Rptr. 2d 506].) A term of the
agreement is ambiguous if it is susceptible of more than one reasonable
interpretation. ( Tahoe National Bank v. Phillips (1971) 4 Cal. 3d 11, 22-24 [92
Cal. Rptr. 704, 480 P.2d 320]; Hayter Trucking, Inc. v. Shell Western E&P, Inc.
(1993) 18 Cal. App. 4th 1, 15 [22 Cal. Rptr. 2d 229]; In re Marriage of Paul
(1985) 173 Cal. App. 3d 913, 917 [219 Cal. Rptr. 318, 13 A.L.R.4th 427].)
Provided it supports a meaning to which the language is reasonably susceptible,
extrinsic evidence is admissible to prove the parties' intent as to ambiguous
terms in a marital settlement agreement. ( Code Civ. Proc., § 1856, subd. (g);
Garcia v. Truck Ins. Exchange (1984) 36 Cal. 3d  426, 435 [204 Cal. Rptr. 435,
682 P.2d 1100]; Continental Baking Co. v. Katz (1968) 68 Cal. 2d 512, 522 [67
Cal. Rptr. 761, 439 P.2d 889]; Roddenberry v. Roddenberry (1996) 44 Cal. App.
4th 634, 645 [51 Cal. Rptr. 2d 907]; In re Marriage of Trearse, supra, 195 Cal.
App. 3d at p. 1192.) As a matter of substantive law, extrinsic evidence cannot
be relied on to support a meaning to which the agreement is not reasonably
susceptible. ( Riley v. Bear Creek Planning Committee (1976) 17 Cal. 3d 500,
508-509 [131 Cal. Rptr. 381, 551 P.2d 1213]; In re Marriage of Dawley (1976) 17
Cal. 3d 342, 353, fn. 7 [131 Cal. Rptr. 3, 551 P.2d 323]; Tahoe National Bank v.
Phillips, supra, 4 Cal. 3d at p. 23; Estate of Gaines (1940) 15 Cal. 2d 255,
264-265 [100 P.2d 1055].)

   When the language of the judgment incorporating the marital settlement
agreement is clear, explicit, and unequivocal, and there is no ambiguity, the
court will enforce the express language. ( Civ. Code, § 1638; Lucas v. Elliot,
supra, 3 Cal. App. 4th at pp. 892-894; In re Marriage of Zlatnik (1988) 197 Cal.
App. 3d 1284, 1290-1291 [243 Cal. Rptr. 454]; see Hogoboom & King, Cal. Practice
Guide: Family Law, supra, P 9.123, p. 9-32.) Extrinsic evidence of the parties'
intentions is inadmissible to vary, alter, or add to the terms of an unambiguous
agreement. ( Code Civ. Proc., § 1856; Tahoe National Bank v. Phillips, supra, 4
Cal. 3d at p. 23; Continental Baking Co. v. Katz, supra, 68 Cal. 2d at pp.
521-522; Flynn v.   Flynn (1954) 42 Cal. 2d 55, 60-61 [265 P.2d 865]; Fox v. Fox
, supra, 42 Cal. 2d at p. 52; Barham v. Barham (1949) 33 Cal. 2d 416, 422-423
[202 P.2d 289]; Hayter Trucking, Inc. v. Shell Western E&P, Inc., supra, 18 Cal.
App. 4th at pp. 13-15; see Estate of Butler, supra, 205 Cal. App. 3d at p. 316;
Hogoboom & King, Cal. Practice Guide: Family Law, supra, PP 9.124-9.126, pp.
9-32 to 9-32.1.)

     The language of the present judgment incorporating the marital settlement
agreement is clear, explicit, and unequivocal. Wife was to receive spousal
support after July 15, 1993, only so long as she was a full-time student, at an
accredited institution of higher education, "successfully completing 10 units
each semester or quarter," and "actively pursuing a Bachelors degree." As set
forth in the judgment, the parties "carefully bargained" concerning this
provision. The agreement is not reasonably susceptible of  wife's proffered
interpretation. She asks this court to add qualifying language to the agreement.
To do so would substantially alter the agreement reached by the parties as
clearly and explicitly stated in the judgment. This we cannot do. ( Civ. Code,
§ 1638; Code Civ. Proc., § 1856; Riley v. Bear Creek Planning Committee, supra,
17 Cal. 3d at pp. 508-509; In re Marriage of Dawley, supra, 17 Cal. 3d at p.
353, fn. 7; Tahoe National Bank v. Phillips, supra, 4 Cal. 3d at p. 23;
Continental Baking Co. v. Katz, supra, 68 Cal. 2d at pp. 521-522; Flynn v. Flynn
, supra, 42 Cal. 2d at pp. 60-61; Fox v. Fox, supra, 42 Cal. 2d at p. 52; Barham
v. Barham, supra, 33 Cal. 2d at pp.  422-423; Estate of Gaines, supra, 15 Cal.
2d at pp. 264-265; Hayter Trucking, Inc. v. Shell Western E&P, Inc., supra, 18
Cal. App. 4th at pp. 13-15; Lucas v. Elliot, supra, 3 Cal. App. 4th at pp.
892-894; In re Marriage of Zlatnik, supra, 197 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 1290-1291;
see Estate of Butler, supra, 205 Cal. App. 3d at p. 316; Hogoboom & King, Cal.
Practice Guide: Family Law, supra, PP 9.123 to 9.126, pp. 9-32 to 9-32.1.) The
parties could have agreed the education requirement would be subject to a good
faith or reasonable ability qualification. (E.g., Hilton v. McNitt (1957) 49
Cal. 2d 79, 82 [315 P.2d 1].) No such language was included. Further,  it was
undisputed wife dropped out of college as of May 1995. Under the plain language
of the judgment, spousal support absolutely, irrevocably terminated when wife
ceased attending college and the trial court was without jurisdiction to extend
it. Therefore, the trial court properly concluded wife was not entitled to
spousal support after April 30, 1995.

   Wife relies on decisional authority that is distinguishable from the present
case. In the case of In re Marriage of Brown, supra, 35 Cal. App. 4th at pages
789-790, involving a marriage of long duration, the Court of Appeal held the
trial court had jurisdiction to modify a spousal support award where the
judgment did not contain explicit language precluding modification. Under Family
Code section 4336, subdivision (a), where a marriage is of long duration
(generally 10 years or more), and absent a written agreement to the contrary, a
court retains jurisdiction indefinitely as to spousal support. (35 Cal. App. 4th
at pp. 789-790.) The ambiguous language at issue in Brown was as follows: "
'After the payment of the 60th [monthly] installment of [spousal support] . . .,
[husband's] obligation to pay spousal support to [wife] shall terminate forever
and no Court shall have any jurisdiction to extend the within award of spousal
support either as to amount or duration after said date.' " (35 Cal. App. 4th at
p. 787, italics added.) The Court of Appeal ruled the judgment did not preclude
modification of the spousal support award to extend its duration beyond the 60th
month so long as the request was made prior to that date. ( Id. at pp. 789-791.)
The language at issue in the present case contains no ambiguity like that
construed in Brown.  In re Marriage of Olsen (1994) 24 Cal. App. 4th 1702, 1704
[30 Cal. Rptr. 2d 306], another decision relied upon by wife, involved "an
unforeseen change in the law" which destroyed the effect of the court's prior
order awarding the wife a share of the husband's military retirement benefits in
lieu of spousal support. The court held although there was no retention of
jurisdiction, it had inherent power to do justice under those circumstances. (
Ibid.) In re Marriage of Harbach (1987) 195 Cal. App. 3d 629, 634 [240 Cal.
Rptr. 698], the final decision relied upon by the wife, involved a mutual
mistake of fact underlying the parties' agreement.  Jurisdiction to modify the
decree had been retained by the trial court. No unforeseen change in the law or
mutual  mistake of fact has been asserted in the present case. Further, the
trial court had no jurisdiction to modify the conditions governing termination
of spousal support.

   Finally, on appeal, wife asserts that husband harassed her. She alleges she
was threatened to the point she was forced to drop out of school. However, in
her declaration in support of her modification request, she stated she withdrew
from school because her "[m]other was very ill." Wife informed  husband of that
decision to withdraw from school. Subsequent to the notification wife had
dropped out of school, she alleges husband directed angry threats at her. In
other words, she dropped out of school and thereafter, threats were directed at
her by husband. No doubt, abusive or violent conduct which materially causes a
spouse to withdraw from a college or university can equitably estop a party from
relying on a settlement provision limiting a duty to pay all or part of tuition
or other expenses.   The Courts of Appeal have held: " 'Estoppel applies to
prevent a person from asserting a right where his conduct . . . makes it
unconscionable for him to assert it.' [Citation.]" ( In re Marriage of
Stephenson (1984) 162 Cal. App. 3d 1057, 1072 [209 Cal. Rptr. 383]; In re
Marriage of Umphrey (1990) 218 Cal. App. 3d 647, 658 [267 Cal. Rptr. 218]; In re
Marriage of Recknor (1982) 138 Cal. App. 3d 539, 546 [187 Cal. Rptr. 887, 34
A.L.R.4th 805].) The definition of equitable estoppel as applicable to family
law issues was set forth by the Court of Appeal as follows: "The doctrine of
equitable estoppel is 'pre-eminently' the creature of equity and '[i]ts
foundation is justice and good conscience.' (3 Pomeroy, Equity Jurisprudence, §
802, p. 180.) It has been defined by Professor Pomeroy as '. . . the effect of
the voluntary conduct of a party whereby he is absolutely precluded, both at law
and in equity, from asserting rights which might perhaps have otherwise existed,
either of property, of contract, or of remedy, as against another person, who
has in good faith relied upon such conduct, and has been led thereby to change
his position for the worse, and who on his part acquires some corresponding
right, either of property, or contract, or of remedy.' (3 Pomeroy,  Equity
Jurisprudence, § 804, p. 189.) In short, it is the object of equitable estoppel
to prevent a person from asserting a right which has come into existence by
contract, statute or other rule of law where, because of his conduct, silence or
omission, it would be unconscionable to allow him to do so." ( Brown v. Brown
(1969) 274 Cal. App. 2d 178, 188 [82 Cal. Rptr. 238].)

     Application of the law to the present case supports the trial court's
implicit determination no equitable estoppel bars husband from asserting his
rights under the settlement agreement. Rulings concerning the existence of an
estoppel are factual issues and are normally reserved for resolution by the
trial court and will be upheld if supported by substantial evidence. (
Conservatorship of Kevin M. (1996) 49 Cal. App. 4th 79, 92 [56 Cal. Rptr. 2d
765];  Brown & Bryant, Inc. v. Hartford Accident & Indemnity Co. (1994) 24 Cal.
App. 4th 247, 257, fn. 13 [29 Cal. Rptr. 2d 144].) The trial court reasonably
could have concluded that no threats or other unconscionable conduct on
husband's part caused wife to drop out of school. No showing under oath was made
concerning a single threat by husband prior to the decision by wife to withdraw
from school. Her own evidence expressly states she withdrew from college because
of her mother's illness. No equitable estoppel exists.

      *

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*   See
footnote, ante, page 1434.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

IV. DISPOSITION

   The order is affirmed. Walter P. Iberti is to recover his costs on appeal
from Christine Patricia Flannery Iberti.

   Grignon, J., and Armstrong, J., concurred.

   A petition for a rehearing was denied July 14, 1997.


                              36 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of LYNN and JACK ALAN BOWER. LYNN BOWER,
                   Appellant, v. JACK ALAN BOWER, Respondent.

                                  No. B151217.

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SECOND APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION SIX

          96 Cal. App. 4th 893; 117 Cal. Rptr. 2d 520; 2002 Cal. App.
            LEXIS 2382; 2002 Cal. Daily Op. Service 2113; 2002 Daily
                                Journal DAR 2547


                             March 4, 2002, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:      Superior Court County of Ventura. No. SC014570. Manuel J.
Covarrubias, Commissioner.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports

(1) Appellate Review § 135--Scope of Review--Presumptions--In Favor of Lower
Court's Judgment.  --A judgment or order of the lower court is presumed correct.
All intendments and presumptions are indulged to support it on matters as to
which the record is silent, and error must be affirmatively shown. This is not
only a general principle of appellate practice but an ingredient of the
constitutional doctrine of reversible error.

(2) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 66--Spousal Support--Modification--
Discretion of Trial Court--Standard of Review.  --Whether a modification of a
spousal support order is warranted depends upon the facts and circumstances of
each case, and its propriety rests in the sound discretion of the trial court,
the exercise of which the appellate court will not disturb unless as a matter of
law an abuse of discretion is shown. An abuse of discretion occurs where,
considering all the relevant circumstances, the court has exceeded the bounds of
reason or it can fairly be said that no judge would reasonably make the same
order under the same circumstances. The appellate court must accept as true all
evidence tending to establish the correctness of the trial judge's findings,
resolving all conflicts in the evidence in favor of the prevailing party and
indulging in all legitimate and reasonable inferences to uphold the judgment.

(3) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69--Spousal Support--Modification--
Change of Circumstances--Statutory Criteria.  --In exercising discretion whether
to modify a spousal support order, the court considers the same criteria set
forth in Fam. Code, § 4320, as it considered when making the initial order.
These factors include the ability of the supporting party to pay; the needs of
each party based on the standard of living established during the marriage; the
obligations and assets of each party; and the balance of hardships to each
party. Modification of spousal support requires a material change of
circumstances since the last order. Change of circumstances means a reduction or
increase in the supporting spouse's ability to pay or an increase or decrease in
the supported spouse's needs. It includes all factors affecting need and the
ability to pay. An abuse of discretion occurs when a court modifies a support
order without substantial evidence of a material change of circumstances.

(4) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69--Spousal Support--Modification--
Change of Circumstances--Supported Spouse's Cohabitation with Person of Opposite
Sex.  --For purposes of modifying a spousal support order, a material change of
circumstances may occur if the supported spouse alters his or her lifestyle and
cohabits with a person of the opposite sex. Cohabitation may reduce the need for
spousal support because sharing a household gives rise to economies of scale.
Also, more importantly, the cohabitant's income may be available to the obligee
spouse. Fam. Code, § 4323, subd. (a)(1), provides that there is a rebuttable
presumption, affecting the burden of proof, of decreased need for spousal
support if the supported party is cohabiting with a person of the opposite sex.
The Legislature created the presumption based on thinking that cohabitation
creates a change of circumstances so tied in with the payment of spousal support
as to be significant enough by itself to require a reexamination of whether such
need for support continues in such a way that it still should be charged to the
prior spouse.

(5) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69--Spousal Support--Modification--
Change of Circumstances--Supported Spouse's Cohabitation with Person of Opposite
Sex--Statutory Presumption.  --In proceedings in which a former husband sought
termination of his spousal support obligation, the trial court did not abuse its
discretion in concluding that the former wife's cohabitation with another man
was a change of circumstances triggering the presumption of Fam. Code, § 4323
(rebuttable presumption of decreased need for spousal support if supported party
is cohabiting with person of opposite sex). The trial court had found, three
years earlier, that there was no cohabitation, and that the man the former wife
was living with was merely a roommate with whom she shared expenses. The former
wife sought to show that there was no change of circumstances between the
earlier proceeding and the current one. However, when the Legislature chose to
use the word "cohabiting," it was selecting a word of particular legal
significance that carries more meaning than two persons of the opposite sex
living under the same roof. In the current proceedings, the parties had
stipulated that the former wife was cohabiting with the man, which was
tantamount to a concession that, at least on a practical level, she was living
with him as though he were her husband. In addition, they maintained a joint
savings account to which they equally contributed to save up for vacations and
trips taken together. This was a material change of circumstances triggering the
presumption of Fam. Code, § 4323.

   [See 11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (9th ed. 1990) Husband and Wife, § 265.]

(6) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 70--Spousal Support--Modification--
Change of Circumstances--Order--Adequacy of Reasons for Order.  --In proceedings
in which a former husband sought termination of his spousal support obligation,
the trial court gave adequate reasons for its order reducing spousal support and
terminating it after one year. In addition to finding that the former wife was
cohabiting with another man, the statement of decision showed that the trial
court also considered the increase in the former wife's earnings and assets. The
trial court explained that it was continuing reduced spousal support for one
year to enable the former wife to purchase a residence without having to invade
her savings and other assets. This record permitted intelligent appellate
review. The trial court's articulated rationale could not be equated with an
abuse of discretion. Rather, the record justified an outright termination of
spousal support, and it was not required to explain in detail why it extended
largesse to the former wife.

(7) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 35--Attorney Fees and Costs--Factors
Considered--Discretion of Trial Court.  --In proceedings in which the trial
court reduced and then terminated a former husband's spousal support obligation,
the trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying the former wife's
request for attorney fees and costs, notwithstanding that the former husband had
a greater ability to pay. Financial resources are only one factor for the court
to consider in determining how to apportion the overall cost of the litigation
equitably between the parties. A motion for attorney fees and costs is left to
the sound discretion of the trial court. In the absence of a clear showing of
abuse, its determination will not be disturbed on appeal. The trial court's
order will be overturned only if, considering all the evidence viewed most
favorably in support of its order, no judge could reasonably make the order
made. In the present case, the former wife did not prevail on the order to show
cause, and although the former husband had a greater ability to pay, it could
not be said that the trial court abused its discretion as a matter of law.

COUNSEL: George H. Hultman for Appellant.

Law Offices of Arthur Zittell, Arthur Zitell; Lascher & Lascher and Gabriele
Mezger-Lashly for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Yegan, J., with Gilbert, P. J., and Perren, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: YEGAN

OPINION

     YEGAN, J.

   Wife unsuccessfully appeals from orders reducing and then terminating spousal
support and denying her request for attorney's fees and costs. She contends that
the trial court (1) erroneously applied Family Code section 4323 (presumption of
decreased need for spousal support if the supported party is cohabiting with a
person of the opposite sex), (2) failed to give adequate reasons for its order
reducing and terminating spousal support, and (3) abused its discretion in
denying attorney's fees and costs.  1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   All
statutory references are to the Family Code.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Notwithstanding the manner in which the contentions are phrased, in reality
appellant asks us to reweigh the evidence and substitute our discretion for that
of the trial court. As we have previously indicated, these are not legitimate
functions of the Court of Appeal. ( In re Marriage of Martin (1991) 229 Cal.
App. 3d 1196, 1200 [280 Cal. Rptr. 565]; Estate of Gilkison (1998) 65 Cal. App.
4th 1443, 1448-1449 [77 Cal. Rptr. 2d 463].) We again lament, "no one seems to
listen." ( In re Marriage of Martin, supra, 229 Cal. App. 3d at p. 1200.)

   1995 ORDER

   The parties' 15-year marriage was dissolved in October 1995. Husband was
ordered to pay $ 1,700 per month spousal support. At that time, wife's monthly
gross income was $ 2,586.

   1997 ORDER

   In February 1997 husband sought modification or termination of spousal
support. He alleged that wife was cohabiting with Mr. S. and that her earnings
had increased.  2 Wife admitted only that she had "moved in" with Mr. S. and was
splitting "living expenses" with him. She referred to Mr. S.  as "a roommate."
Wife attached checks payable to S. "evidencing [her] one half [payment] of the
rent, utilities, and food." By this arrangement, wife was saving "a little bit
of money on rent." Her income and expense declaration showed a current monthly
gross income of $ 2,690.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Although
not required to do so, we refer to wife's cohabitant by his last initial only.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The trial court denied husband's request to modify or terminate spousal
support. It found that wife and Mr. S. were only "roommates" and ". . . that she
pays her fair share of living expenses in regards to rent, utilities, and food."
Had husband appealed from this order, he would not have prevailed. He wisely
recognized the trial court's ruling as an adverse factual finding on the issue
of cohabitation.

    2000 ORDER

   In October 2000 husband again sought termination of spousal support. Husband
alleged that wife's income had increased to a level approaching her standard of
living when the marriage was dissolved. He again claimed that wife was
cohabiting with Mr. S. This time, he had proof. Husband submitted a bank
statement showing that wife and Mr. S. maintained a joint savings account. The
parties stipulated that wife was cohabiting with Mr. S.

   Notwithstanding the stipulation, wife insisted that her circumstances had not
changed since the 1997 proceeding. She alleged that she had received "only a
modest increase in earnings" and that she "live[d] in an apartment with a room
mate [sic]." Wife's income and expense declaration showed a current monthly
gross income of $ 3,598. She had $ 500 in cash,  $ 3,000 in savings, and $
13,347 in other liquid assets.

   The trial court found that wife "is now cohabiting with Mr.[S.] and [is] not
merely a roommate . . . ." Noting section 4323, the trial court applied the
presumption that wife had a reduced need for spousal support. It ruled that wife
had "failed to meet her burden to refute the presumption . . . ." It did not
immediately terminate spousal support because wife's "standard of living during
the marriage was higher than what she has now, and [husband] continues to have
the financial ability to provide support." The court reduced monthly spousal
support to $ 500 and ordered that it be terminated after one year. The court
believed that the "additional year period will allow [wife] the time and income
to be able to obtain her own residence . . . without having to invade the
savings and other assets that she has been able to accumulate . . . ." The court
denied wife's request for attorney's fees and costs.

   STANDARDS OF REVIEW

     " 'A judgment or order of the lower court is presumed correct. All
intendments and presumptions are indulged to support it on matters as to which
the record is silent, and error must be affirmatively shown. This is not only a
general principle of appellate practice but an ingredient of the constitutional
doctrine of reversible error.' [Citations]." ( Denham v. Superior Court (1970) 2
Cal. 3d 557, 564 [86 Cal. Rptr. 65, 468 P.2d 193].)

     " 'Whether a modification of a spousal support order is warranted depends
upon the facts and circumstances of each case, and its propriety rests in the
sound discretion of the trial court the exercise of which this court will not
disturb unless as a matter of law an abuse of discretion is shown.' [Citation.]
An abuse of discretion occurs 'where, considering all the relevant
circumstances, the court has exceeded the bounds of reason or it can fairly be
said that no judge would reasonably make the same order under the same
circumstances.' [Citation.]" ( In re Marriage of Olson (1993) 14 Cal. App. 4th
1, 7 [17 Cal. Rptr. 2d 480].) We " 'must accept as true all evidence tending to
establish the correctness of the trial judge's findings, resolving all conflicts
in the evidence in favor of the prevailing party and indulging in all legitimate
and reasonable inferences to uphold the judgment.' " ( In re Marriage of
Stephenson (1995) 39 Cal. App. 4th 71, 82, fn. 5 [46 Cal. Rptr. 2d 8].) As we
shall explain, the trial court's statement of decision (see ante, p. 898)
contains factual findings, adverse to wife, which are fatal to her appeal. ( In
re Marriage of Martin, supra, 229 Cal. App. 3d at p. 1200.) She has not
demonstrated, as a matter of law, that these factual findings are not supported
by the record (ibid.) or that the trial court abused its discretion as a matter
of law. ( Estate of Gilkison, supra, 65 Cal. App. 4th at pp. 1448-1449.)

   MODIFICATION OF SPOUSAL SUPPORT AND THE PRESUMPTION OF SECTION 4323

     In exercising discretion whether to modify a spousal support order, "the
court considers the same criteria set forth in section 4320 as it considered
when making the initial order . . . . [Citation.] These factors include the
ability of the supporting party to pay; the needs of each party based on the
standard of living established during the marriage; the obligations and assets
of each party; and the balance of hardships to each party. (§ 4320, subds.
(c)-(e), (j).)" ( In re Marriage of Terry (2000) 80 Cal. App. 4th 921, 928 [95
Cal. Rptr. 2d 760].) " 'Modification of spousal support . . . requires a
material change of circumstances  since the last order. [Citations.] Change of
circumstances means a reduction or increase in the supporting spouse's ability
to pay and/or an increase or decrease in the supported spouse's needs.
[Citations.] It includes all factors affecting need and the ability to pay.
[Citation.] . . . [A]n abuse [of discretion] occurs when a court modifies a
support order without substantial evidence of a material change of
circumstances. [Citations.]' [Citations.]" ( Id., at pp. 936-937.)

     A material change of circumstances may occur if the supported spouse alters
his or her lifestyle and cohabits with a person of the opposite sex.
Cohabitation may reduce the need for spousal support because "sharing a
household gives rise to economies of scale. [Citation.] Also, more importantly,
the cohabitant's income may be available to the obligee spouse." ( In re
Marriage of Schroeder (1987) 192 Cal. App. 3d 1154, 1159 [238 Cal. Rptr. 12].)
Section 4323, subdivision (a)(1), provides, "[T]here is a rebuttable
presumption, affecting the burden of proof, of decreased need for spousal
support if the supported party is cohabiting with a person of the opposite sex."
"[T]he Legislature created the presumption . . . based on thinking that
cohabitation . . . creates a change of circumstances so tied in with the payment
of spousal support as to be significant enough by itself to require a
re-examination of whether such need for support continues in such a way that it
still should be charged to the prior spouse." ( In re Marriage of Leib (1978) 80
Cal. App. 3d 629, 643 [145 Cal. Rptr. 763].)

   NO ABUSE OF DISCRETION IN CONCLUDING THAT WIFE'S COHABITATION WAS A CHANGE OF
CIRCUMSTANCES TRIGGERING THE PRESUMPTION OF SECTION 4323

     In its statement of decision, the trial court observed that in the 1997
proceeding it had "found that the person with whom [wife] was residing . . . in
effect, was a roommate." It concluded that the evidence in the present
proceeding clearly established "that [wife] is now cohabiting with Mr. [S.] and
[is] not merely a roommate . . . ." It therefore applied the presumption of
section 4323 that wife had a decreased need for support.

   Wife alleges that the trial court abused its discretion because her
cohabitation with Mr. S. "was clear in 1997"  and the trial court "in effect
found" cohabitation in the 1997 proceeding. She submits that the 1997 order's
reference to In re Marriage of Lieb, supra, 80 Cal. App. 3d 629, 643, shows that
the trial court found that she was cohabiting with Mr. S. in 1997. The 1997
order cites In re Marriage of Lieb and says that she is "not 'giving away
household services at the expense of obligor former spouse.' " Thus, wife
argues, cohabitation was not a change of circumstances and could not have
triggered the presumption of section 4323.

   Wife's interpretation of the 1997 order flies in the face of the rules on
appeal (ante, pp. 898-899) and violates the "obligation of the reader,"
articulated by Justice Gilbert in Harris v. Superior Court (1992) 3 Cal. App.
4th 661, 665-667 [4 Cal. Rptr. 2d 564].) 3 In 1997 the trial court neither
expressly  nor impliedly found cohabitation. The fair and only import  of that
order is that the trial court factually found that there was no cohabitation at
that time. That the order says she was not making a gift of the value of
household services does not show that she was cohabiting with Mr. S.  The 1997
ruling does not mention any presumption of decreased need that a cohabitation
finding would entail. In 1997 the trial court credited wife's representation
that Mr. S. was merely a roommate: "[Wife] indicates that Mr. [S.] is, in
effect, a roommate. She attaches persuasive evidence that she pays her fair
share of living expenses in regards to rent, utilities, and food." Thus, the
reader has let "the wish for a particular result color the meaning" of the
order. ( Id., at p. 666.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   In Harris
v. Superior Court, supra, 3 Cal. App. 4th at pages 665-666, under the heading "A
short digression on the subject of what cases mean--obligations of the writer
and the reader" THIS COURT SAID: "An opinion ought to be written so that a
reasonably intelligent reader knows what it means. The opinion ought to be
concise and clear, not vague and obscure. The holding of a case should state a
principle of law with sufficient clarity so that persons can carry on their
affairs with reasonable predictability as to the legal consequences of their
actions. If, however, an opinion be reasonably susceptible to different
interpretations, then the writer may have failed to meet his or her obligation.
[P] On the other hand, if the reader lets the wish for a particular result color
the meaning of an opinion, then the reader has not met his or her obligation. It
is understandable that lawyers often view a case only from the perspective that
favors their client. Lawyers, however, should not practice '. . . the art of
proving by words multiplied for the purpose, that white is black and black is
white, according as they are paid.' (Swift, Gulliver's Travels (1726) A Voyage
to the Country of the Houyhnhbms, ch. 5.) [P] This approach is unproductive
because ' "[a] litigant cannot find shelter under a rule announced in a decision
that is inapplicable to a different factual situation in his own case, nor may a
decision of a court be rested on quotations from previous opinions that are not
pertinent by reason of dissimilarity of facts in the cited cases and in those in
the case under consideration." ' ( Harris v. Capital Growth Investors XIV (1991)
52 Cal. 3d 1142, 1157 [278 Cal. Rptr. 614, 805 P.2d 873], quoting Southern Cal.
Enterprises v. Walter & Co. (1947) 78 Cal. App. 2d 750, 757 [178 P.2d 785].)"
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The 1997 evidence that wife and Mr. S. were roommates sharing expenses was
insufficient by itself to establish cohabitation: "When the Legislature chose to
use 'cohabiting' it was selecting a word of particular legal significance that
carries more meaning than two persons of the opposite sex living under the same
roof." ( In re Marriage of Thweatt (1979) 96 Cal. App. 3d 530, 534 [157 Cal.
Rptr. 826].) In Thweatt the appellate court found no cohabitation where the wife
shared expenses with two male boarders and there was "no evidence of a sexual
relationship, a romantic involvement, or even a homemaker-companion relationship
between either of the men and wife." ( Id., at p. 535.) The 1997 proceeding was
similarly devoid of such evidence.

   In the 2000 proceeding there was substantial evidence showing that wife's
relationship with Mr. S. had ripened into more than just an arrangement for
sharing expenses. The stipulation to cohabitation is tantamount to a concession
that, at least on a practical level, wife was living with Mr. S. as though he
were her husband. In addition, they maintained a joint savings account to "which
they equally contribute[d]  to save up for vacations and trips taken together."
This was a material change of circumstances triggering the presumption of
section 4323.

   THE TRIAL COURT GAVE ADEQUATE REASONS FOR ITS ORDER

     Wife contends that the trial court failed to give adequate reasons for its
order reducing spousal support and terminating it after one year. Wife  alleges:
"[T]here is no explanation for the step down order in support other than [that]
the . . . Trial Court found that [wife] is now cohabiting." But the statement of
decision shows that the court also considered the increase in wife's earnings
and assets. The court observed that, since the 1997 proceeding, wife's monthly
earnings  had increased from $ 2,700 to $ 3,600. It also noted that in 1997 wife
had "listed savings of $ 400, and no stock, bonds or other liquid assets." In
the present proceeding wife listed "savings of $ 3,000 and stocks, bonds and
other liquid assets of approximately $ 13,000." The trial court explained that
it was continuing reduced spousal support for one year to enable wife to
purchase a residence "without having to invade [her] savings and other assets .
. . ." The record permits intelligent appellate review. The trial court's
articulated rationale cannot be equated with an abuse of discretion. In fact,
the record would justify an outright termination of spousal support. It need not
explain in detail why it extended largesse to wife.

   THE TRIAL COURT DID NOT ABUSE ITS DISCRETION IN DENYING WIFE'S ATTORNEY'S
FEES

     Wife contends that the trial court abused its discretion in denying her
request for attorney's fees and costs because husband's ability to pay was clear
and she was still in need of support. (§ 2032, subd. (a).) "[T]he court shall
take into consideration the need for the award to enable each party, to the
extent practical, to have sufficient financial resources to present the party's
case adequately . . . ." (Id., subd. (b).) However, "[f]inancial resources are
only one factor for the court to consider in determining how to apportion the
overall cost of the litigation equitably between the parties . . . ." (Ibid.)
"[A] motion for attorney fees and costs . . . is left to the sound discretion of
the trial court. [Citation.] In the absence of a clear showing of abuse, its
determination will not be disturbed on appeal. [Citation.] '[T]he trial court's
order will be overturned only if, considering all the evidence viewed most
favorably in support of its order, no judge could reasonably make the order
made. [Citations.]' [Citation.]" ( In re Marriage of Sullivan (1984) 37 Cal. 3d
762, 768-769 [209 Cal. Rptr. 354, 691 P.2d 1020].)

   The trial court did not abuse its discretion. Wife did not prevail on the
order to show cause. Although husband had a greater ability to pay, we cannot
say that the trial court abused its discretion as a matter of law. ( Estate of
Gilkison, supra, 65 Cal. App. 4th at pp. 1448-1449.)

    DISPOSITION

   The 2000 order is affirmed. Costs to respondent.

   Gilbert, P. J., and Perren, J., concurred.


                              37 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             In re the Marriage of PATRICIA G. and DONALD D. PAUL.
          PATRICIA G.  PAUL, Appellant, v. DONALD D. PAUL, Respondent

                                  No. B001732

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Three

            173 Cal. App. 3d 913; 219 Cal. Rptr. 318; 1985 Cal. App.
                          LEXIS 2682; 63 A.L.R.4th 427


                                October 29, 1985

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Los Angeles County, No. D 953217, James N.
Reese, Judge.

COUNSEL: Robert Mann for Appellant.

Donald D. Paul, in pro. per., for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Klein, P. J., with Lui and Arabian, JJ., concurring.

OPINION BY: KLEIN

OPINION

     Appellant Patricia G. Paul (Wife) appeals from an order denying her an
increase in spousal support payments from respondent Donald D. Paul (Husband),
and from a denial of a motion for new trial.

   Because the trial court abused its discretion, the judgment is reversed and
the matter remanded.

   Procedural and Factual Background

   Wife and Husband were divorced in late 1978 after a marriage of over 17
years.  The November 6, 1978, interlocutory judgment dissolving the marriage was
based on a "marital settlement agreement" between the parties.

   The judgment provided for monthly child support to be paid by Husband to
Wife, the custodial parent, at a rate of $ 300 per minor child.  At the time of
the judgment, all three of the parties' children were under 18 years of age and
resided with Wife.  The judgment contained a spousal support order requiring
Husband to pay $ 700 per month to Wife.

    The judgment also contained a provision which permitted Husband to reduce
his liability of $ 700 per month by $ 1 for every $ 2 of "net earnings" earned
by Wife from employment, for that portion in excess of $ 400 per month.  The
provision defined "net earnings" as follows: "Net earnings for the purposes of
this paragraph shall be defined as gross income less all legally required
payroll deductions including, federal and state income taxes, social security
and disability insurance, plus union dues, if required."

   In May 1982, Husband filed an order to show cause requesting that Wife be
ordered to reimburse Husband for overpayment of spousal support. The following
month, Wife filed her own order to show cause requesting the amounts of child
and spousal support be increased from their original level, set in the 1978
judgment.

   On March 9, 1983, the trial court issued an order modifying the 1978
judgment.  The order increased the amount of child support payable to Wife from
$ 300 to $ 500, with respect to the one remaining child (Charles), until Charles
attained the age of majority (Oct. 11, 1984).  However, the level of spousal
support was not increased and Husband was to be credited with a total of $
12,187 against future spousal support obligations, as a result of previous
overpayments made to Wife during the period between September 1979 through May
1982.

   Contentions

   Wife contends the trial court abused its discretion by failing: (1) to take
extrinsic evidence as to the parties' true meaning of the term "net earnings";
and (2) to consider Wife's expenditures on college tuition and related costs for
her adult children as a factor in establishing her need for increased spousal
support.

   Husband controverts these contentions.

   Discussion

   1. The trial court abused its discretion.

   (a) The trial court should have entertained evidence as to an ambiguous term
in the judgment.

    Before confronting the issue of what is required of a trial court when
interpreting an ambiguous term of a judgment, a preliminary determination that
an ambiguity exists is a necessary requisite.  ( Lippman v. Sears, Roebuck & Co.
(1955) 44 Cal.2d 136, 145 [280 P. 2d 775]; Professional Bldg.  of Eureka, Inc.
v. Anita Frocks, Inc., No. 6 (1960) 178 Cal.App.2d 276, 278-279 [2 Cal.Rptr.
914].)

   In the instant case, there is ample evidence in the record that a patent
ambiguity existed with respect to the meaning of the  term "net earnings." One
example is illustrated by the following colloquy between the trial court and
Wife's attorney:

   "Mr. Mann: The question now becomes: Does it not appear that definition of
'net earnings' pertains to a situation where Mrs. Paul is an employee?  It
refers only to withholding.

   "The Court: Correct.

   "Mr. Mann: Does it define what 'net earnings' are if Mrs. Paul is not an
employee?

   "The Court: That's correct; it doesn't.

   "Mr. Mann: It doesn't.  It seems to me that the judgment is silent as to what
'net earnings' are.  If Mrs. Paul is not an employee; that is, if Mrs. Paul is
an independent contractor which for purposes of this case always has been.

   "The Court: That's correct."

    Well-settled law establishes that appellate courts must refrain from
interfering with the trial court's broad discretion to determine the proper
amount of spousal support, and are loathe to reverse absent a showing of abuse
of discretion. ( In re Marriage of Connolly (1979) 23 Cal.3d 590, 597-598 [153
Cal.Rptr. 423, 591 P.2d 911]; Philbin v. Philbin (1971) 19 Cal.App.3d 115, 119
[96 Cal. Rptr. 408]; Miller v. Miller (1970) 11 Cal.App.3d 197, 199 [89
Cal.Rptr. 643].)

    However, in a case where, as here, a term of the judgment for dissolution is
ambiguous and susceptible of more than one reasonable interpretation, the trial
court is in error for failing to entertain extrinsic evidence in an effort to
resolve the ambiguity. ( Carlton v. Superior Court (1966) 240 Cal.App.2d 586,
588 [49 Cal.Rptr. 759]; Emanuel v. Emanuel (1975) 50 Cal.App.3d 56, 59 [123
Cal.Rptr. 249]; In re Marriage of Sherman (1984) 162 Cal.App.3d 1132, 1137-1138
[208 Cal.Rptr. 832].)

   Carlton dealt with the question as to the nature of payments to the wife
under a divorce decree.  The Carlton court made the following determination:
"[If] the parties' agreement embodied in a consent decree is ambiguous, then
extrinsic evidence of intent is admissible to determine whether the decree
orders . . . support payments or . . . payments on account of a property
settlement." ( Carlton v. Superior Court, supra, 240 Cal.App.2d at p. 588.)

   Emanuel involved another interpretation of a divorce decree.  The decree
approved a property settlement agreement between the spouses and ordered
performance of its executory provisions.  The Emanuel court stated: "[That] like
any other contract which requires interpretation to ascertain the intent of the
parties, an agreement such as the one here may require the resort to extrinsic
evidence to determine the true intent of the parties." ( Emanuel v. Emanuel,
supra, 50 Cal.App.3d at p. 59.)

   In the recent case of In re Marriage of Sherman, supra, 162 Cal.App.3d at
pages 1137-1138, when confronted with the issue of modification of spousal
support, the court expressly approved of the consideration of extrinsic evidence
in the form of deposition testimony of the wife's counsel to find that the
parties intended the wife's support payments to continue even after her
remarriage.

   Here, Wife sought to introduce extrinsic evidence at trial to support her
contention that the definition of "net earnings," was applicable only if she
were working as an employee, not as an independent contractor.

   The trial court should have admitted Wife's proffered evidence, relative to
the parties' true intent in formulating the underlying "marital settlement
agreement," and the trial court's failure to do so was an abuse of discretion.

   (b) Wife's additional expenses caused by outlays for college education of
their adult child should have been considered by the trial court in analyzing
need for spousal support.

    Wife contends the trial court should have considered her expenditures toward
college education for the parties' adult  child when establishing Wife's need
for increased spousal support. We agree.

   Wife sought modification of the interlocutory judgment of dissolution to
increase her amount of spousal support from Husband.  Wife claimed a change of
circumstances necessitated such an increase, in that she was paying for college
related expenses for one of the parties' adult children. Because the child had
reached age 18, Wife no longer received any child support from Husband, which
support could have been used to help defray some of these additional costs.
Husband refused to help the child in this  regard, but Wife continued to assist
even though it placed a difficult financial burden on her.

    The spousal support order is modifiable as to amount of payment.  Civil Code
section 4811, subdivision (b), provides that spousal support is always "subject
to subsequent modification or revocation by court order, . . . except to the
extent that any written agreement, . . . entered into in open court between the
parties, specifically provides to the contrary." Here, the judgment expressly
states that the amount of spousal support is subject to modification either by
mutual agreement of the parties or by court order.

   Thus, the trial court had the authority to modify the spousal support
payments as warranted by the evidence.   However, the trial court's refusal to
consider the educational expenditures by Wife for their adult child was an abuse
of discretion.

   In construing Civil Code section 4801, subdivision (a), which sets forth the
relevant factors to be considered in making an award of spousal support, the
California Supreme Court concluded "the term, 'circumstances,' 'includes
"practically everything which has a legitimate bearing upon the present and
prospective matters relating to the lives of both parties."'" ( In re Marriage
of Morrison (1978) 20 Cal.3d 437, 454 [143 Cal.Rptr. 139, 573 P.2d 41].)

   In practice, courts have expressly considered the fact that the supporting
spouse is paying for the college education of an adult child when determining
that spouse's ability to pay spousal support to the supported spouse.  (See,
e.g., In re Marriage of Epstein (1979) 24 Cal.3d 76, 90 [154 Cal.Rptr. 413, 592
P.2d 1165]; In re Marriage of Kelley (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 82, 95 [134 Cal.Rptr.
259]; Hall v. Hall (1954) 42 Cal.2d 435, 441 [267 P.2d 249].)

   Our Supreme Court in Epstein stated the "[husband's] income is inadequate
both to sustain two separate households at the standard of living previously
enjoyed by the parties and to provide for the daughter's college education." (
In re Marriage of Epstein, supra, 24 Cal.3d at p. 90.) The Epstein court
concluded the trial court had not abused its discretion in limiting the
husband's spousal support payments to $ 750 per month, in view of the fact that
his monthly expenses totalled $ 1,750 per month, including $ 350 for the adult
daughter's college education, while his monthly net income amounted to $ 2,600.
(Ibid.)

   In Kelley, the court held a modification of spousal support from $ 500 per
month to $ 300 was justified by the trial court, due to the husband's expected
increased expenses flowing from the enrollment of a daughter in college.  ( In
re Marriage of Kelley, supra, 64 Cal.App.3d at p. 95.)

   It would be an anomaly for courts to entertain these expenses in the fact
situations such as Epstein and Kelley as factors to be weighed when setting
spousal support, and yet ignore such similar factors when it is the supported
spouse who is expending monies on education of an adult child. "What's good for
the goose is good for the gander," is quite apropos here.  We find such
inconsistency unacceptable and reject its further application to the instant
case.

   The record here shows the trial court was sympathetic toward Wife's position
but determined it lacked precedential authority to make an order based upon her
contributions toward the support and maintenance of an adult child. In addition
to  the foregoing, the following authority also supports our position.

   In the case of In re Marriage of Siegel (1972) 26 Cal.App.3d 88, 90 [102
Cal.Rptr. 613], the husband appealed the trial court's increase of spousal
support to the wife on the basis that the modification order considered the
wife's increase in expenses attributable to the fact that she was caring for
their adult daughter and granddaughter.

   The Siegel court pointed out that the trial court expressly noted its lack of
authority to require the husband to support his adult daughter and granddaughter
directly.  However, it recognized the wife's moral and social obligation to her
progeny and concluded this was a circumstance it could legitimately consider in
determining the wife's need, and the amount her former husband should pay for
her support.  ( Id., at p. 93.) The trial court order included the following
realistic observation, "'The [wife] will be naturally inclined to short herself
and the younger boys if not given additional help to support the adult daughter
and grandchild.'" ( Id., at p. 91.)

   The Siegel court further elaborated: "Fulfilling her maternal obligation is a
commendable part of her way of life just as much as entertaining her friends,
contributing to worthy charitable causes or giving presents to her relatives on
their birthdays, at Christmas or other memorable occasions.  (Gen. see Anderson
v.  Anderson, 124 Cal. 48, 54, 55 [56 P. 630, 57 P. 81].)" ( Id., at p. 93.)

   The same rationale is applicable to this case.  Wife's choosing to spend
money to educate her adult children, even though not legally obligated to do so,
is not only justified but is also morally commendable.

    This decision recognizes that the trial court must continue to weigh all
relevant factors and circumstances as proscribed by statute when making an award
of spousal support. In the present case, it is relevant that Husband is a
lawyer, that Wife is also a well-educated working woman, and that the importance
of college education in today's society is known to them.  It is relevant to
consider the standard of living to which the parties are accustomed, and that
Wife seeks additional spousal support not for silly whims or fanciful pursuits,
but for the education of their children.

   Because the trial court failed to weigh the fact that Wife was making
legitimate educational expenditures which would necessarily impact upon her need
for spousal support, we find the trial court abused its discretion.

   The judgment is reversed and remanded for proceedings in accordance with this
opinion.

    Wife is entitled to costs on appeal and may apply to the trial court for an
award of attorney's fees.


                              38 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            In re the Marriage of BARBARA J. and PATRICK J. RASSIER.
             BARBARA J. RASSIER, Appellant, v. PATRICK J. RASSIER,
                                  Respondent.

                                  No. B145310.

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SECOND APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION FIVE

          96 Cal. App. 4th 1431; 118 Cal. Rptr. 2d 113; 2002 Cal. App.
            LEXIS 3153; 2002 Cal. Daily Op. Service 2652; 2002 Daily
                                Journal DAR 3208


                            March 22, 2002, Decided

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Review Denied June 19, 2002, Reported at: 2002 Cal.
LEXIS 4226.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from the Superior Court for Los Angeles County. Super.
Ct. No. BL037244. Richard Montes, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports

(1a) (1b) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 118.2--Recognition, Enforcement,
and Effect of Foreign Orders and Decrees--Spousal Support Order--Modification.
--The trial court lacked jurisdiction to modify a spousal support obligation
imposed by an order of a Florida court in the parties' dissolution of marriage
judgment, even though the parties no longer resided in Florida and the husband
resided in California. Fam. Code, § 4909, provides that a California tribunal
may not modify a spousal support order issued by a tribunal of another state
having continuing, exclusive jurisdiction over that order under the law of that
state, and Florida had such jurisdiction over the order. The fact that Florida
no longer had exclusive and continuing jurisdiction over the parties, because
neither party resided in Florida, was immaterial to whether a California court
could modify the Florida spousal support order. Once a court obtains personal
jurisdiction over a party in an action, jurisdiction over the party continues
for subsequent proceedings that arise out of that action.

   [See 11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (9th ed. 1990) Husband and Wife, § 252.]

(2) Courts § 15--Jurisdiction--Loss of Jurisdiction--Continuing Jurisdiction.
--The continuance of a state's judicial jurisdiction, once such jurisdiction has
been obtained, is not dependent upon the constant existence of some
jurisdictional basis. Such a basis must exist at the initiation of the
proceeding; it need not continuously do so thereafter. Once a court obtains
jurisdiction over the parties in an action and enters an order in that action,
the court retains jurisdiction to vacate, reverse, or modify that order, even if
there is no other basis for jurisdiction over the parties at that time, such as
when the parties move out of the state in which the court is located, and even
if there has been a lapse of many years between the issuance of the order and
the request for modification.

COUNSEL: Michael L. Guisti for Appellant.

Loring M. Myers for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Mosk, J., with Turner, P. J., and Armstrong, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: MOSK

OPINION

     MOSK, J.

   INTRODUCTION

   Appellant Barbara J. Rassier appeals from an order by the Los Angeles
Superior Court modifying a spousal support obligation imposed upon respondent
Patrick J. Rassier by order of a Florida court in a 1985 Florida dissolution of
marriage judgment. Because we hold that notwithstanding that  neither of the
parties now resides in Florida, a California court does not have the power to
modify a spousal support order issued by the Florida court, we reverse the
modification order.

   BACKGROUND

   Barbara and Patrick 1 were married in 1968, separated in 1984, and divorced
in 1985. At the time of their divorce, both Barbara and Patrick were residents
of Florida; therefore, the dissolution proceedings were in a Florida court. The
Florida court ordered Patrick to pay Barbara "permanent" spousal support of $
900 per month, which support would terminate only upon Barbara's or Patrick's
death or Barbara's remarriage.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   For
reasons of clarity, with no disrespect intended, we refer to the parties by
their first names.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Sometime after the divorce, Barbara moved to Guam and Patrick moved to
California. In November 1998, Patrick stopped making his spousal support
payments. In October 1999, Barbara registered, and sought to enforce, the
Florida spousal support order in Los Angeles Superior Court, because at that
time Patrick was a resident of Los Angeles County. The superior court issued a
wage and earnings assignment order that ordered Patrick's employer to withhold a
portion of Patrick's earnings and to pay the withheld earnings to Barbara
through the office of the court trustee.

   In February 2000, Patrick filed an order to show cause in the same
proceeding, asking the superior court to terminate the Florida court's spousal
support order. Barbara opposed Patrick's request on the ground that the
California court does not have jurisdiction to modify or terminate the Florida
court's order, citing California Family Code sections 4909, subdivision (f), and
4910, subdivision (c).  2 The superior court granted Patrick's request and
ordered Patrick's spousal support obligation reduced to $ 0 per month, holding
that Florida no longer had exclusive and continuing jurisdiction over either
party because neither party resided in Florida.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   All
further statutory references are to the California Family Code unless otherwise
indicated.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   On appeal, Barbara contends that the superior court's order modifying the
spousal support must be reversed because (1) under section 4909, subdivision (f)
, the court was precluded from modifying or  terminating the order, (2) under
the principle of comity, the California court must defer to the Florida court's
jurisdiction over the order, and (3) even if the superior court had the power to
modify or terminate the spousal support order, the court abused its discretion
in reducing the award to zero. Because we hold that that  section 4909,
subdivision (f), precludes the modification of the Florida spousal support order
and thus requires reversal of the superior court's order modifying the spousal
support obligation, we need not address Barbara's other contentions.

   DISCUSSION

     Subdivision (f) of section 4909 provides, in relevant part: "A tribunal of
this state may not modify a spousal support order issued by a tribunal of
another state having continuing, exclusive jurisdiction over that order under
the law of that state." Thus, the superior court, as a "tribunal of this state"
( Fam. Code, § 4902), was precluded by statute from modifying the Florida
spousal support order if Florida, under its law, has continuing, exclusive
jurisdiction over the order. It does.

   Subdivision (6) of Florida Statutes section 88.2051 , which enactment is part
of the Florida Uniform Interstate Family Support Act, provides, in relevant
part: "A tribunal of this state [Florida] issuing a support order consistent
with the law of this state has continuing exclusive jurisdiction over a spousal
support order throughout the existence of the support obligation." Although the
Florida Uniform Interstate Support Act was not in effect at the time the Florida
court issued the original spousal support order in this case, Florida courts
have determined that the act "applies to all proceedings for support or for
modification of support orders . . . commenced on or after [July 1, 1997]." (
Department of Revenue v. Cascella (Fla.Dist.Ct.App. 2000) 751 So.2d 1273, 1275,
italics added; see also Department of Revenue ex rel. Sloan v. Sloan
(Fla.Dist.Ct.App. 1999) 743 So.2d 1131, 1133, fn. 3.) Therefore, Florida
Statutes section 88.2051 applies to Patrick's request to terminate the spousal
support order; and California Family Code section 4909, subdivision (f)
precludes the superior court from modifying the Florida spousal support order
because, under Florida Statutes section 88.2051, the Florida court that issued
the support order has continuing, exclusive jurisdiction over the order.

   Even if the law in effect at the time of the Florida spousal support order
did control whether the Florida court has continuing exclusive jurisdiction over
the order, the result is the same.  Florida Statutes section 61.14, as it read
in 1985, provided in relevant part: "(1) [W]hen a party is required by court
order to make any payments, and the circumstances or the financial ability of
either party has changed[,] . . . either party may apply to the circuit court of
the circuit . . . in which the order was rendered, for a  judgment decreasing or
increasing the amount of support, maintenance, or alimony, and the court has
jurisdiction to make orders as equity requires . . . . [P] (2) . . . No person
shall commence, or cause to be commenced, as party or attorney or agent or
otherwise, in behalf of either party in any court, an action or proceeding
otherwise than as herein provided, nor shall any court have jurisdiction to
entertain any action or proceeding otherwise than as herein provided to enforce
the recovery of separate support, maintenance, or alimony otherwise than
pursuant to the order." (Historical and Statutory Notes, 5A West's Fla. Stat.
Ann. (1997 ed.) § 61.14, p. 62.) Thus, under Florida law as it existed at  the
time of the spousal support order, the Florida court that issued the order has
continuing jurisdiction to modify or terminate the support obligation for as
long as the obligation exists (under subdivision (1)), and that jurisdiction is
exclusive (under subdivision (2)).

   The superior court's conclusion that Florida no longer had exclusive and
continuing jurisdiction over the parties because neither party resided in
Florida is immaterial to whether a California court may modify a Florida spousal
support order. As noted above, California law prohibits a California court from
modifying a spousal support order issued by a court in another state when, as in
this case, the court in that other state has continuing exclusive jurisdiction
over the order. Thus, whether the parties reside in the issuing state at the
time modification is sought is of no consequence.

   In any event, the superior court's conclusion that Florida no longer had
jurisdiction over the parties is incorrect with respect to the modification of
the Florida spousal support order, because the Florida court has the power to
retain and retains exclusive jurisdiction over the parties in and for the
dissolution proceeding by virtue of its jurisdiction over its support order. It
is well established that once a court obtains personal jurisdiction over a party
in an action, jurisdiction over the party continues for subsequent proceedings
that arise out of that action. (See, e.g., Rest.2d Conf. of Laws (Rev. May 19,
1988) § 26 ["If a state obtains judicial jurisdiction over a party to an action,
the jurisdiction continues throughout all subsequent proceedings which arise out
of the original claim."]; Michigan Trust Co. v. Perry (1913) 228 U.S. 346, 353
[33 S. Ct. 550, 552, 57 L. Ed. 867] ["if a judicial proceeding is begun with
jurisdiction over the person of the party concerned it is within the power of a
State to bind him by every subsequent order in the cause"].)

     As the comments to section 26 of the Restatement Second of Conflict of Laws
explain, "[t]he continuance of a state's judicial jurisdiction, once such
jurisdiction has been obtained, is not dependent upon the constant existence of
some jurisdictional basis. Such a basis must exist at the initiation of the
proceeding; it need not continuously do so thereafter." (Rest.2d  Conf. of Laws,
supra, § 26, com. a, p. 24.) Once a court obtains jurisdiction over the parties
in an action and enters an order in that action, the court retains jurisdiction
to vacate, reverse, or modify that order even if there is no other basis for
jurisdiction over the parties at that time, such as when the parties move out of
the state in which the court is located, and even if there has been a lapse of
many years between the issuance of the order and the request for modification. (
Id. at com. b, p. 25.) 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   The
Restatement provides the following example: "A obtains a support order against B
in state X. A later becomes domiciled in state Y. Thereafter, B becomes
domiciled in another state. The X court still has judicial jurisdiction to
modify the original order." (Rest.2d Conf. of Laws, supra, § 26, com. g, illus.
9, p. 29.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      In this case, the Florida court obtained jurisdiction over Patrick and
Barbara at the time of the original marital dissolution proceeding that resulted
in the spousal support order at issue. Despite the passage of time and the
relocation of the parties, Florida retains jurisdiction over Patrick and Barbara
for the purpose of determining whether the support order should be modified,
regardless of either party's current residence. (See Cohn v. Cohn (Fla. 1942) 10
So.2d 77, 81 [holding that because Florida court had jurisdiction over the
parties at the time of the  dissolution proceeding in which the court ordered
alimony, the Florida court retained jurisdiction for purposes of modification of
alimony even though neither party resided in Florida at the time modification
was sought].)

   Patrick incorrectly contends that (1) under Williams v. North Carolina (1945)
325 U.S. 226 [65 S. Ct. 1092, 89 L. Ed. 1577, 157 A.L.R. 1366], Florida did not
have continuing, exclusive jurisdiction over the support order, and (2) under In
re Marriage of Aron (1990) 224 Cal. App. 3d 1086 [274 Cal. Rptr. 357],
California courts may modify foreign support orders. Neither of these cases
applies to the circumstances of this case.

   In Williams v. North Carolina, supra, 325 U.S. 226, a man and a woman who
were married to others and living in North Carolina went to Nevada to obtain
divorces from their respective spouses and to marry each other. When they
returned to North Carolina after six weeks in Nevada and established residence
together, they were arrested for bigamy because North Carolina did not recognize
the Nevada divorce. The United States Supreme Court explained that "[a] judgment
in one State is conclusive upon the merits in every other State, but only if the
court of the first State had power to pass on the merits--had jurisdiction, that
is, to render the judgment." ( Williams v. North Carolina, supra, 325 U.S. at p.
229 [165 S. Ct. at p. 1095].) The court held that, because the parties lived in
North Carolina during the events in  question (except for the six-week period in
which the parties were in Nevada to obtain their divorces), "North Carolina was
entitled to find, as she did, that they did not acquire domiciles in Nevada and
that the Nevada court was therefore without power to liberate the petitioners
from amenability to the laws of North Carolina governing domestic relations." (
Id. at p. 239 [65 S. Ct. at p. 1099].) This holding does not bear on the present
case, because there is no question that the Florida court had jurisdiction over
Barbara and Patrick at the time it entered the spousal support order. Therefore,
under Williams v. North Carolina, supra, 325 U.S. at page 229 [65 S. Ct. at
pages 1094-1095], the judgment of dissolution in this case--including the
spousal support order--is conclusive in California.

   In re Marriage of Aron, supra, 224 Cal. App. 3d 1086, in which the court held
that a California court may modify a child support order rendered in another
state if one of the parties resides in California at the time modification is
sought, also is inapplicable to the present case. First, In re Marriage of Aron
was decided under the Revised Uniform Reciprocal Enforcement of Support Act of
1968 (RURESA). (In re Marriage of Aron, supra, 224 Cal. App. 3d at p. 1089.)
California and Florida replaced RURESA with the Uniform Interstate Family
Support Act (UIFSA), and UIFSA (including Cal. Fam. Code, § 4909 and Fla. Stat.
§ 88.2051) now governs the jurisdiction of the courts to modify spousal support
orders. (See, e.g., In re Marriage of Newman (2000) 80 Cal. App. 4th 846, 849
[95 Cal. Rptr. 2d 691].) Second, the support order at issue in In re Marriage of
Aron was a child support order, and UIFSA treats child support orders and
spousal support orders differently with respect to continuing exclusive
jurisdiction. Unlike a spousal support order, with respect to which the
residence of the parties is irrelevant as to whether the issuing court has
continuing exclusive jurisdiction, a tribunal of the state issuing a child
support order under UIFSA has continuing exclusive jurisdiction over the child
support order only for as long as at least one of the parties--the obligor, the
obligee, or the child--resides in the issuing state. ( Cal. Fam. Code, § 4909,
subd. (a); Fla. Stat. § 88.2051, subd. (1).)  Therefore, the court's conclusion
in In re Marriage of Aron that the trial court had the power to modify a child
support order because one of the parties resided in California is irrelevant as
to whether the court in the instant case had the power to modify a spousal
support order.

   As we have explained, the trial court in this case lacked the power to modify
the Florida spousal support order.

    DISPOSITION

   The judgment is reversed. Costs on appeal are awarded to appellant.

   Turner, P. J., and Armstrong, J., concurred.

   Respondent's petition for review by the Supreme Court was denied June 19,
2002. Kennard,  J., did not participate therein.


                              39 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of PHYLLIS MARIE and CLIFFORD L. BENSON.
            CLIFFORD L. BENSON, Appellant, v. PHYLLIS MARIE BENSON,
                                   Respondent

                                  No. G000451

           Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District,
                                 Division Three

            171 Cal. App. 3d 907; 217 Cal. Rptr. 589; 1985 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2464


                                August 29, 1985

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Orange County, No. D-127884, Claude M.
Owens, Judge.

COUNSEL: Thomas J. Brown and James R. Goff for Appellant.

McGuire, Bauer & Walker and William M. Walker for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Crosby, J., with Trotter, P. J., concurring.  Separate
dissenting opinion by Sonenshine, J.

OPINION BY: CROSBY

OPINION

     May spousal support be extended before it lapses under the terms of a
judgment based on a marital settlement agreement? Yes.

    I

   Clifford and Phyllis Benson separated in 1977 after 31 years of marriage.
Each retained counsel, and within a few months a marital settlement agreement
was finalized.  It was approved by the court and incorporated into an
interlocutory judgment of dissolution of marriage. Both documents were drafted
by husband's attorney.  The provision for wife's support reads as follows:
"[Husband] shall pay to  [wife] as and for spousal support the sum of $ 650.00
per month, payable on the 1st day of each month, commencing June 1, 1977, and
continuing until the death of either party, [wife's] remarriage, until modified
by a court of competent jurisdiction or until the expiration of eight (8) years,
whichever first occurs.  [Italics added.]"

   Five years later wife, then age 59, petitioned for an increase in support.
She testified she required eye surgery and extensive dental work, but had no
funds and inadequate insurance coverage.  Her daily living expenses were
steadily increasing, and she had been forced to sell a number of household items
and jewelry to meet them.

   Wife, who was never employed during the marriage, also testified she had yet
to obtain a job as an instructor of interior design, her chosen field.  She did
not feel physically capable of handling a fulltime sales position.  She taught
an occasional genealogy class for a city recreation department, receiving $ 5
per student, and earned other money by performing various jobs for friends,
including painting and wallpapering.  A vocational rehabilitation expert
retained by husband testified wife's sociology degree qualified her for a
position as a counselor in an adolescent facility and age was no barrier.  An
entry level position would pay between $ 700 and $ 800 per month.

   Based on this evidence, the court increased the award to $ 1,000 per month
"continuing until August 1, 1985, on which date the spousal support will be
reduced to $ 1.00 per month, . . . and continuing until further order of Court,
[wife's] remarriage, or the death of either party, whichever first occurs."
Husband concedes the court had authority to modify the amount of his support
obligation, although he argues evidence of wife's need was insufficient to
justify the increase.  His central contention is that the court was bound by the
parties' agreement to limit spousal support to eight years and was,
consequently, without jurisdiction to extend it beyond July 20, 1985, the eighth
anniversary of the entry of the interlocutory judgment of dissolution.

   II

   Civil Code section 4801, subdivision (d) provides, "An order for payment of
an allowance for the support of one of the parties shall terminate at the  end
of the period specified in the order and shall not be extended unless the court
in its original order retains jurisdiction."  Does this language require the
reservation of jurisdiction to extend spousal support beyond a specified
termination date to be explicit?  Wife, of course, says no; and we must agree.

   As early as 1977, one appellate court observed, "Section 4801 does not
require the use of 'magic words' to avoid loss of jurisdiction" ( In re Marriage
of Keeva (1977) 66 Cal.App.3d 512, 519 [136 Cal.Rptr. 82]); and the matter was
definitively resolved contrary to husband's position in the case of In re
Marriage of Vomacka (1984) 36 Cal.3d 459 [204 Cal.Rptr. 568, 683 P.2d 248]. In
Vomacka, the Supreme Court rejected the argument that jurisdiction must be
specifically retained, holding that a reservation of jurisdiction will be
implied wherever it is reasonable to do so.  ( Id., at p. 467.)

   As in this case, the parties in Vomacka stipulated to an interlocutory
judgment which required husband to pay spousal support for a certain period of
time.  It was to commence "September 1, 1979 [and] continue each month
thereafter until further order from the Court, the death of either party, the
remarriage of [wife], or August 1, 1982, whichever first occurs." The order also
provided, "The Court shall retain jurisdiction regarding spousal support until
September 1, 1984, at which time [wife's] right to request spousal support from
[husband] shall terminate forever." ( Id., at pp. 461-462; italics deleted.)
Shortly before August 1, 1982, wife petitioned for modification of the award,
and the court granted an increase and eliminated the previous cutoff date of
September 1, 1984.  Husband appealed,  claiming the court had no power to order
payments beyond the termination date specified in the judgment.

   But the Supreme Court disagreed; both the increase and the extension were
proper.  The court reaffirmed "the fundamental jurisdiction of trial courts to
modify existing spousal support orders to extend support payments past the last
date they can act" ( id., at p. 474) and articulated three basic guidelines, all
of which are applicable here:  (1) "[Orders] providing for absolute termination
of spousal support on a specified date are disfavored and will be overturned as
an abuse of discretion 'unless the record clearly indicates that the supported
spouse will be able to adequately meet his or her financial needs at the time
selected for termination of jurisdiction.  . . .' [Citation.] This rule is
particularly applicable to lengthy marriages." ( Id., at p. 467.)   (2) "[Where]
there is an ambiguity in the language of a marital property agreement it must be
decided in favor of the right to spousal support." ( Id., at p. 469.)   And (3)
"language in a spousal support order suggesting that modification of its terms
will be permitted is routinely interpreted as a retention of the court's
fundamental jurisdiction  to modify and, upon a proper factual showing, to
extend the spousal support provisions contained therein." ( Id., at p. 470.)

     With these considerations in mind, we examine the judgment in this case.
It was drafted by husband's attorney and is expressly modifiable "by a court of
competent jurisdiction . . . ." Husband urges this language must be interpreted
to confer jurisdiction to modify the amount of the award only, not its duration.
Not so: The modification provision follows the words describing the term of the
order, not the amount, as would be expected if husband's construction were
correct.

   Moreover, even if we assumed husband's interpretation does reflect the
parties' intent at the time the marital settlement agreement was executed, that
intent was not expressed in the agreement or in a stipulation on the record.  (
Civ. Code, § 4811, subd. (b).) In other words, the court was not told of any
understanding which would bar an extension of spousal support; and considering
wife's lack of employment history, her age, and the length of this marriage, a
conscientious judge would have refused a proposed judgment prohibiting
modification of the duration of support in the absence of other satisfactory
provision for wife's future security.

     Extrinsic evidence proffered by husband on the question of intent, i.e.,
testimony that he signed the marital settlement agreement with the understanding
his support obligation would be limited to eight years and a letter from wife
acknowledging her acceptance of the condition, was of no moment.  The marital
settlement agreement, accepted by the court and incorporated into the judgment,
no longer exists as an independent, enforceable contract; and parol evidence
concerning the intentions of litigants is of no use in the interpretation of a
judgment of a court.  ( Id., 36 Cal.3d at p. 465; In re Marriage of Hufford
(1984) 152 Cal.App.3d 825 [199 Cal.Rptr. 726]; In re Marriage of Wright (1976)
54 Cal.App.3d 1115 [126 Cal.Rptr. 894].)

     In attempting to avoid the binding precedent of Vomacka, our dissenting
colleague relies on a meaningless distinction between the support order in that
case and the one we review today.  In Vomacka, as here, the original support
obligation was to terminate on a specific date; but the Vomacka order also
contained a second clause in which the court "[retained] jurisdiction regarding
spousal support until [a specific date two years later,] at which time [wife's]
right to request spousal support . . . [terminated] forever." ( In re Marriage
of Vomacka, supra, 36 Cal.3d at p. 462.) True, there is no similar grace period
during which wife could revive an expired obligation in this order.  But the
Vomacka decision clearly was not solely pinned to that unique feature  of the
judgment, as the following quotation  illustrates: "In the instant case, the
parties' interlocutory decree provided for its future modification not only by
permitting until September 1, 1984, for [wife] to request support payments but
also by stating that spousal support payments would continue 'until further
order from the Court, the death of either party, the remarriage of respondent,
or August 1, 1982, whichever first occurs.' (Italics added.) It was pursuant to
the first portion of this clause that [wife] properly sought modification of the
decree on June 29, 1982.  The interpretation of this language to permit
modification of the parties' interlocutory decree extending spousal support
payments beyond September 1, 1984, is supported by In re Marriage of Keeva,
supra, 66 Cal.App.3d 512." (Id., at p. 470, fn. omitted.) The words "this
language" can only refer to the first portion of the Vomacka order, which is, of
course, virtually identical to the judgment before us.

   The court then emphasized the point by observing in a footnote that the power
to modify includes the power to extend, while the two-year grace period created
an entirely different animal, the right to obtain a new award: "Had [wife] not
sought modification of the interlocutory decree before August 1, 1982, her
spousal support payments would have ceased on that date.  However, she
nonetheless could have sought modification of the decree to provide for a new
spousal support award, rather than an extension of the original award, pursuant
to the language of the decree retaining jurisdiction to hear [wife's] requests
for spousal support until September 1, 1984." (Id., at p. 470, fn. 9.) Here, of
course, wife did not have the luxury of an option because the order did not
include a grace period. She had to seek modification before husband's obligation
terminated or be forever foreclosed from obtaining relief, and she did.  As in
Vomacka, the reserved jurisdiction to modify was sufficient to permit the trial
court to extend the duration of the order.

   While compelled by Vomacka, our conclusion is grounded in sound public policy
as well: It is wholly unrealistic to expect "the parties to a marital settlement
agreement [to] anticipate and provide for unexpected changes of circumstances
which may invalidate the expectations reflected in the agreement." ( In re
Marriage of Hufford, supra, 152 Cal.App.3d 825, 829.) Flexibility in the
administration of judgments which will affect the lives of the parties far into
the future, especially after very lengthy marriages, is to be encouraged; in few
other fields do the equities scream quite so loudly as they do in family law.
Moreover, the state's own interests are involved: The elderly and infirm and
those otherwise unable to support themselves should not become burdens on
society where it is just and proper for former spouses to provide support.

    III

     Husband next contends the court abused its discretion in increasing the
amount of the order from $ 650 to $ 1000 per month.  He argues wife was not
diligent in her efforts to obtain a job and there was insufficient evidence of
the need for an increase.

   As to the first point, we find nothing in the record to indicate wife
unreasonably delayed in seeking employment or wilfully refused to accept
alternative employment options.  She had never worked during 31 years of
marriage, and only one year had elapsed since she completed her interior design
training.

   Nor are we persuaded wife failed to justify the increase.    Appellate courts
are loathe to interfere with the trial court's broad discretion to determine the
proper amount of spousal support ( In re Marriage of Kuppinger (1975) 48
Cal.App.3d 628, 633-634 [120 Cal.Rptr. 654]), and it was not disputed that
wife's net monthly income was considerably below her monthly expenses.  Also,
her medical insurance would reimburse but a fraction of the cost of her
anticipated eye surgery, and she had no  insurance to cover needed dental work.
On the other hand, husband's income rose from $ 36,000 to approximately $ 70,000
in the five years since the interlocutory judgment was entered.  The increase in
spousal support was hardly an abuse of discretion.

   The judgment is affirmed.  Wife is entitled to costs on appeal and may apply
to the trial court for attorneys fees as well.  (See, e.g., In re Marriage of
Newport (1984) 154 Cal.App.3d 915 [201 Cal.Rptr. 647].)

DISSENT BY: SONENSHINE

DISSENT

   SONENSHINE, J., Dissenting.  I respectfully dissent.  I do not believe the
court had jurisdiction to extend the support obligation beyond the specified
termination date. 1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   I do,
however, agree with the majority opinion insofar as it concludes the trial court
properly increased the amount of the support.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Unless jurisdiction is retained, the court loses its ability to extend
support.  (Civ. Code, § 4801, subd. (d).) And In re Marriage   of Vomacka (1984)
36 Cal.3d 459 [204 Cal.Rptr. 568, 683 P.2d 248] did not repeal this legislative
mandate.  The Vomacka court simply found the underlying order implied a
retention of jurisdiction. No such interpretation can be made here.

    There are, of course, similarities between the Vomacka order and the present
one: each provides for the payment of a specified amount of support pending the
first to occur of four contingencies, i.e., death of either party, remarriage of
wife, modification by court, 2 or a specified date.  Thus, the trial court in
each case had jurisdiction to modify the amount of the award at any time prior
to the specified date.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   The
contingency, "until modified by a court of competent jurisdiction," as used in
the Bensons' order, is virtually the same as "until further order from the
court." (See In re Marriage of Vomacka, supra, at p. 470.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   But there is one critical distinction: the Vomacka order contains an express
reservation of jurisdiction "regarding spousal support" until a date certain, at
which time the wife's "right to request spousal support shall terminate
forever." It is this language, "suggesting that modification of [the order's]
term [would] be permitted" (Vomacka, at p. 470) which the Vomacka court
"interpreted as a retention of the court's fundamental jurisdiction to . . .
extend the spousal support provisions contained therein." (Ibid.)

   Thus, jurisdiction to extend the duration of support was derived from this
explicit reservation of jurisdiction terminating on September 1, 1984, and not
from the "further order of court" contingency. As the Vomacka court noted: "Had
[wife] not sought modification of the interlocutory decree before August 1,
1982, her spousal support payments would have ceased on that date.  However, she
nonetheless could have sought modification of the decree to provide for a new
spousal support award, rather than an extension of the original award, pursuant
to the language of the decree retaining jurisdiction to hear [wife's] requests
for spousal support until September 1, 1984." ( In re Marriage of Vomacka, supra
, at p. 470, fn. 9, italics added.) The court further observed the trial court's
"retention of jurisdiction until September 1, 1984, to hear [wife's] requests
for spousal support implies that the court retained the power to grant such
requests.  If the court was without jurisdiction to award spousal support past
September 1, 1984, its retention of jurisdiction until that date to hear
[wife's] requests for support would be meaningless.  [Citations.]" ( Id., at p.
471.) 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   The
majority holds the Supreme Court in Vomacka relied on the first part of the
underlying support order as the basis for extending jurisdiction.  My colleagues
suggest In re Marriage of Keeva (1977) 66 Cal.App.3d 512 [136 Cal.Rptr. 82] is
authority for this analysis.  However, neither the Supreme Court's own words nor
the facts in Keeva support the majority's conclusion.

   In Keeva, the trial court modified a support order making the amounts payable
through November 15, 1975.  The order also continued the matter for another
hearing on that date.  But the hearing was further continued until December 10.
Husband argued because the court had not specifically retained jurisdiction
beyond November 15, 1975, it could not order any further support.  But that
argument was rejected.  "It is thus apparent that although the court did not use
the words that it 'retains jurisdiction,' there was no intent to limit the
duration of the period of payment for support." ( Id., at p. 518.) In other
words, the date itself was not controlling, but rather the manifest intent of
the court.  Jurisdiction was not explicitly retained but the intention to do so
was expressed.

   The Vomacka court's reliance on the second part of the underlying order is
clear.  "As in Keeva, the instant trial court's retention of jurisdiction until
September 1, 1984, to hear Joyce's requests for spousal support implies that the
court retained the power to grant such requests." ( In re Marriage of Vomacka,
supra, 36 Cal.3d 470, 471, italics added.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      This express reservation of jurisdiction has no counterpart here.  Nor is
there any language from which fundamental jurisdiction to extend support could
be implied.  Thus, Phyllis' right to receive spousal support terminated upon the
first to occur of the contingencies specified in the order, but in no event
later than the order's eighth anniversary.

   Civil Code section 4801, subdivision (d), mandates the loss of jurisdiction
to extend support unless it is retained in the original order. Such retention
need not be explicit.  It must, however, in some fashion, exist.  It cannot be
created by appellate fiat.


                              40 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of MARGARET and GEORGE PLESCIA. MARGARET
               PLESCIA, Appellant, v. GEORGE PLESCIA, Respondent.

                                  No. E018551.

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FOURTH APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION TWO

           59 Cal. App. 4th 252; 69 Cal. Rptr. 2d 120; 1997 Cal. App.
          LEXIS 935; 97 Cal. Daily Op. Service 8741; 97 Daily Journal
                                   DAR 14113


                           November 18, 1997, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from the Superior Court of San Bernardino County.
Super.Ct.No. OFL-12837. Raymond P. Van Stockum, Judge. *

*   Judge of the San Bernardino Municipal Court, West Valley Division, assigned
by the Chief Justice pursuant to art. VI, § 6 of the California Construction.

COUNSEL: Gregory T. Annigian for Appellant.

Gassner & Gassner and Lawrence M. Gassner for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Hollenhorst, Acting P. J., with Ward and Gaut, JJ.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: HOLLENHORST

OPINION

     HOLLENHORST, Acting P. J.

   During a hearing pursuant to a show cause order, the superior court used the
equitable doctrine of laches to deny Margaret Plescia's demand for past due
spousal support. She appeals, contending that the superior court exceeded its
jurisdiction when it invoked the doctrine of laches. We affirm.

   FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

   On October 19, 1979, the superior court issued an interlocutory judgment of
dissolution of marriage to Margaret and George Plescia. At the time, the court
did not order payment of spousal support, although it expressly reserved
jurisdiction over the issue for both parties until their death or remarriage.

    In 1984, the order was modified pursuant to a show cause order. Respondent
was ordered to pay appellant $ 150 per month so long as appellant provided
respondent with a list of 20 job contacts each month, this condition becoming
active within 5 days of appellant's release from disability. The support was to
continue until the death of either party, remarriage of appellant, or further
order of the court.

   During a contempt hearing in May and June of 1986, the superior court held
that respondent owed no back spousal support payments because appellant had
never provided a list of 20 job contacts. However, the court also modified the
support order and removed the condition requiring a showing of job contacts from
future spousal support.

   On July 2, 1988, appellant remarried, terminating the requirement for
continuing spousal support payments.

   At some point between July of 1988 and November of 1995 respondent retired
from his railroad job and now subsists solely on his pension.

   On April 18, 1996, an order to show cause hearing was held. Appellant
contended that respondent owed spousal support arrears from June of 1986
through July of 1988. With interest this amount totaled $ 15,063.73. Respondent
stipulated that no payment had ever been made and the superior court dismissed
respondent's argument that the 1986 modification was improper. The court did
note that respondent truly believed he did not have to make spousal support
payments unless he received a list of 20 job contacts. Nevertheless, respondent
was found to be in arrears.

   However, the superior court held that, in light of basic fairness and
respondent's change of position, the claim would not be enforceable because of
the equitable doctrine of laches.

   Appellant's motions to reconsider under Code of Civil Procedure sections 1008
and 663 were denied in a hearing on May 30, 1996.

    DISCUSSION

   Appellant contends that the superior court exceeded its jurisdiction when it
invoked the doctrine of laches.

   I. The Doctrine of Laches

     Generally, the existence of laches is a question of fact to be determined
by the trial court in light of all the applicable circumstances, and in the
absence of a palpable abuse of discretion, the trial court's finding of laches
will not be disturbed on appeal. ( Millbrae Assn. for Residential Survival v.
City of Millbrae (1968) 262 Cal. App. 2d 222, 247 [69 Cal. Rptr. 251].)

   The defense of laches is derived from the maxim that "[t]he law helps the
vigilant, before those who sleep on their rights." ( Civ. Code, § 3527.) This
has been restated as "[e]quity frowns upon stale demands [and] declines to aid
those who have slept on their rights." ( Latta v. Western Inv. Co. (9th Cir.
1949) 173 F.2d 99, 107.)

   In practice, laches is defined as an unreasonable delay in asserting an
equitable right, causing prejudice to an adverse party such as to render the
granting of relief to the other party inequitable. ( Wells Fargo Bank v. Bank of
America (1995) 32 Cal. App. 4th 424, 439 [38 Cal. Rptr. 2d 521].) Thus, if a
trial court finds (1) unreasonable delay; and (2) prejudice, and if its findings
are not palpable abuses of discretion, a finding of laches will be upheld on
appeal.

     In the instant case, the trial court found that it was unreasonable for
appellant to have delayed from 1986 to 1995 without attempting to collect  on
the judgment. In light of the record, the trial court did not palpably abuse its
discretion. Appellant waited over nine years before bringing her initial claim.
During this period appellant remarried and had "lived life" without asking for
the arrears. It was not a palpable abuse of discretion for the trial court to
find this delay unreasonable.

   Further, the trial court found that the delay in collection unduly prejudiced
respondent. Again, with respect to the record, we find that this was not a
palpable abuse of discretion on the part of the trial court. Respondent had
retired, changing the parties' relative circumstances, and could no longer pay
the support order. In addition, respondent had a good faith belief that no
spousal support payment was due until appellant provided him with 20 job
contacts. Since appellant never provided these contacts, respondent assumed he
did not owe appellant spousal support. The court acknowledged respondent's good
faith belief, and held that it would circumvent basic fairness to allow
appellant to bring this claim now, after sitting on her rights for almost a
decade. Clearly the trial court did not abuse its discretion when it found
respondent to have been unduly prejudiced by appellant's unreasonable delay in
asserting her rights.

   Thus, the trial court's finding of laches was well within the scope of its
discretion; and consequently,  this finding will not be disturbed on appeal.

   II. The Jurisdiction of the Trial Court

   However, appellant does not simply challenge the trial court's finding of
laches. Rather, appellant challenges the jurisdiction of the trial court to use
the doctrine of laches in the first place. As we shall see, this jurisdictional
challenge is based on statutory jurisdictional limitations appellant perceives
in the Family Code 1 and not on the underlying jurisdiction of the superior
courts.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Unless
otherwise indicated, further statutory references are to the Family Code.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The California Constitution states that "[s]uperior courts have original
jurisdiction in all other causes except those given by statute to other trial
courts." (Cal. Const., art. VI, § 10.) In addition, section 200 specifies that
"[t]he superior court has jurisdiction in [all] proceedings under [the Family]
code." Finally, it has long been settled that the jurisdiction of law and equity
are blended together in this state. ( Code Civ.  Proc., § 307; Thayer v. White
(1853) 3 Cal. 228, 229.) Thus, the equitable defense of laches, in a matter
proceeding under the code, falls squarely under the jurisdiction of a superior
court.

      Moreover, it is axiomatic that one who seeks equity must be willing to do
equity. ( Farmers Ins. Exchange v. Zerin (1997) 53 Cal. App. 4th 445,  453 [61
Cal. Rptr. 2d 707].) This maxim has been interpreted to mean that a court will
not grant equitable relief to one party unless that party acknowledges the
equitable claims or defenses of the adverse party that grow out of the same
controversy. (Cf.  Russell v. Soldinger (1976) 59 Cal. App. 3d 633, 645 [131
Cal. Rptr. 145].) This maxim stems from the paramount principle that equity is,
peculiarly, a forum of conscience. ( Couts v. Cornell (1905) 147 Cal. 560, 563
[82 P. 194].)

   Historically, equity jurisdiction was deemed to include the right to award
spousal support in a proper case. (24 Am.Jur.2d, Divorce and Separation, § 540,
p. 560.) Further, in California it has been held that the sole purpose of
permanent spousal support is to make an equitable apportionment between the
parties. (In re Marriage of   Dick (1993) 15 Cal. App. 4th 144, 166 [18 Cal.
Rptr. 2d 743]; see also 33 Cal.Jur.3d (rev.) Family Law, § 1014, p. 498.)
Concurrently, the laches defense is derived directly from the guiding maxims of
equity. ( Civ. Code, § 3527.) Thus, a party seeking an equitable grant of
spousal support must be willing to grant the equitable defense of laches in the
same controversy.

     In 1981, 1984, and 1986, appellant approached the court under its mantle of
equity in order to receive a more conscionable apportionment of the parties'
financial resources. Now, when respondent seeks to raise the equitable defense
of laches, appellant cries foul. The fact that this is a proceeding on a writ of
execution and not a proceeding on modification is irrelevant as this is
undeniably the fruit of the same controversy. (Cf.  Russell v. Soldinger, supra,
59 Cal. App. 3d 633, 645.) It is a fundamental duty of the court to provide
equity to all parties, and fully dispose of the issues between the parties. (See
Nomellini Construction Co. v. Harris (1969) 272 Cal. App. 2d 352, 359 [77 Cal.
Rptr. 361].) Further, in effecting a complete disposition of the litigation
before it, equity can extend its jurisdiction to matters that ordinarily are
subject to legal cognizance only. ( St. Sava Mission Corp. v. Serbian Eastern
Orthodox Diocese (1990) 223 Cal. App. 3d 1354, 1367 [273 Cal. Rptr. 340].) Thus,
unless the Legislature specifically excluded laches from the jurisdiction of the
superior court, the court not only had the power to bring this controversy to an
equitable conclusion, it had the duty. Therefore, respondent's equitable defense
of laches, raised during the equitable disposition of appellant's spousal
support order, should be affirmed absent any explicit statutory language to the
contrary.

   The appellant essentially puts forth two separate statutory arguments in
support of her contention that the superior court lacked jurisdiction to find
laches in an action on a writ of execution for spousal support. First, appellant
asserts that spousal support has no applicable statute of limitations, and thus
is always due until paid. Second, appellant asserts that, when the Legislature
seemingly circumvented the requirement of diligence on the part of the party
seeking enforcement by writ of execution, it was attempting to circumvent the
defense of laches as well. We will address each of these assertions in turn.

   A. Statute of Limitations

   Appellant argues that "[n]otwithstanding [Family Code section 291], a spousal
support order may be enforced by a writ of execution . . . as long as the
support order remains enforceable." (§ 5101, italics added.) Section 291 states
that lack of diligence shall be considered by the court in determining whether
to permit enforcement, but only when the lack of diligence is for longer than
the period specified in sections 5100-5104. Further, "a judgment for . . .
spousal support . . . is exempt from any requirement that judgments be renewed.
[Thus, a] judgment for . . . spousal support . . . is enforceable until paid in
full." (§ 4502, italics added.) Appellant argues that since sections 5100-5104
do not specify any period, and since spousal support payments are enforceable
until paid in full, there is no applicable statute of limitations, and a
judgment would be enforceable indefinitely.

   If we assume that appellant's statutory interpretation is correct, insofar as
there is  no statutory limit on the period in which a writ of execution can be
brought on a judgment for spousal support,  this would not ipso jure lead us to
the position that the equitable defense of laches can never be raised in
opposition to this same writ. Laches should always be available as a defense
under the proper circumstances.

   The flaw in appellant's statutory argument is that appellant analogizes in
the wrong direction.   It has long been held that the mere enactment of a
statute of limitations will not cause the atrophy of laches. Thus, when one
party's unjustified delay operates to the injury of another party, the defense
of laches may be successfully invoked, even though the lapse of time is less
than the applicable period of limitations. (Cf.  Holt v. County of Monterey
(1982) 128 Cal. App. 3d 797, 801 [180 Cal. Rptr. 514].)

   Appellant analogizes, however, that if laches is applicable when there is a
statute of limitations, then it must not be applicable when there is not a
statute of limitations. This argument misstates the basic reasoning behind the
statement of law from which appellant analogizes, namely that laches may be
invoked even when the lapse of time is less than the applicable statutory
period.

   The reason that laches may be successfully invoked, even when a relevant
statute of limitations has not expired, is because it was the product of a
different body of jurisprudence and has different requirements than a statute of
limitations; not because laches is a lesser included portion of a statute of
limitations. Nothing more than the mere passage of time is required for the
statute of limitations to bar an action at law. ( State Farm Fire & Casualty Co.
v. Superior Court (1989) 210 Cal. App. 3d 604, 612 [258 Cal. Rptr. 413].)
However, mere passage of time alone will never constitute a proper defense of
laches. ( Green v. Board of Dental Examiners (1996) 47 Cal. App. 4th 786, 794
[55 Cal. Rptr. 2d 140].) For laches to apply, the passage of time must be
unreasonable, and it must have caused prejudice to the other party. (See Martin
v. Kehl (1983) 145 Cal. App. 3d 228, 241 [193 Cal. Rptr. 312].) Thus, laches
exists independently of a relevant statute of limitations.

     Since laches exists independently of a relevant statute of limitations,
appellant's argument is without merit. When a statute provides for absolutely no
period of limitations, this does not mean that the statute provides for
absolutely no laches defense. These two doctrines are fundamentally different,
and the valid existence of one in no way inhibits or supports the valid
existence of the other. This is because " '[e]quity . . . has its origin . . .
in those cases where the law, by reason of its universality, would create
injustice in the affairs of men.' " ( Estate of Vargas (1974) 36 Cal. App. 3d
714, 718 [111 Cal. Rptr. 779, 81 A.L.R.3d 1]; see also Holy Trinity Church v.
United States (1892) 143 U.S. 457, 472 [12 S. Ct. 511, 516-517, 36 L. Ed. 226].)
Equity was specifically designed to step in where the law does not work justice.

   Thus, appellant's argument, that since spousal support is not subject to a
statute of limitations, then it, ipso jure, must not be subject to the laches
defense, must fail.

   B. Diligence Requirement

   Next, appellant asserts that when the Legislature seemingly circumvented the
requirement of diligence on the part of a party seeking enforcement by writ of
execution, it was attempting to circumvent the defense of laches as well.

   Section 291 states that "lack of diligence for more than the period specified
in [sections 5100-5104] in seeking enforcement of a judgment . . .  made . . .
pursuant to this code . . . shall be considered by the court in determining
whether to permit enforcement of the judgment . . . ." This "period specified"
was set at 10 years in 1982. (Former Civ. Code, § 4384.) However, in 1993, the
code sections specifying this period were changed. Spousal support judgments no
longer had to be renewed to retain validity.  ( Code Civ. Proc., § 683.130.)
Thus, spousal support judgments became enforceable until paid in full. (§ 4502.)
The Legislature seemed to be saying that lack of diligence in seeking
enforcement of a judgment for spousal support would no longer be looked at,
since there is no longer a specified statutory period in sections 5100-5104.
Appellant argues that this  elimination of the lack of diligence requirement
implies a legislative elimination of the equitable defense of laches as well.

     It is a fundamental tenet of statutory interpretation that absent any
indication that the Legislature intends a statute to supplant common law, the
courts should not give it that effect. ( Lacher v. Superior Court (1991) 230
Cal. App. 3d 1038, 1050 [281 Cal. Rptr. 640].) Of course, this tenet will not
apply when a Legislature has minutely described the limitations and exceptions
dealing with a given subject matter. (Ibid.)  In the instant case appellant
urges us to supplant the well-established common law doctrine of laches through
the elimination of a diligence requirement for a statute of limitations, an
elimination that is only apparent after a close reading of several often
modified statutes. While it appears to be true that the consideration of
diligence has been eliminated when a court enforces a spousal support order by a
writ of execution, this sleight of hand interpretation will not be expanded to
areas of the common law long held established. Absent any legislative indication
that laches has been supplanted as an equitable defense, we refuse to condone
its supplantation by fiat.

     It is also a fundamental tenet of statutory interpretation that legislation
will be interpreted on the assumption that the Legislature was aware of existing
judicial decisions. ( People v. Hall (1994) 8 Cal. 4th 950, 961-962 [35 Cal.
Rptr. 2d 432, 883 P.2d 974].)  Although there has been very little California
litigation on this specific issue, the existence of a laches defense to spousal
support arrearages has long been recognized. (See Rupp v. Rupp (1954) 129 Cal.
App. 2d 23 [276 P.2d 144]; Long v. Long (1946) 76 Cal. App. 2d 716 [173 P.2d
840].) In other states where this same issue has been considered, laches has
been allowed as an equitable defense. ( Jerkins v. Dept. of Health and
Rehabilitative Services (Fla.Dist.Ct.App. 1995) 653 So.2d 1128.) Also, in at
least 18 other states the defense of laches has been upheld in an action on
spousal support arrearages. (See Annot., Laches or Acquiescence as Defense, So
As to Bar Recovery of Arrearages of Permanent Alimony or Child Support (1981) 5
A.L.R.4th 1015, § 3, 6.) In addition, there are states that do recognize laches
as a valid defense to spousal support, but simply have not had a case which met
all of the requirements of laches. (Ibid.) It is clear that the laches defense
to spousal support is established in judicial opinions reflecting the common
law. Assuming that the Legislature was aware of this established law, its
failure to use the language of laches weighs in heavily against appellant's
argument.

      Moreover, one of the fundamental tools for statutory interpretation is the
maxim expressio unius   est exclusio alterius. ( Kinlaw v. State of California
(1991) 54 Cal. 3d 326, 343 [285 Cal. Rptr. 66, 814 P.2d 1308].) This maxim is
roughly translated as "the expression of the one thing implies the exclusion of
the other." (Cf. Ibid.)  In the statutory scheme at hand, the Legislature
eliminates from judicial consideration the requirement of diligence in a spousal
support action. (See § 291, 4502, 5101.) However, it has long been established
that the requirements of a valid laches defense are: (1) unreasonable delay, and
(2) undue prejudice to the party raising the defense. (See 11 Witkin, Summary of
Cal. Law (9th ed. 1990) Equity, § 14-16, pp. 690-694.) While diligence may be a
factor taken into account when examining the reasonableness of a delay, these
two doctrines are certainly not coterminous in definition. Further, diligence
has very little to do with the prejudice aspect of the laches defense. Thus,
when the Legislature expressly eliminated the diligence defense, it must be seen
to have left all other defenses alone, especially since we have no indications
to the contrary.

   Taking into account the long common law history of the laches defense, and
the large amount of judicial support for it in other states, we find the
Legislature's failure to mention laches quite conspicuous. When the Legislature
discontinued looking at diligence, it could have eliminated the laches defense
as well. It did not do so. Thus, we conclude that the Legislature's decision to
leave laches out of its legislative scheme allows that remedy to remain
available in appropriate cases.

   The superior court had jurisdiction to apply the equitable defense of laches
in an execution action for spousal support arrears.

    DISPOSITION

   The judgment is affirmed.

   Ward, J., and Gaut, J., concurred.


                              41 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             In re the Marriage of ELIZABETH ANN and PATRICK JOSEPH
          MEEGAN.  ELIZABETH ANN MEEGAN, Appellant, v. PATRICK JOSEPH
                              MEEGAN, Respondent.

                                  No. G011809

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FOURTH APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION THREE

           11 Cal. App. 4th 156; 13 Cal. Rptr. 2d 799; 1992 Cal. App.
          LEXIS 1368; 92 Cal. Daily Op. Service 9532; 92 Daily Journal
                                   DAR 15838


                           November 25, 1992, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Orange County, No. D-270846, Jack K.
Mandel, Judge.

COUNSEL: Michael Leight for Appellant.

Jonathan R. Cox for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Moore, J., with Sills, P. J., and Crosby, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: MOORE, J.

OPINION

     In a marital dissolution judgment, a husband is ordered to pay monthly
spousal support and does so for some years.  Thereafter, however, he voluntarily
resigns his high-paying job and enters a monastery to pursue a life of religious
observation and prayer.  In this case of first impression, we must decide
whether it was an abuse of discretion for the trial court to grant the husband's
request to reduce the spousal support award to zero.

   FACTS

   After more than 23 years of marriage, Elizabeth and Patrick Meegan were
divorced on May 17, 1988.  At the time of the dissolution, Patrick's net
disposable income was $ 4,700 per month.  Although the financial  records
submitted to the court were incomplete, the evidence indicated Elizabeth, who
was a nurse, had a monthly net disposable income of $ 1,900.  Patrick was
ordered to pay $ 739 per month spousal support.

    In early 1991, Patrick decided to pursue a life of religious observance and
prayer.  He resigned his job as a sales executive, joined an order of the
Catholic church, and entered the Holy Trinity Monastery in St. David, Arizona.
He supported himself from his savings and, though he was no longer employed,
continued to contribute $ 875 per month toward his two adult daughters' college
educations and expenses.  Patrick agreed to pay his 25- year-old daughter $ 300
per month, and his 19-year-old daughter $ 425 per month plus $150 a month for
her car insurance, until they graduated and found employment.

   On March 22, Patrick, then in his mid-50's, filed an order to show cause for
modification seeking to terminate his obligation to pay spousal support,
stating: "I am no longer employed and I cannot continue my former vocation due
to its stress which has caused me depression and my conscience and desire to
become a Catholic priest dictate I follow a path of good works and services.
[P] In preparation to become a priest. I plan to work at 'Holy Trinity
Monestary' [sic] for a year of voluntary community work.  [P] During the next
few years I do not anticipate I will be earning income.  I plan to support
myself from my separate property from my divorce.  I cannot afford to pay
spousal support during the time I have no income."

   Patrick estimated it would take four and a half to five years to become a
permanent member of the religious order, prior to which time he could be asked
to leave.  He conceded the church might not permit him to become a priest
because he had been married previously and would have to obtain an  annulment
before he could make his vows.  At the time of the hearing, he had not started
the annulment process.  He was not obligated to pay money to the church for his
residence at the monastery, and the church supplied his food and drink.

   Patrick had $ 4,873 in checking accounts, $ 16,379 in a savings account, and
stock worth $ 73,000.  He received $ 4,700 from his pension plan when he
resigned his job.  In the year prior to the order to show cause (OSC) hearing,
Patrick gave $ 4,000 to the church. Elizabeth testified her income was $ 28,000
per year at the time of the dissolution and that she had $ 70,000 in assets,
including equity in her home. Patrick contended Elizabeth's income increased 30
percent between the time of the dissolution and the time of the OSC.

   The court entered an order reducing the spousal support to zero, ruling: "The
judgment of dissolution of marriage ... is modified.  Spousal support is reduced
to zero ..., with the court reserving jurisdiction over it.  In the event
[Patrick] obtains employment the spousal support order made in [the] judgment of
dissolution of marriage is reinstated upon [Patrick's] receipt of a first
paycheck, until a court of competent jurisdiction can evaluate the then existing
financial situation in order to make a new order.  ..."

   The court determined Patrick was acting in good faith and did not resign his
job to avoid his spousal support obligations.  The court also found that
Elizabeth had a capacity "to be financially independent without a substantial
reduction in her standard of living," and emphasized its decision would have
been different if Elizabeth was "unemployable and faced with an impoverished
situation as [compared] to being employable and faced with a minimal reduction
in standard of living." The court found support should be reduced to zero based
upon Patrick's "being no longer income-producing and his rights to a free[]
alienation of his existing property."  The court also stated that Patrick had
"the ability to pay until he has no further money.  That's patently obvious from
the facts presented.  The question [is] should the court take from him all
capital as a response to this relief presuming that there was a division of
community property with some rule of reason as to that division ... some four
years ago.  [P] The question now is: do I have jurisdiction to take from
[Patrick]  all that he has, and the answer is no, I do not have that
jurisdiction and I will not do that." 1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   The trial
court considered numerous hypotheticals and emphasized the importance of this
case to the bench and bar.  For example, the judge considered a scenario where a
wealthy stockbroker from Newport Beach divorces his wife and moves to Utah to
rent canoes for $ 25,000 a year, leaving the wife and family destitute. He also
considered the possibility of a trial attorney making $ 250,000 a year deciding
to become a judge and earn $ 80,000 a year.  The judge noted that courts have
concluded that there are "no rules we could come up with, no pattern.  ...
[E]very case would be analyzed on an individual basis."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      (See fn. 2.)  Elizabeth contends the trial court abused its discretion by
reducing the spousal support to zero and by denying her request to create a
lien in her favor on moneys and other property owned by Patrick to secure
payment to her of any future spousal support payments ordered made by Patrick. 2


- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Elizabeth
also purports to argue the court abused its discretion by allowing introduction
of evidence of her financial condition because Patrick did not base his
application to terminate support on that factor.  However, she has failed to
cite this court to any authority in support of that contention, and, therefore,
we deem any error in that regard to have been waived and refuse to consider it.
( Troensegaard v. Silvercrest Industries, Inc. (1985) 175 Cal.App.3d 218, 228
[220 Cal.Rptr. 712]; Sprague v. Equifax, Inc. (1985) 166 Cal.App.3d 1012, 1050
[213 Cal.Rptr. 69].) Moreover, it is well established that spousal support must
be determined by the financial needs of both parties and their abilities to meet
those needs.  (See, e.g., In re Marriage Bukaty (1986) 180 Cal.App.3d 143, 147
[225 Cal.Rptr. 492].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    DISCUSSION

     Spousal support is not a mandatory requirement in dissolution proceedings.
(See Civ. Code, § 4801.) "Spousal support must be determined according to the
needs of both parties and their respective abilities to meet these needs.
[Citation.] In this regard, a trial court has broad discretion and an abuse
thereof only occurs when it can be said that no judge reasonably could have made
the same order." ( In re Marriage of Rome (1980) 109 Cal.App.3d 961, 964 [167
Cal.Rptr. 351]; see also In re Marriage Bukaty, supra, 180 Cal.App.3d at p. 147
.)

     Similarly, modification of a spousal support order is a matter for the
sound exercise of the court's discretion, based upon a showing of a material
change of circumstances since the last spousal support order. ( In re Marriage
of Smith (1990) 225 Cal.App.3d 469, 480 [274 Cal.Rptr. 911]; In re Marriage of
Kuppinger (1975) 48 Cal.App.3d 628, 633 [120 Cal.Rptr. 654].) On appeal, this
court must accept as true all evidence tending to establish the correctness of
the trial judge's findings, resolving all conflicts in the evidence in favor of
the prevailing party and indulging in all legitimate and reasonable inferences
to uphold the judgment.  When a finding of the trial court is attacked as being
unsupported, our power begins and ends with a determination of whether there is
any substantial evidence which will support the conclusions reached by the trial
court.  ( In re Marriage of Hopwood (1989) 214 Cal.App.3d 1604, 1607 [263
Cal.Rptr. 401].)

     Elizabeth first argues the trial court abused its discretion in reducing
her spousal support to zero. We disagree.  Elizabeth concedes there was a change
of circumstances, but, quarreling with the trial court's factual findings, she
argues this situation is "no different than if [Patrick] had simply  decided to
stop all work and to spend the rest of his life surfing." However, a bona fide
motive leading to a change of circumstances may be the basis for a reduction in
spousal support. ( In re Marriage of Sinks (1988) 204 Cal.App.3d 586, 594 [251
Cal.Rptr. 379].) Here, the court found Patrick did  not quit his job to avoid
his spousal support obligation and that he acted in good faith in deciding to
enter the monastery.

   Without citation to authority, Elizabeth claims a party seeking to reduce a
spousal support obligation should be required to show a change of circumstances
beyond his or her control. No case has ever so held, and we decline to impose
that requirement.  Moreover, the cases relied  upon by Elizabeth are uniformly
fatal to her contention.

    In re Marriage of Sinks, supra, 204 Cal.App.3d 586 affirmed the trial
court's decision refusing to reduce spousal support. However, the court based
its conclusion on the fact that the husband retired from his job in "an attempt
to shirk his support obligation." (Id. at p. 594.) Because the trial court found
the husband's retirement "was improperly motivated," the Court of Appeal did not
address the question of first impression raised here. 3 As Elizabeth concedes,
the trial court here found Patrick was "well motivated."

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   However,
the court did anticipate the question now before us: "If the circumstances here
were different and the motivation behind the retirement were not suspect, the
case would raise an issue of first impression in this state: Is a supporting
spouse ... obligated to continue working to provide spousal support?" (Id. at p
594.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     In re Marriage of Williams (1984) 155 Cal.App.3d 57 [202 Cal.Rptr. 10],
cited by Elizabeth, actually supports our position.  There, the trial court
found that the ex-husband did not deliberately attempt to avoid his financial
responsibilities.  The ex- husband and his second wife had quit their jobs and
moved to Reno, Nevada. Their monthly income from salaries was reduced to zero.
The Court of Appeal held that unless there was some conduct by which a father
was deliberately attempting to shirk his responsibility to his children, the
trial court could properly consider only his actual earnings and not his ability
to earn.

   Here, the trial court found that Patrick did not quit his job to avoid his
spousal support obligation and was acting in good faith.  Credibility is a
matter within the trial court's discretion.  ( In re Marriage of Everett (1990)
220 Cal.App.3d 846, 861 [269 Cal.Rptr. 917].) The court believed Patrick's
testimony that he could not continue his former employment due to stress and
depression, and due to the fact that his "conscience and desire to become a
Catholic priest dictate [he] follow a path of good works and services in
preparation to becoming a priest." The evidence was uncontroverted that he  did,
in fact, take residence at the monastery, that he was no longer employed, and
that he was earning no income.  Patrick estimated it would take four and a half
to five years for him to become a permanent member of the religious order, at
which time he would be required to take a vow of poverty. Deferring to the trial
court's findings on these credibility issues, as we must, we conclude there was
no abuse of discretion in reducing Elizabeth's spousal support to zero.

   Elizabeth also asks us to find that spousal support should be based on
Patrick's ability to earn, rather than on his actual earnings. In light of the
trial court's determinations, we may not do so.   "It has long been the rule the
court can consider the payor's earning capacity when determining ... spousal
support. [Citations.] However, this rule has been applied only where the parent
has demonstrated a willful intention to avoid fulfilling financial obligations
through deliberate misconduct." ( In re Marriage of Regnery (1989) 214
Cal.App.3d 1367, 1371 [263 Cal.Rptr. 243] italics added; see also Philbin v.
Philbin (1971) 19 Cal.App.3d 115, 121 [96 Cal.Rptr. 408].) No such facts exist
here.

     Finally, Elizabeth contends the court should have ordered that all of
Patrick's cash, promissory notes, or other resources available to pay spousal
support be placed in an interest-bearing account requiring the signatures of
both parties or a court order for any disbursement, in order to ensure that she
continue to receive spousal support.  Civil Code section 4801, subdivision (a)
provides the court may order the supporting spouse to provide reasonable
security for payments ordered.

   Elizabeth notes Patrick has $ 70,000 in assets which would allow her to
receive spousal support payments at the current rate for approximately eight
more years.  However, we cannot conclude the trial court abused its discretion
in refusing to impose a lien or set up an interest-bearing account in this case.

   Elizabeth relies on In re Marriage of Johnson (1982) 134 Cal.App.3d 148 [184
Cal.Rptr. 444], where the trial court placed a lien on the husband's entire
share of the  community property to secure payment of court ordered spousal and
child support.  As the Johnson court noted, the trial court had discretion to
impose a lien, or other remedies, including contempt, wage assignment,
executions, and receiverships.  (Id. at pp. 161-162.) Those remedies were
clearly available for consideration by the trial court in that case.  Here,
however, after the court's ruling, Elizabeth's counsel sought an order from the
trial court to prevent Patrick from "walking out the door and giving everything
he owns to the Catholic church." Elizabeth asked the court to  "enjoin [Patrick]
from any transfer of any sum of money that he has other than his normal and
customary living expenses as he has described them until this case is final on
appeal." The trial judge noted that request was not before him and, when
Patrick's counsel was unwilling to stipulate to that injunction, the court
refused to make any such order.  Having failed to timely request the imposition
of a lien or other remedies in the trial court, we may not consider this
argument here.

   The judgment is affirmed.  In the interests of justice, each side shall bear
his or her own costs on appeal.

   Sills, P. J., and Crosby,  J., concurred.

   Appellant's petition for review by the Supreme Court was denied February 18,
1993.


                              42 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of KAREN J. and ALVIN G. SEGEL.  KAREN J.
                SEGEL, Appellant, v. ALVIN G. SEGEL, Respondent

                                  No. B009687

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Three

           177 Cal. App. 3d 1030; 223 Cal. Rptr. 430; 1986 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2616


                               February 25, 1986

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Appellant's Petition for Review by the Supreme Court was
Denied June 18, 1986.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Los Angeles County, No. WED 28426, Jerry
Pacht, Judge.

COUNSEL: Trope & Trope and William B. Anderson for Appellant.

Irell & Manella, Peter J. Gregora and Sharon Lybeck Hartmann for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Lui, J., with Klein, P. J., and Danielson, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: LUI

OPINION

     The question presented in this appeal is whether the trial court had
jurisdiction to modify a support order after the date specified in said order
for termination of support when the supporting spouse has fully complied with
the terms of the order, which was based upon a stipulated agreement between the
parties.  We hold that the trial court lost jurisdiction to modify the support
arrangement and affirm the trial court's order denying further spousal support.

   Procedural and Factual Background

   Karen Segel (appellant) and Alvin Segel (respondent) were married in June
1968 and separated in November 1975.  The marriage was dissolved in June 1976.
There is one child of the marriage, a son, born in April 1975.

   On November 6, 1975, appellant and respondent executed a detailed marital
settlement agreement (the 1975 agreement) which provided, among other  things,
that appellant would have physical custody of their son, Adam.  The financial
responsibility for the support of the son was to be divided equally between the
parties.  The 1975 agreement further provided that respondent would pay
appellant one-half of his annual gross earned income as spousal support until
her death or remarriage, whichever event should first occur.  This sum was
subject to an offset of 50 percent of appellant's gross income in any month in
which she was employed.  An interlocutory decree of dissolution that
incorporated the terms of the 1975 agreement was entered on June 21, 1976.

   Thirteen months after the 1975 agreement took effect, the parties appeared in
court to modify it.  On March 21, 1977, appellant and respondent appeared before
Commissioner John Alexander, and appellant's attorney read into the record a
previously negotiated stipulation which "deleted" and replaced certain
paragraphs of the 1976 interlocutory judgment. The stipulated modifications were
as follows: (1) the physical custody of Adam, then approximately two years old,
was modified to award such custody to respondent who also agreed to provide all
of the son's support; (2) the spousal support was amended to provide for a
nonmodifiable spousal support award of $ 60,000 to appellant, payable $ 500 on
the 1st and 15th day of each month, commencing April 1, 1977, until the death,
remarriage or the passage of a five-year period, whichever of these three events
shall first occur.

   During the course of the hearing on the motion modifying the June 21, 1976,
interlocutory judgment of dissolution, Commissioner John Alexander and the
attorneys discussed the stipulation in detail and in the presence of the
parties. 1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   After
counsel for appellant stated the essence of the stipulated agreement of the
parties regarding the modification, respondent's attorney, appellant's attorney
and the court had the following discussion:

   "Mr. Wasser [respondent's attorney]: The five-year period is from April 1,
1977.  As soon as those three occurrences, Your Honor.

   "Mr. Daniel [appellant's attorney]: The earliest of those three occurrences,
Your Honor.

   "The Court: Subject to these contingencies, I take it this is to be
unintegrated in the domestic sense?

   "Mr. Wasser: No.  It is not intended to be integrated from the domestic.  It
is intended to be deducted by the respondent and taxable by the [appellant].

   "The Court: But still nonmodifiable

   "Mr. Wasser: Absolutely.

   "The Court: The court associates integrated in the domestic sense with
nonmodifiability.  If you make a distinction, otherwise let's have it clearly
understood.

   "Mr. Daniel: The court's statement is the understanding of the parties.

   "The Court: No.  My statement seems to have been wrong.  Mr. Wasser's
statement is the intent of the parties.  It is nonintegrated.  It is a
court-imposed obligation, but it is not nonmodifiable except for termination
upon death, remarriage or termination by complete performance.

   "Mr. Wasser: Yes, Your Honor.

   "Mr. Daniel: That's correct.

   "The Court: Over a period of five years.  Did I state it accurately now?

   "Mr. Wasser: Yes.

   "The Court: Anything else?

   "Mr. Wasser: It is intended to be spousal support.

   "The Court: I understand.  All right." (Italics added.)

   At the time of the hearing, appellant had three motions pending before the
trial court: (1) a motion to compel answers and a deposition; (2) a motion re
contempt for failure of respondent to pay charges in certain bank credit cards
and denial of child's visitations; and (3) a motion for modification of
visitation and spousal support. Because appellant's briefs on appeal only
address the court's denial of her motion for modification of spousal support, we
shall deem the other contentions to have been abandoned.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      Following discussion of other matters, the court stated to appellant and
respondent that "you are presumed to understand and accept these stipulations
having heard them audibly pronounced in open court."

   Subsequently, appellant's attorney filed a proposed order which he drafted,
embodying the oral stipulations made on March 21, 1977.  This order was signed
by the court and provided as follows: "3. [Respondent] is ordered to pay
[appellant] as and for non-modifiable spousal support, the sum of $ 60,000
payable $ 500 on the 1st and 15th day of each month, commencing April 1, 1977,
and continuing until the death or remarriage of [appellant], or the expiration
of five years, which ever [sic] shall first occur."

   Over the next five years, respondent paid the full amount of $ 60,000 to
appellant, making the last monthly payment in March 1982.

   In May 1983, appellant filed an order to show cause seeking spousal support
in the amount of 50 percent of respondent's gross earned income.  She asserted
that the June 15, 1977, order had merely altered the respondent's support
obligation during the five-year period, after which the original spousal support
provisions were to be automatically reinstated.

   The order to show cause came on for hearing in February 1984 before Judge
Jerry Pacht.  After hearing argument on the spousal support modification, the
matter was submitted for the trial court's determination.  Following
consideration, the trial court entered the following minute order as of February
7, 1984, "The Court finds that the parties knowingly and intelligently entered
into a non-modifiable support agreement on March 21, 1977.  They were both
represented by experienced counsel.  Their agreement was recited in open court
and was clearly the result of negotiation and compromise.  The agreement was
reduced to a formal order signed June 1, 1977.  The order, prepared by
[appellant's] counsel clearly states that it is nonmodifiable. [para. ] There is
no evidence that the agreement was procured by  fraud, duress or any
inappropriate means.  [para. ] Therefore, [appellant's] motion to 'modify' past
orders for support is denied, and order to show cause thereon is discharged.
(The Court is persuaded it is without jurisdiction to 'modify' any past order;
and further persuaded that if it had jurisdiction, it would find [appellant's]
motion to be without merit.) The Court retains jurisdiction to entertain motions
for attorney fees for bringing or resisting these proceedings."

   Appellant filed a timely notice of appeal from the trial court's order of
February 7, 1984.

   Contentions on Appeal

   Appellant contends, in summary, that the trial court erred in denying her
motion for modification of spousal support because:

   1. Public policy favors the retention of jurisdiction over spousal support
when the language of an agreement or court order is uncertain or ambiguous as to
whether the trial court retained jurisdiction to modify or extend spousal
support beyond a certain date, and when there is no evidence that the supported
spouse will be able to provide for his or her own support subsequent to the
projected termination date; and

   2. In the alternative, the trial court lacked subject matter jurisdiction in
1977 to modify the previous interlocutory judgment since there was no express
reservation of jurisdiction in the interlocutory order which would empower the
trial court to make the 1977 modification order.

   Respondent controverts these contentions.

    Discussion

   I

   The Trial Court Properly Denied the   Request for Modification

   Appellant first argues that neither the modification order entered in 1977
nor the underlying oral stipulation speaks precisely to the question of whether
the trial court retained jurisdiction to modify spousal support after the
five-year period which ended March 31, 1982.  She argues that the original
open-ended reservation in the interlocutory judgment is, by necessity, continued
in the 1977 modification order. She also contends that the trial court  erred in
finding that the parties intended to terminate spousal support at the end of
March 1982.

   Appellant relies principally on our Supreme Court's decisions in In re
Marriage of Morrison (1978) 20 Cal.3d 437 [143 Cal.Rptr. 139, 573 P.2d 41], and
In re Marriage of Vomacka (1984) 36 Cal.3d 459 [204 Cal.Rptr. 568, 683 P.2d 248]
. Appellant's reliance on these decisions is misplaced.

   In Morrison, wife, Patricia Morrison, appealed from an interlocutory judgment
of dissolution contending, in part, that the trial court abused its discretion
in failing to retain jurisdiction to award further spousal support after the
11-year period provided in the interlocutory judgment. Her former husband, David
Morrison, had petitioned the trial court for dissolution of their 28-year
marriage when he and wife were 52 and 54 years old respectively.  Wife had
certain health problems which made it problematical whether she would ever be
able to work full time.  She was earning approximately $ 100 per month in part
time employment.  Husband, on the other hand, was employed full time earning a
combined monthly take home income of $ 1,456 from his current employment and a
military pension.

   The Morrison court reviewed a number of decisions of the Court of Appeal
regarding the guidelines the trial court must use in determining whether or not
to retain jurisdiction to extend a spousal support under section 4801,
subdivision (d), of the Civil Code, 2 including In re Marriage of Patrino (1973)
36 Cal.App.3d 186 [111 Cal.Rptr. 367] (Patrino) and In re Marriage of Lopez
(1974) 38 Cal.App.3d 93 [113 Cal.Rptr. 58] (Lopez). 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   All
statutory references shall be to the Civil Code unless otherwise indicated.

   Section 4801, subdivision (d), provides: "An order for payment of an
allowance for the support of one of the parties shall terminate at the end of
the period specified in the order and shall not be extended unless the court in
its original order retains jurisdiction."
3   The appeals in Patrino, Lopez and Morrison were from interlocutory orders of
dissolution. The appeals challenged the amount and duration of spousal support
orders and were taken prior to the time the support was actually terminated.
The trial court still had jurisdiction to modify such support.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The court in Morrison stated: "To support the assertion that one of the goals
of the Family Law Act was to curtail the number of modification proceedings, the
Patrino and Lopez decisions rely on section 4801, subdivision (d).  This
reliance is misplaced for several reasons.  Section 4801, subdivision (d), was
not, as Patrino and Lopez assert, a new provision added to the Civil Code with
the adoption of the Family Law Act.  That subdivision was merely a
recodification of former section 139.7, which had been enacted in 1965.  The
legislative history of former section 139.7 indicates that the Legislature, in
adopting this section, had a very different goal in mind than the curtailment of
modification proceedings.

    "Before the enactment of former section 139.7 , the appellate courts held
that a trial court retained jurisdiction to modify an alimony decree at any time
during the payment period and it was not necessary to so state in the court's
order.  The right to extend the duration of such an award and the right to
terminate it were part of this power.  . . .  Further, no relief could be
granted after the specified term in the decree had passed, for the trial court's
jurisdiction terminated on that date. . . .

   " The confusion, which was generated by these rules concerning the retention
of jurisdiction, led to some unfortunate results for both spouses.  Since the
trial court was not required to take any affirmative steps to retain
jurisdiction during the alimony period, the supporting spouse was not
necessarily given any express notice of the court's continuing jurisdiction to
extend the period.  . . .

   "These rules benefited the supported spouse by providing for automatic
retention of jurisdiction during the payment period.  However, confusion as to
how long the court retained that jurisdiction led some supported spouses to
erroneously wait until the previously provided alimony had ended before
petitioning for an extension.  [Citation.] Even though the request may have come
only one day after alimony ended, the court was without jurisdiction to provide
relief despite the fact the supported spouse's need may have been great.

   "To eliminate these prevalent misunderstandings of the parties concerning the
trial court's retention of jurisdiction, the Legislature changed the decisional
law by enacting former section 139.7.  [Fn. omitted.] The trial court was
required to expressly indicate in its order if it wished to retain jurisdiction.
The supporting spouse was put on notice by the court's order that it had the
power to extend the alimony payments.  It is true that the supported spouse no
longer received the benefit of the court's automatic retention of jurisdiction
during the period for which alimony had been awarded.  However, under the new
statute, when the court did retain jurisdiction for an indefinite period of
time, the supported spouse would no longer be precluded from petitioning for
additional relief after the previously provided alimony had terminated.  If the
court retained jurisdiction for only a limited period of time, that time period
was expressly set forth in the order, so the supported spouse knew the time
within which he or she had to petition for additional relief.

   "In short, the new statute clarified for both parties whether, and for what
period of time, a court retained jurisdiction to extend an alimony order.  It
was to provide this clarification, not to curtail modification proceedings as
Patrino and Lopez assert, that the Legislature enacted former section 139.7.
[Fn. omitted.]" ( Morrison, supra, 20 Cal.3d at pp. 445-447, italics added.)

   "The enactment of the Family Law Act in 1969 did nothing to change this
requirement that a court be guided by the circumstances of the parties in
resolving issues relating to spousal support. [Fn. omitted.] As noted, former
section 139.7 was recodified as section 4801, subdivision (d), [fn. omitted]
with the adoption of that act.  . . .  Former section 139 was repealed, and a
new section, section 4801, subdivision (a), set forth the factors to be
considered by a court in setting the amount and duration of spousal support. . .
.  The major differences between former section 139 and the new section were
that the new section eliminated consideration of the comparative marital fault
of the parties in setting support, and listed two specific factors to be
considered by the court in setting support -- the duration of the marriage and
the ability of the supported spouse to engage in gainful employment.  [Fn.
omitted.] . . ." ( Id., at p. 449.)

   The Morrison court was concerned with the trial court's order setting the
term of spousal support at a maximum of 11 years because there was no showing
that wife would be self-supporting at the end of 11 years.  All the evidence in
the record was to the contrary and therefore the trial court abused its
discretion in divesting itself of jurisdiction to award future support to her
after the 11-year period had elapsed.

   The facts of the present appeal are distinguishable from Morrison because
appellant agreed to the court's modification of spousal support and did not
challenge the modification until 13 months after the spousal support had ceased
pursuant to the stipulation and order.  The court in Morrison  was concerned
with the length of the period set for spousal support and not with the precise
question presented in this appeal, namely, whether the trial court could modify
a spousal support order after the date specified for termination of support when
the supporting spouse had fully complied with the order.

   This precise question was presented to the appellate court in Maben v.
Superior Court (1967) 255 Cal.App.2d 708 [63 Cal.Rptr. 439], and decided under
former Civil Code section 139.7.  In Maben, the wife, Doris Maben, obtained an
interlocutory judgment of divorce from her husband, Malcolm Maben, in May 1958.
The interlocutory judgment ordered husband to pay wife $ 600 per month as
alimony commencing May 1, 1958, but was silent as to the continuing jurisdiction
of the court to modify the award.  In March 1962, on husband's motion, the
interlocutory judgment was modified and he was required to pay wife $ 485 per
month as alimony commencing April 1, 1962, and again the order was silent as to
the continuing jurisdiction of the court to modify. On December 30, 1965, on
husband's order to show  cause, the court modified the prior support order and
provided that husband was to pay wife support and maintenance for 12 months at $
250 per month commencing January 1, 1966, and continuing for 11 months;
thereafter alimony was to terminate. Husband fully complied with the provisions
of this December 30, 1965, order.

   In January 1967, wife obtained an order requiring husband to show cause why
the provisions of the December 1965 order should not be further modified so as
to provide for further payment of alimony. Husband then sought a writ of
prohibition in the Court of Appeal to restrain the superior court from taking
any further proceedings based on the order to show cause claiming that the trial
court had no jurisdiction to do so by reason of former section 139.7. 4 Husband
contended that the trial court's order of December 30, 1965, expressly provided
that wife's right to alimony should terminate with the last payment in December
1966, and that the trial court lacked jurisdiction to modify the spousal support
after the expiration of the period.  Wife, on the other hand, contended that
former section 139.7 "modifies previous law by expanding the jurisdiction of the
court to extend alimony allowed for a limited period even if the application for
such modification is filed after the period has expired if there is a
reservation of jurisdiction in the 'original order.' She necessarily also
[argued] that the original order [was] the 1958 interlocutory judgment in which
jurisdiction was retained by implication of law.  [Fn. omitted.]" ( Maben, supra
, 255 Cal.App.2d at p. 712.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   Former
section 139.7 provided: "An order for payment of an allowance for the support of
one of the parties pursuant to section 139 shall terminate at the end of the
period specified in the order and shall not be extended unless the court in its
original order retains jurisdiction."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The appellate court in Maben concluded that ". . . the phrase 'original
order' as used in section 139.7 . . . refers to the latest order in point of
time in which the court has made an allowance for the support of either party.
That order may be the interlocutory judgment or, as here, may be an order
modifying an earlier order for the payment of alimony under the provisions of
section 139 of the Civil Code. As we see it, the Legislature intended to provide
that the obligation of one party to pay for the support of the other party
pursuant to section 139 shall terminate at the end of the period specified in
the latest order and shall not be extended unless the court in that order
expressly retains jurisdiction." (Ibid., italics in original.)

   The court in Maben held that since the order requiring husband to show cause
why he should not be required to make additional payments was not issued until
January 13, 1967, the court had no jurisdiction to extend the allowance for the
support of wife beyond December 31, 1966.  Maben was  considered and discussed
by our Supreme Court in In re Marriage of Vomacka, supra, 36 Cal.3d 459. Vomacka
did not  deal with the precise question presented in this appeal but contains
persuasive dicta with respect to Maben which is dispositive of the issue
presented in this appeal.

   In Vomacka, supra, 36 Cal.3d at pages 461-462, the trial court entered an
interlocutory judgment of dissolution which provided, among other things, that
husband, William Vomacka, was to pay his wife, Joyce Vomacka, the sum of $ 275
as support commencing September 1, 1979, which was "'to continue each month
thereafter until further order from the Court, the death of either party, the
remarriage of [wife], or August 1, 1982, whichever first occurs.  The Court
shall retain jurisdiction regarding spousal support until September 1, 1984, at
which time [wife's] right to request spousal support from [husband] shall
terminate forever.'" (Italics in original.)

   On June 29, 1982, wife obtained an order to show cause seeking, inter alia,
to modify the spousal support provision in the interlocutory decree.  An order
was issued which provided that husband would be required to continue his support
payments to wife, increased to $ 600 per month until the death of either party,
remarriage of wife, or until further order of the court.  The trial court
explained in its intended decision its reasoning for providing spousal support
beyond the dates specified in the interlocutory order and made the following
explanation: "'To find from an agreement that there is a termination of spousal
support, the Court must find explicit language of such termination. The alleged
termination provision herein is not sufficiently explicit to find such
termination (purports to terminate [wife's] right to ask for additional support;
does not address itself explicitly to the termination of support).  Thus, the
Court finds that there is no absolute termination herein on September 1, 1984.
(See In re the Marriage of Moore (1980) 113 Cal.App.3d 22 [169 Cal.Rptr. 619]
.)'" ( Vomacka, supra, 36 Cal.3d at p. 462.)

   The trial court issued its order modifying spousal support. Husband appealed
contending that the trial court had exceeded its jurisdiction in modifying the
interlocutory judgment to extend spousal support payments beyond the date
contained in the judgment.  Husband argued that the trial court's decision was
contrary to the parties' agreement and violated section 4811, subdivision (b), 5
which permits the parties to agree that the provisions  of any agreement or
order for the support of either party shall not be subject to subsequent
modification or revocation by court order.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   Section
4811, subdivision (b), provides: "The provisions of any agreement for the
support of either party shall be deemed to be separate and severable from the
provisions of the agreement relating to property.  All orders for the support of
either party based on the agreement shall be deemed law-imposed and shall be
deemed made under the power of the court to make the orders.  The provisions of
any agreement or order for the support of either party shall be subject to
subsequent modification or revocation by court order, except as to any amount
that may have accrued prior to the date of filing of the notice of motion or
order to show cause to modify or revoke, and except to the extent that any
written agreement, or, if there is no written agreement, any oral agreement
entered into in open court between the parties, specifically provides to the
contrary."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    In Vomacka, wife's request for modification of support was made prior to the
termination date specified in the interlocutory order. This is the
distinguishing feature of Vomacka and the case at bench.

   The interlocutory order also specified, unlike the present appeal, that the
support payments were to "continue until further order of the court" or the
occurrence of the other events listed.  The court in Vomacka concluded that
there was insufficient language in the modification order to support the finding
of nonmodifiability and stated that the record on appeal "does not contain a
transcript of the trial court proceedings, presumably waived by the parties, and
therefore contains no reference to the oral statements of the parties during any
of the dissolution proceedings.  . . .  [para. ] As there is no evidence of a
written or oral agreement of the parties prohibiting modification of  the
interlocutory decree, we reject [husband's] argument that the subject order
violates the limitation on judicial modifications set forth in section 4811,
subdivision (b)." ( Vomacka, supra, 36 Cal.3d at p. 465.)

     Unlike Vomacka, the record in the case before us contains the parties'
agreement regarding termination of spousal support. The parties to this appeal
dispute whether the language contained in the oral stipulations made in open
court and incorporated in the 1977 modification order are certain and
unambiguous.  The trial court found the language to be clear and unambiguous,
and the evidence supports the trial court's conclusion.  Certainly, appellant's
actions in failing to seek relief until over a year after the five-year period
had elapsed is consistent with the trial court's finding.

   The trial court's conclusion that it lacked jurisdiction is supported by the
Vomacka decision.  In its footnote 12, the Vomacka court stated in pertinent
part, in reference to the decision in Maben, that Maben is "factually
distinguishable from the instant case.  In Maben, the second modification of the
original spousal support award . . . was made after the enactment of former
section 139.7 and provided in pertinent part that spousal support should
'[continue] for 11 months thereafter at which time alimony shall terminate.' . .
. Unlike the instant case, the request for extension of spousal support was
properly denied because   brought after the expiration of this 11-month period,
that is, after the court's jurisdiction had clearly ceased." ( Vomacka,  supra,
at p. 473, italics added.) Footnote 12 in Vomacka is dispositive of the issue
presented herein because Vomacka concludes that the trial court's jurisdiction
ceases when the termination date passes.

   Following the reasoning in Vomacka and Maben, we conclude that the trial
court properly denied the request for modification. We see no violation of
public policy in our holding since requiring a party to seek a modification
order prior to the termination date serves to provide certainty to the parties
involved in dissolution proceedings as to their respective obligations and
expectations under support arrangements.  During this five-year period,
respondent provided appellant the agreed support payments.  Appellant had ample
opportunity to seek relief in the trial court.  We cannot accept her argument
that the term "nonmodifiable" as used in the oral stipulation and in the 1977
modification order was strictly limited to the five-year period and that the
support arrangements would thereafter revert to the original provisions for
support contained in the 1976 interlocutory judgment. Our conclusion is further
supported by the additional language providing for termination after the
expiration of five years and the absence of any reference to possible court
action by the insertion of the words "further order of the court" during the
five-year period as was present in the interlocutory order in Vomacka.

   As the court said in In re Marriage of Hawkins (1975) 48 Cal.App.3d 208, 213
[121 Cal.Rptr. 681], "The parties to a property settlement are entitled to
relinquish the possibility of a potentially more beneficial support order in
exchange for certainty of their rights and obligations.  Because of that
certainty, both can better plan their affairs and adjust their lives to the new
circumstances created by the termination of a long marriage."

   While the Hawkins decision was issued in connection with the husband's
attempt to modify a previously entered support order approving the parties'
agreement, it nonetheless has the same persuasive ring when applied to the
modification order between the parties in this appeal.  Both appellant and
respondent in the instant appeal were represented by competent counsel;
appellant was a law school graduate and an experienced accountant; and
respondent was a practicing lawyer.  Both appellant  and respondent were thus
highly educated, adequately represented, and persons capable of making an
intelligent decision as to their financial arrangements.  Any ambiguity must be
resolved against the appellant whose counsel drafted the agreement.  (
Ecco-Phoenix Electric Corp. v. Howard J. White, Inc. (1969) 1 Cal.3d 266, 275
[81 Cal.Rptr. 489, 461 P.2d 33]; 1 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (8th ed. 1973)
Contracts, § 535, pp. 456-457.)

    Appellant has presented us with no facts or argument which would justify a
more lengthy support arrangement as was present in Morrison.  Given these
circumstances, it is understandable that the appellant would have agreed to
potentially less lifetime support in exchange for a more certain and regular
five-year arrangement.

   II

The Trial Court Had Jurisdiction to Modify the Previous Interlocutory Order

     Appellant argues, in the alternative, that the trial court lacked
jurisdiction in 1977 to modify the 1976 interlocutory order because there was no
express reservation of jurisdiction in the interlocutory order permitting any
modifications by the trial court.  Appellant argues, therefore, that the trial
court lacked subject matter jurisdiction to approve the 1977 modification
agreement.  This argument is meritless.

   The 1977 modification order was entered pursuant to an agreement between the
parties and recited in open court by counsel.  The agreement was later
incorporated in a document prepared by appellant's attorney, signed by the court
and entered in the court's records.  Both parties submitted to the jurisdiction
of the trial court in making the modification for support.  The trial court had
fundamental jurisdiction over the parties and the subject matter of spousal
support under section 4811, subdivision (b), even without an explicit
reservation of jurisdiction in the interlocutory judgment.

   Section 4811, subdivision (b), provides in pertinent part: "All orders for
the support of either party based on the agreement [for spousal support] shall
be deemed law-imposed and shall be deemed made under the power of the court to
make the orders.  The provisions of any agreement or order for the support of
either party shall be subject to subsequent modification   or revocation by
court order . . . ." (Italics added.)

   There was no lack of subject matter jurisdiction and the trial court had the
power to make the 1977 order modifying the support to appellant.  (See Vomacka,
supra, 36 Cal.3d 459 at p. 472; In re Marriage of Maxfield (1983) 142 Cal.App.3d
755, 759-760 [191 Cal.Rptr. 267]; and Esserman v. Esserman (1982) 136 Cal.App.3d
572, 578 [186 Cal.Rptr. 329].)

    The order appealed from is affirmed.


                              43 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of LESLIE and NORLENE STEPHENSON. LESLIE
           STEPHENSON, Respondent, v. NORLENE STEPHENSON, Appellant.

                                  No. D018407.

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FOURTH APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION ONE

            39 Cal. App. 4th 71; 46 Cal. Rptr. 2d 8; 1995 Cal. App.
          LEXIS 1022; 95 Cal. Daily Op. Service 8253; 95 Daily Journal
                                   DAR 14199


                          September 26, 1995, Decided

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     As Modified October 20, 1995. The Publication Status of
this Document has been Changed by the Court from Unpublished to Published
October 20, 1995.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of San Diego County, No. D226693, Linda B.
Quinn, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports

(1a) (1b) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69--Spousal Support--
Modification--Change of Conditions--Supporting Spouse's Election of Early
Retirement--Statutory Criteria--Supporting Spouse's Earning Capacity.  --In a
proceeding brought by a husband for a reduction in his spousal support
obligation based on his decision to take early retirement from his
$75,000-per-year job at age 59, with severance pay of $52,000, the trial court
erred in ordering a reduction in spousal support from $1,500 per month to $345
per month, to commence eight and one-half months later, at the time when the
severance pay would be exhausted. Although there was no evidence of the
husband's deliberate avoidance of his support obligation, the trial court abused
its discretion in failing to predicate its order upon the enumerated statutory
criteria, including the husband's reasonable earning capacity under the
circumstances (Civ. Code, former § 4801, now Fam. Code, § 4320). When the trial
court ordered continuation of the $1,500-per-month spousal support for eight and
one-half months, the trial court impliedly concluded no change in circumstances
warranting modification at that time. Hence, the court's order for a future
reduction of the spousal support obligation was premature, and the order
improperly shifted the burden of proof to the wife to refute the change in
circumstances.

   [Change in financial condition or needs of husband or wife as ground for
modification of decree for alimony or maintenance, note, 18 A.L.R.2d 10. See
also 11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (9th ed. 1990) Husband and Wife, § 258.]

(2) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69--Spousal Support--Modification--
Change of Conditions--Statutory Criteria--Supporting Spouse's Earning Capacity.
--Modification of spousal support must be determined according to the needs of
both parties and their respective abilities to meet these needs. In this regard,
a trial court has broad discretion and an abuse thereof occurs only where it can
be said that no judge reasonably could have made the same order. The moving
party bears the burden of establishing a material change of circumstances. In
determining whether a change of circumstances has occurred, the trial court is
required to consider the standards and criteria set forth in Civ. Code, former §
4801, now Fam. Code, § 4320. These statutes expressly require the trial court to
consider the supporting spouse's ability to pay taking into account his or her
earning capacity (Civ. Code, former § 4801, subd. (a)(3), now Fam. Code, § 4320,
subd. (a)). Although a showing of changed circumstances is necessary to obtain
the court's consideration of a modification of spousal support, it does not
ensure that a modification will be granted.

(3) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69--Spousal Support--Modification--
Change of Conditions--Supporting Spouse's Election of Early Retirement--
Obligation to Provide Support--Statutory Criteria.  --In the context of
modification of an existing spousal support order in consideration of changed
circumstances, where the supporting spouse elects to retire early and to not
seek reasonably remunerative available employment under the circumstances, the
court can properly impute income to that supporting spouse. The supporting
spouse has an obligation to provide support and to make reasonable efforts to
obtain employment which would generate a reasonable income under the
circumstances to meet a continuing support obligation. Indeed, a supporting
party's retirement or cessation of gainful employment does not automatically
compel a finding of a sufficient changed circumstance to warrant a decrease or
termination of a support obligation. Rather, whether modification is warranted
is governed by the surrounding circumstances and the trial court's consideration
of relevant statutory criteria (Civ. Code, former § 4801, now Fam. Code, § 4320
).

(4) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 74--Spousal Support--Appeal--
Modification--Standard of Review--Substantial Evidence.  --In reviewing findings
supporting a trial court's exercise of discretion in modifying spousal support,
the reviewing court must accept as true all evidence tending to establish the
correctness of the trial judge's findings, resolving all conflicts in the
evidence in favor of the prevailing party and indulging in all legitimate and
reasonable inferences to uphold the judgment. When a finding of the trial court
is attacked as being unsupported, the reviewing court's power begins and ends
with a determination of whether there is any substantial evidence which will
support the conclusions reached by the trial court.

COUNSEL: Scott B. Tepper and Robert M. Garland for Appellant.

Andrew J. Parrott for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Work, Acting P. J., with Huffman and Nares, JJ., concurring.

OPINION BY: WORK, Acting P. J.

OPINION

     WORK, Acting P. J.

   Following the dissolution of their 31-year marriage, Norlene Stephenson
appeals that portion of an order reducing spousal support from $1,500 to $345
because of a change in circumstances arising from Leslie Stephenson's election
to take an early retirement at age 59. She contends Leslie's decision to retire
early from his $75,000-a-year job constituted a voluntary and deliberate attempt
to reduce or extinguish his spousal support obligation, requiring the trial
court to consider his earning capacity in evaluating his request for termination
or modification of support. Moreover, she contends former Civil Code 1 section
4801, subdivision (a) (repealed by Stats. 1992, ch. 162; now Fam. Code, § 4320)
was improperly applied to the facts and that, in any event, Leslie has failed to
adequately prove there was a change in circumstances justifying modification of
support at the time the request was made. As we shall explain, we conclude the
nature of the cessation of employment, be it retirement, quitting or layoff, or
whether voluntary or involuntary in character, is irrelevant when it comes to
the trial court's duty to consider statutory criteria before determining support
obligations. For, a spouse's obligation to continue support is predicated upon
the enumerated statutory criteria including reasonable earning capacity under
the circumstances, regardless whether there is evidence of deliberate avoidance
of support obligations. Accordingly, we affirm the portion of the order that
treats Leslie's severance pay ($52,000)  as the equivalent to eight and one-half
months of salary and refuses to modify the $1,500 monthly support obligation
during that time, because it is amply supported by the record. However, we
reverse that portion of the order reducing the monthly spousal support to $345
after the expiration of that time period; for, it was premature under the
circumstances and the trial court abused its discretion in not applying the
statutory criteria under former section 4801 (now Fam. Code, § 4320), including
earning capacity.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   All
statutory references are to the Civil Code unless otherwise specified.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   I

   Leslie and Norlene were married in 1952, when Norlene was 17 years of age.
The parties legally separated in 1983. Since December 1, 1957, Leslie  had been
employed by Otis Elevator Company and by late 1992 at 59 years of age he was a
construction supervisor earning approximately $74,000 per year. During the
marriage, Norlene was the homemaker and worked in various secretarial positions.
After they separated,  Norlene attempted to become trained and earn a living as
a professional photographer, having no other vocational skills other than
secretarial. Plagued by various health problems (i.e. sacroilitis, ankylosing
spondylitis and fibrositis) requiring the use of medication to control  the
constant pain, her efforts to establish a career as a professional photographer
have been modestly fruitful, as she has been hampered by not only her physical
disability, but also a lack of capital funds to start up and carry on the
business and the theft of her photographic equipment.

   At the time of dissolution, Leslie was ordered to pay Norlene monthly spousal
support of $2,000. In May 1991, spousal support was modified from $2,000 to
$1,500 retroactive to March 1991. In August 1992, Leslie filed an order to show
cause for modification of spousal support, declaring his intent to retire in
October 1992, from Otis Elevator Company. In his supplemental declaration,
Leslie explained the nature of his retirement from Otis Elevator Company as a
construction superintendent as follows: "One does not need to think too hard to
realize that construction of all sorts has come to a virtual standstill in San
Diego County. And one needs only to take a look around the skyline of downtown
San Diego to realize that there are no new skyscrapers under construction. About
the only construction being done these days is a small amount of homebuilding.
Homes do not need elevators. My approaching sixtieth birthday and the standstill
in construction have coincided. There was an 'understanding' between me and my
employer that it would be a wise decision on my part to retire. In fact, I
answered [Norlene's counsel's] question whether the company would benefit from
my continuing to work for them as follows: 'Two more heads are rolling this
week. There's not any openings.' He asked me whether there were any incentives
for retiring other than what I described as 'the golden handshake' of one week
of pay for every year I had worked for Otis. There was not." In other words,
Leslie decided to retire and receive the $52,000 in severance pay because the
chances of being laid off were high and, if he had not retired, but risked
continued employment, and were terminated, he would not receive any severance
pay.

   By order filed on December 4, the trial court reduced spousal support from
$1,500 to $ 345 per month, commencing July 15, 1993, approximately eight and
one-half months after Leslie's date of retirement. Essentially, the trial court
determined the severance pay amounted to eight and one-half months' normal
salary for Leslie, resulting in its prospective order monthly  spousal support
be reduced eight and one-half months from the date of his retirement to $345
only if the circumstances remain unchanged and the only income to both parties
continues to be their retirement. The court determined that at that time,
Leslie's income would be $1,200 and Norlene's income would be $295. In its order
entered January 29, 1993, the court expressly stated: "Spousal support shall be
modified as ordered herein only if the income to each party remains only
pension/retirement payments each is entitled to." Norlene timely filed a notice
of appeal on February 8.

   II

     Norlene contends the record establishes Leslie's decision to retire early
was voluntary and constituted a deliberate attempt to reduce or extinguish his
spousal support obligation to her, requiring the trial court to consider his
earning capacity in evaluating his request for modification of support. Leslie
responds the trial court properly did not apply that standard because the record
did not demonstrate he had deliberately depressed his income. However, as we
shall explain, within the context of the trial court's duty to apply governing
statutory criteria to determine support obligations, it matters not the nature
of the cessation of employment or whether it be voluntary or involuntary in
character. For, a supporting spouse's further obligation to support, and the
level of that obligation, is predicated upon the enumerated statutory criteria
including reasonable earning capacity under the circumstances regardless whether
there is any evidence of deliberate avoidance of support obligation.

     Preliminarily, spousal support " 'must be determined according to the needs
of both parties and their respective abilities to meet these needs. [Citation.]
In this regard, a trial court has broad discretion and an abuse thereof only
occurs where it can be  said that no judge reasonably could have made the same
order.' " ( In re Marriage of Meegan (1992) 11 Cal. App. 4th 156, 161 [13 Cal.
Rptr. 2d 799], quoting In re Marriage of Rome (1980) 109 Cal. App. 3d 961, 964
[167 Cal. Rptr.  351]; see former § 4801, now Fam. Code, § 4320.  2 ) Similarly,
whether a spousal support order should be modified is a matter within the sound
discretion of the trial court, predicated upon a showing of a material change of
circumstances since the last spousal  support order. (In re Marriage of Meegan,
supra, 11 Cal. App. 4th at p. 161; In re Marriage of Olson (1993) 14 Cal. App.
4th 1, 7, 9 [17 Cal. Rptr. 2d 480].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Former
section 4801 (now Fam. Code, § 4320) states in pertinent part:

   "(a) In any judgment decreeing the dissolution of a marriage or a legal
separation of the parties, the court may order a party to pay for the support of
the other party any amount, and for any period of time, as the court may deem
just and reasonable, based on the standard of living established during the
marriage. In making the award, the court shall consider all of the following
circumstances of the respective parties:

   "(1) The extent to which the earning capacity of each spouse is sufficient to
maintain the standard of living established during the marriage, taking into
account all of the following:

   "(A) The marketable skills of the supported spouse; the job market for those
skills; the time and expenses required for the supported spouse to acquire the
appropriate education or training to develop those skills; and the possible need
for retraining or education to acquire other, more marketable skills or
employment.

   "(B) The extent to which the supported spouse's present or future earning
capacity is impaired by periods of unemployment that were incurred during the
marriage to permit the supported spouse to devote time to domestic duties.

   "(2) The extent to which the supported spouse contributed to the attainment
of an education, training, a career position, or a license by the other spouse.

   "(3) The ability to pay of the supporting spouse, taking into account the
supporting spouse's earning capacity, earned and unearned income, assets, and
standard of living.

   "(4) The needs of each party based on the standard of living established
during the marriage.

   "(5) The obligations and assets, including the separate property, of each.

   "(6) The duration of the marriage.

   "(7) The ability of the supported spouse to engage in gainful employment
without interfering with the interests of dependent children in the custody of
the spouse.

   "(8) The age and health of the parties.

   "(9) The immediate and specific tax consequences to each party.

   "(10) Any other factors which it deems just and equitable."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The moving party bears the burden of establishing a material change of
circumstances since the last order was made in order to obtain modification of
the spousal support order. (In re Marriage of Olson, supra, 14 Cal. App. 4th at
p. 9; In re Marriage of Gavron (1988) 203 Cal. App. 3d 705, 710 [250 Cal. Rptr.
148]; In re Marriage of Norvall (1987) 192 Cal. App. 3d 1047, 1060 [237 Cal.
Rptr. 770].) In determining whether a change of circumstances has occurred, the
trial court is required to reconsider the same standards and criteria set forth
in former section 4801 and now Family Code section 4320 3 it considered in
making  the initial long-term order at the time of judgment  and any subsequent
modification order. ( In re Marriage of Prietsch & Calhoun (1987) 190 Cal. App.
3d 645, 655 [235 Cal. Rptr. 587].) These statutes expressly require the trial
court to consider the supporting spouse's ability to pay taking into account his
or her earning capacity. (Former § 4801, subd. (a)(3); Fam. Code, § 4320, subd.
(a).) Accordingly, even if Leslie shows a change of circumstances in actual
income as the result of retirement, modification is not necessarily mandated
given the court's obligation to reconsider the statutory standard, especially
the reasonable needs and financial abilities of the parties. (See In re Marriage
of Prietsch & Calhoun, supra, 190 Cal. App. 3d at p. 655.) "Thus, although a
showing of changed circumstances is necessary to obtain the court's
consideration of a modification of spousal support, it does not ensure that a
modification will be granted." (Samuels & Mandabach, Practice Under the Cal.
Family Code (Cont.Ed.Bar 1995) § 6.24, p. 168.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3    Family
Code section 4320 states:

   "In ordering spousal support under this part, the court shall consider all of
the following circumstances:

   "(a) The extent to which the earning capacity of each party is sufficient to
maintain the standard of living established during the marriage, taking into
account all of the following:

   "(1) The marketable skills of the supported party; the job market for those
skills; the time and expenses required for the supported party to acquire the
appropriate education or training to develop those skills; and the possible need
for retraining or education to acquire other, more marketable skills or
employment.

   "(2) The extent to which the supported party's present or future earning
capacity is impaired by periods of unemployment that were incurred during the
marriage to permit the supported party to devote time to domestic duties.

   "(b) The extent to which the supported party contributed to the attainment of
an education, training, a career position, or a license by the supporting party.

   "(c) The ability to pay of the supporting party, taking into account the
supporting party's earning capacity, earned and unearned income, assets, and
standard of living.

   "(d) The needs of each party based on the standard of living established
during the marriage.

   "(e) The obligations and assets, including the separate property, of each
party.

   "(f) The duration of the marriage.

   "(g) The ability of the supported party to engage in gainful employment
without unduly interfering with the interests of dependent children in the
custody of the party.

   "(h) The age and health of the parties.

   "(i) The immediate and specific tax consequences to each party.

   "(j) Any other factors the court determines are just and equitable."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    It is undisputed it has long been the rule the trial court could consider a
supporting spouse's earning capacity when determining spousal support. However,
several courts have applied this rule only where the supporting spouse has
demonstrated a willful intention to avoid fulfilling familial financial support
obligations through deliberate misconduct. (In re Marriage of Meegan, supra, 11
Cal. App. 4th at p. 163; In re Marriage of Regnery (1989) 214 Cal. App. 3d 1367,
1371 [263 Cal. Rptr. 243]; see also Philbin v. Philbin (1971) 19 Cal. App. 3d
115, 121 [96 Cal. Rptr. 408].) In In re Marriage of Simpson (1992) 4 Cal. 4th
225, 233 [14 Cal. Rptr. 2d 411, 841 P.2d 931], the Supreme Court acknowledged a
number of decisions would permit a trial court to consider a supporting spouse's
earning capacity, as opposed to actual income, only where the supporting spouse
deliberately suppresses income to avoid support obligations. However, the court
did not resolve whether a trial court's authority to consider the supporting
spouse's earning capacity is so limited, because the trial court there had found
deliberate conduct by the father primarily motivated to avoid family support
obligations, a finding amply supported by substantial evidence. ( Id. at pp.
233-234.) Nevertheless, the Supreme Court explained: "[T]he statutory guidelines
governing spousal and child support do not limit the circumstances under which
the trial court may consider the earning capacity of the supporting spouse or in
any way restrict the trial court's discretion in the manner in which it may
consider earning capacity as well as actual income in fixing  support
[citations], with the exception that in fixing child support, reliance on
earning capacity must be 'consistent with the best interests of the children.'
[Citation.]" ( Id. at p. 233, quoting former § 4721, subd. (f)(2).)

   Historically, courts focused on earning capacity, rather than actual
earnings, to fashion familial support orders in those limited situations where
the record revealed a spouse was deliberately attempting to avoid familial
financial responsibilities by refusing to accept or seek gainful employment.
(See In re Marriage of Meegan, supra, 11 Cal. App. 4th at pp. 161-163; In re
Marriage of Sinks (1988) 204 Cal. App. 3d 586, 594 [251 Cal. Rptr. 379]; In re
Marriage of   Williams (1984) 155 Cal. App. 3d 57, 62 [202 Cal. Rptr. 10];
Philbin v. Philbin, supra, 19 Cal. App. 3d at p. 121; see also In re Marriage of
Everett (1990) 220 Cal. App. 3d 846, 859 [269 Cal. Rptr. 917].) In In re
Marriage of Nolte (1987) 191 Cal. App. 3d 966, 972-973 [236 Cal. Rptr. 706], the
court held "the Philbin" rule immediately above was altered by the enactment of
support statutes permitting the trial court to consider earning capacity of
either or both parents in fixing a support award. (See also In re Marriage of
Ilas (1993) 12 Cal. App. 4th 1630, 1638 [16 Cal. Rptr. 2d 345]; In re Marriage
of Everett, supra, 220 Cal. App. 3d at p. 859; In re Marriage of Regnery, supra,
214 Cal. App. 3d at p. 1372.) The Nolte court essentially reasoned the
legislation changed the Philbin rule, which used the earning capacity standard
to punish the person who made a deliberate attempt to avoid his or her support
obligations. (In re Marriage of Nolte,  supra, 191 Cal. App. 3d at p. 973; In re
Marriage of Ilas, supra, 12 Cal. App. 4th at p. 1638.) In In re Marriage of
Meegan, supra, 11 Cal. App. 4th at page 163, the court held findings of good
faith, however, prevented use of earning capacity standard. In In re Marriage of
Ilas, supra, 12 Cal. App. 4th at pages 1638-1639, the court disagreed,
declaring: "While deliberate avoidance of family responsibilities is a
significant factor in the decision to consider earning capacity [citation], the
statute explicitly authorizes consideration of earning capacity in all cases.
([Former] § 4801, subd. (a)(1).) Accordingly, the trial court's consideration of
earning capacity is not limited to cases in which a deliberate attempt to avoid
support responsibilities is found."

   Shortly thereafter, the court in County of Yolo v. Garcia (1993) 20 Cal. App.
4th 1771, 1780-1783 [25 Cal. Rptr. 2d 681], reexamined the Philbin rule and the
cases relied upon by that court (see, e.g., Webber v. Webber (1948) 33 Cal. 2d
153, 161 [199 P.2d 934]), concluding whether earning capacity may be relied on
in lieu of actual income turns on the state of the evidence; a parent has the
responsibility to provide for familial economic security by making reasonable
attempts to seek and accept employment to support a child; and thus the
dispositive issue is whether the evidence will sustain the inference the party
charged with support could, with reasonable  effort, obtain employment
generating the higher income. ( County of Yolo v. Garcia, supra, 20 Cal. App.
4th at p. 1781.) After analyzing the Webber decision, the court explained:
"Thus, the rationale for the Philbin rule is that a fair and logical deduction
that ability to earn exceeds actual income can only be made where there is
evidence that the party to be charged has failed to make a reasonable effort to
obtain employment that would generate a higher income. The proponent of the
claim for past support has the burden of persuasion and the burden of production
of evidence to establish the parent's ability to earn an income sufficient to
defray support. [Citation.] The proponent of support may employ discovery to
ascertain the facts to satisfy these burdens. Accordingly, it is appropriate
that in the absence of evidence affording an inference that earning capacity
exceeds actual earnings the capacity to earn is equivalent to earnings." (
County of Yolo v. Garcia, supra, 20 Cal. App. 4th at p. 1782.) The court then
challenged the Nolte holding, reexamining former section 4721 (now Fam. Code, §
4055) and concluding its consideration of earning capacity is not an alteration,
but simply a reiteration, of existing law. The court summarized: ". . . Nolte
and its progeny are incorrect in concluding that the Philbin rule has been
altered by statute. Nor, as related above, do we perceive the Philbin rule as
'punitive' in nature. The statute's provision requiring 'consider[ation]' of
earning capacity is entirely consistent with the existing rule that earning
capacity be deemed equivalent to actual income in the absence of evidence of
unreasonable failure to seek or accept employment or more remunerative
employment." ( County of Yolo v. Garcia, supra, 20 Cal. App. 4th at p. 1783.)

   We find County of Yolo persuasive as well not only with regard to spousal
support, but especially within the context of any type of premature cessation of
employment, including early retirement.  Accordingly, where the supporting
spouse elects to retire early and to not seek reasonably remunerative available
employment under the circumstances, then the court can properly impute income to
that supporting spouse given that spouse's obligation to provide support and the
general notion a supporting spouse must make reasonable efforts to obtain
employment which would generate a reasonable income under the circumstances to
meet a continuing support obligation. Indeed, a supporting party's retirement or
cessation of gainful employment does not automatically compel a finding of a
sufficient changed circumstance to warrant a decrease or termination of a
support obligation.  Rather, whether modification is warranted is governed by
the surround ing circumstances and  the trial court's consideration of relevant
statutory criteria. 4

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   We do not
imply a supporting spouse who is eligible for retirement having obtained
retirement age must continue working to provide spousal support at the current
level. What continuing support obligation is reasonable is governed by an
evaluation of the totality of the surrounding circumstances unique to each
individual case, including earning capacity.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   III

   Here, the trial court refused to make an ability to earn finding, apparently
persuaded by its perception of the impact of a poor economy on the construction
industry and thus the reasonableness of Leslie's decision to retire with $52,000
in severance pay. However, the court refused to modify the $1,500 per month
support order for another eight and one-half months, treating the severance pay
as the equivalent to the salary Leslie would have earned during that time. Upon
doing so, the trial court essentially determined there had been no change of
circumstances warranting modification of the support order at the time of
application. The court then made the future modification to $345 per month
contingent upon the parties' income being solely their retirement and no further
change in circumstances. The trial court admonished the parties that in light of
their limited retirement income, both would have to find additional support and
work, because there simply is not "enough money" to support them both. In fact,
the trial court assigned them a "goal" "to seek alternate means of supplementing
their respective incomes" during the next eight and one-half months.

   Once the trial court treated the severance pay as the equivalent of salary
for eight and one-half months and continued the existing support obligation of
$1,500 per month during that time period, the court had thus impliedly found no
change of circumstances at the time of application and during that following
eight-and-one-half-month period. Consequently, the issue of whether to modify
spousal support was premature and not ripe for decision at that time. Indeed,
during the interim, the parties had the opportunity to obtain, as directed by
the court, alternative sources of income and work. By prematurely reducing
spousal support prospectively, the trial court shifted the ultimate burden of
proof from Leslie to Norlene to establish a change of circumstances warranting
modification of the monthly spousal support order.

   The trial court found Leslie reasonably elected retirement under the
circumstances, a decision essentially involuntary as it is deemed com pelled by
the economic downturn's effect on the construction industry.    (See fn. 5.)
That finding is amply supported by the record.  5 The court's implied finding
Leslie was thus not deliberately avoiding familial financial responsibilities by
suppressing income or quitting work is similarly supported by the record.
However, as we have explained, deliberate avoidance is not a prerequisite to a
trial court's responsibility under the statutory scheme to consider earning
capacity and ability to pay. Consequently, the trial court erred in declining to
consider earning capacity and Leslie's ability to pay, as well as the other
criteria set forth in former section 4801, presently Family Code section 4320,
when it decided to reduce the monthly support to $345, eight and one-half months
down the road. Those provisions require the trial court to consider before
modifying an existing spousal support order the supporting spouse's ability to
pay, taking into account his or her earning capacity, earned and unearned income
and assets. Given the temporal nature of the trial court's order it should have
calendared a hearing near the expiration of that time period to determine
whether and to what extent as governed by statutory criteria Leslie had
established changed circumstance warranting a specific reduction of spousal
support.  The  impact of the trial court's premature order improperly shifted
the ultimate burden of proof from Leslie to Norlene to establish the changed
circumstances necessary for the modification of the spousal support order
without considering mandatory statutory criteria. Under the trial court's order,
Norlene would be required to show either Leslie's income is greater than his
pension 6 or that changed circumstances warrant modification of the spousal
support order upward from $345.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   In
reviewing findings supporting a trial court's exercise of discretion in
modifying spousal support, ". . . this court must accept as true all evidence
tending to establish the correctness of the trial judge's findings, resolving
all conflicts in the evidence in favor of the prevailing party and indulging in
all legitimate and reasonable inferences to uphold the judgment. When a finding
of the trial court is attacked as being unsupported, our power begins and ends
with a determination of whether there is any substantial evidence which will
support the conclusions reached by the trial court. [Citation.]" (In re Marriage
of Meegan, supra, 11 Cal. App. 4th at p. 161.)
6   The modification order was contingent on the parties' respective incomes
remaining solely their pension/retirement payments.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Having said all this, the fate of the trial court's order modifying the
spousal support obligation is evident. That portion of the order treating the
severance pay as equivalent to eight and one-half months of salary and refusing
to modify the support obligation of $1,500 per month during that time period is
amply supported by the record and does not constitute an abuse of discretion.
However, upon so ordering, the trial court impliedly concluded no change in
circumstances warranting modification at that time. Having done so, the court's
reduction of the spousal support obligation to $345 per month after the
expiration of that eight-and-one-half-month time  period was premature and
rested not on those circumstances including earning capacity the trial court is
statutorily mandated to consider in determining whether to modify a spousal
support obligation. Accordingly, we reverse that portion of the order reducing
the spousal support obligation and remand the matter to the trial court for a
full hearing considering all the criteria set forth in former section 4801 and
now Family Code section 4320, including earning capacity. 7 The resolution of
that issue will determine whether Leslie owes Norlene any spousal support
arrearages from July 15, 1993.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   On
remand, under the circumstances here where Leslie has no actual earnings due to
retirement, once he establishes his actual income is solely his retirement
income, the burdens of persuasion and production of evidence to establish the
preliminary fact of his ability to earn an income sufficient to defray existing
support needs do not shift to Norlene for her to establish a reasonable
inference his earning capacity exceeds his zero actual earnings. (Cf.  County of
Yolo v. Garcia, supra, 20 Cal. App. 4th at p. 1782.) Rather, because Leslie has
no actual earnings, the trial court must determine his earning capacity, that is
the income he is reasonably capable of earning based on a reasonable work
regimen given his health, age, education, marketable skills and vocational
history and the availability of employment opportunities. (In re Marriage of
Simpson, supra, 4 Cal. 4th at p. 234.) Leslie will attempt to show limited
availability of employment opportunities, while Norlene will endeavor to prove
otherwise. However, unlike the trial court's order we reverse reducing the
monthly support to $345, eight and one-half months later without considering
required statutory criteria at that time, the ultimate burden of proof of
establishing changed circumstance warranting modification downward remains on
Leslie.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    DISPOSITION

   That portion of the order continuing spousal support of $1,500 per month to
July 15, 1993 is affirmed. That portion of the order reducing spousal support to
$345 per month beginning July 15, 1993, is reversed, and the matter is remanded
to the superior court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Norlene is entitled to costs on appeal.

   Huffman, J., and Nares, J., concurred.


                              44 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            In re the Marriage of PAMELA and DONALD ZLATNIK.  PAMELA
               ZLATNIK, Respondent, v. DONALD ZLATNIK, Appellant

                                  No. G004469

           Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District,
                                 Division Three

           197 Cal. App. 3d 1284; 243 Cal. Rptr. 454; 1988 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 251


                                January 27, 1988

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Respondent's petition for review by the Supreme Court
was denied April 20, 1988.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Orange County, No. D-133446, Donald E.
Smallwood, Judge.

COUNSEL: Marjorie G. Fuller for Appellant.

John R. Schilling and Linda F. England for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Sonenshine, Acting P. J., with Crosby, J., and Taylor (G.L.),
J., * concurring.  * Assigned by the Chairperson of the Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: SONENSHINE

OPINION

     Donald Zlatnik contends the trial court lacked jurisdiction to extend his
spousal support obligation beyond the termination date to which he and his
former wife, Pamela Zlatnik, stipulated.  We agree and, accordingly, reverse.

I.

   Donald and Pamela Zlatnik dissolved their 14-year marriage in bifurcated
proceedings in December 1978.  A few months later, they entered into a written
stipulation, drafted by Donald's counsel, dividing their community property and
awarding spousal support, child support and custody. 1 An order prepared
pursuant to and contemporaneously with the stipulation was approved by the
court.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   At the
time of the dissolution proceedings, the Zlatniks' three children were 14, 12
and 9 years old.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The stipulation and order were virtually identical in content with the
exception of paragraph 6 in each.  Paragraph 6 of the stipulation read: "That
husband shall pay to wife as and for spousal support the sum of $ 1,900.00 per
month, payable on the 1st day of each and every month, commencing April 1, 1979,
and continuing thereafter on the 1st day of each and every month for a period of
seven (7) years, unless sooner terminated by the death or remarriage of wife, or
the death of [husband].  Spousal support shall be modifiable as to amount only
by further order of court upon a showing of change of circumstances, but in no
event shall husband be obligated to pay spousal support to wife after April 30,
1986 [.]" (Italics added.)

   Paragraph 6 of the order stated: "[Husband] shall pay to [wife], as and for
spousal support, the sum of $ 1,900.00 per month, payable on the 1st day of each
month, commencing April 1, 1979, and continuing thereafter on the 1st day of
each month for a period of seven (7) years, unless sooner terminated by the
death or remarriage of [wife], or the death of [husband], or  until further
order of Court.  In no event shall [husband] be obligated   to pay spousal
support to [wife] after April 30, 1986." (Italics added.)

   In 1982, Pamela sought and obtained an increase in spousal support to $ 2,000
per month.  On February 28, 1986, she filed another request for modification,
this time seeking an extension of Donald's obligation to pay. After a hearing on
May 30, 1986,  the court granted Pamela's request and ordered that support
continue at $ 2,000 per month until Pamela's death, remarriage, or further order
of court.  Donald's appeal followed.

II.

     The California Supreme Court has interpreted Civil Code section 4811,
subdivision (b) 2 as "[permitting] the parties to agree that the provisions of
any agreement or order for the support of either party shall not be subject to
subsequent modification or revocation by court order." ( In re Marriage of
Vomacka (1984) 36 Cal.3d 459, 462-463 [204 Cal.Rptr. 568, 683 P.2d 248].)
Further, pursuant to section 4801, subdivision (d), "[an] order for payment of
an allowance for the support of one of the parties shall terminate at the end of
the period specified in the order and shall not be extended unless the court in
its original order   retains jurisdiction." (Italics added.)  Here, both the
stipulation and the order 3 stated, unequivocally, spousal support was not to be
paid after April 30, 1986.  As we shall explain, this manifestation of the
parties' intent precluded any extension of Donald's obligation to pay.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Civil
Code section 4811, subdivision (b) states in pertinent part: "All orders for the
support of either party based on the agreement shall be deemed law-imposed and
shall be deemed made under the power of the court to make the orders.  The
provisions of any agreement or order for the support of either party shall be
subject to subsequent modification or revocation by court order, except as to
any amount that may have accrued prior to the date of filing of the notice of
motion or order to show cause to modify or revoke, and except to the extent that
any written agreement, or, if there is no written agreement, any oral agreement
entered into in open court between the parties, specifically provides to the
contrary."

   All further statutory references are to the Civil Code.
3   Donald and Pamela disagree as to whether the trial court properly based its
ruling upon the order rather than the stipulation.  Such argument is irrelevant
because both parties look to an insignificant ambiguity.  The parties compare
the stipulation which states "[spousal] support shall be modifiable as to amount
only by further order of court upon a showing of change of circumstances," and
the order which provides for the payment of spousal support "for a period of
seven (7) years, unless sooner terminated by the death or remarriage of [wife],
or the death of [husband], or until further order of Court."

   Pamela contends the order must prevail over the stipulation.  We agree.  (See
In re Marriage of Benson (1985) 171 Cal.App.3d 907, 912 [217 Cal.Rptr. 589].)
But the order, regardless of whether it adopts the exact words of the
stipulation, implies the trial court could exercise its power to modify support
only if it found a change of circumstances.  Change of circumstances is not,
however, the issue.  The question presented is whether the court had
jurisdiction to modify and thereby extend the duration of support.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     In In re Marriage of Vomacka, supra, 36 Cal.3d 459, William and Joyce
Vomacka stipulated in open court to the provisions and entry of an interlocutory
judgment of dissolution of marriage.  The agreement stated: "'[William] shall
pay to [Joyce], as and for spousal support, the sum of Two Hundred Seventy-five
Dollars ($ 275.00), . . . commencing September 1, 1979 to continue each month
thereafter until further order from the Court, the death of either party, the
remarriage of [Joyce], or August 1, 1982, whichever first occurs.  The Court
shall retain jurisdiction regarding spousal support until September 1, 1984, at
which time [Joyce's] right to request spousal support from [William] shall
terminate forever.' (Italics added.)" ( Id., at pp. 461-462.)

   On June 29, 1982, before the August 1st deadline, Joyce filed an order to
show cause to modify spousal support. The trial court granted her request and
ordered William to continue to pay spousal support at an increased monthly rate
of $ 600 "'. . . until the death of either party, remarriage of [Joyce], or
until further order of the court.'" ( Id., at p. 462.) The court's notice of
intended decision explained: "'To find from an agreement that there is a
termination of spousal support, the Court must find explicit language of such
termination. The alleged termination provision herein is not sufficiently
explicit to find such termination (purports to terminate respondent's  right to
ask for additional support; does not address itself explicitly to the
termination of support).  Thus, the Court finds that there is no absolute
termination herein on September 1, 1984.  [Citation.]'" (Ibid.)

     The Supreme Court affirmed the trial court's order, holding that where
jurisdiction to award or grant spousal support is reserved until a specific
date, the court retains fundamental jurisdiction until that date to take new
action concerning such support.  Such new judicial action may include an
extension of spousal support beyond the last date the court can act.  The trial
court may not, however, extend spousal support if the order expressly terminates
the court's jurisdiction to do so.

   In In re Marriage of Benson, supra, 171 Cal.App.3d 907, the parties' marital
settlement agreement and the interlocutory judgment incorporating that
agreement, provided: "'[Husband] shall pay to [wife] as and for spousal support
the sum of $ 650.00 per month, payable on the 1st day of each month, commencing
June 1, 1977, and continuing until the death of either party, [wife's]
remarriage, until modified by a court of competent jurisdiction or until the
expiration of eight (8) years, whichever first occurs.'" ( Id., at p. 910,
italics omitted.) After five years, the wife petitioned for additional support.
The trial court increased the husband's obligation to $ 1,000 per month
"'continuing until August 1, 1985, on which date the spousal support will be
reduced to $ 1.00 per month, . . . and continuing until further  order of Court,
[wife's] remarriage, or the death of either party, whichever first occurs.'" (
Ibid.)

   The husband appealed, arguing the court did not have authority to extend
spousal support past July 20, 1985. 4 We affirmed, 5 finding "the reserved
jurisdiction to modify was sufficient to permit the trial court to extend the
duration of the order." ( Id., at p. 913.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   This date
was the 8th anniversary of the entry of the interlocutory judgment of
dissolution.
5   See dissenting opinion and In re Marriage of Trearse (1987) 195 Cal.App.3d
1189, 1191 [241 Cal.Rptr. 257].
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In In re Marriage of Foreman (1986) 183 Cal.App.3d 129 [228 Cal.Rptr. 4],
Marshall and Burnice Foreman entered into a marital settlement agreement
providing for Marshall to pay "'the sum of $ 1,300 per month, with the first of
said payments to be made on or before May 5, 1974 . . . until [Burnice]
remarries, either party dies, or a total of ten years, whichever event first
occurs.  Thereafter, said spousal support payments shall automatically reduce to
a jurisdictional amount of $ 1.00 per year for an additional one year, and then
terminate. The said spousal support payments provided hereunder, shall not be
modifiable under any circumstances until June 30, 1977.  Thereafter, said
support payments may be modified by the court on a proper showing by either
party.'" ( Id., at p. 131.) During the 11th year, while the court retained
jurisdiction to modify, Burnice requested the monthly payments be increased and
asked for an extension of spousal support beyond the 11th year.  The trial court
granted an increase to $ 1,300 for the 11th year, but determined it had no
jurisdiction to modify the award's duration.

   In affirming the trial court, the Foreman court distinguished Vomacka and
Benson.  It found the decrees in those cases contained "language from which
reservation of jurisdiction may be implied, i.e., the court-ordered support
would 'continue until further order of the court' or 'until modified by a court
of competent jurisdiction.' Here there is no such language.  The only language
of modification refers to modifying spousal support payments." ( Id.  at p. 133
.) Simply stated, the Foreman court found "no language which reasonably can be
interpreted as reserving jurisdiction to avoid the effect of section 4801,
subdivision (d) . . . ." ( Id., at p 134.) 6

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   The
support in Foreman extended for 11 years; in the final year the wife was to
receive $ 1.  Pamela erroneously argues Mrs. Foreman "brought her request for an
increase during the eleventh year, after the ten year deadline set for
termination. Had [she] brought her request prior to the termination date, the
court would still have had jurisdiction to extend support beyond the termination
date."

   Actually, Mrs. Foreman's request was timely.  Moreover, the court did not
extend the duration of support because it found "there [was] no conditional
clause which can be interpreted as reserving jurisdiction to extend the period
of support beyond that specified in the decree . . . ." ( In re Marriage of
Foreman, supra, 183 Cal.App.3d at p. 133.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      The jurisdictional issue was addressed most recently in In re Marriage of
Harbach (1987) 195 Cal.App.3d 629 [240 Cal.Rptr. 698]. There, an interlocutory
judgment required the husband to pay spousal support "'until July 14, 1984 at
which time [his] obligation to pay spousal support . . . shall cease and
terminate.'" ( Id., at p. 630.) The parties later stipulated to a modification
of that judgment, providing, among other things, for the husband to pay spousal
support "'until the death of either party, [the wife's] remarriage, or December
31, 1986, whichever first shall occur.'" (Ibid.) Paragraph 7 of the modified
decree also "[recited] the payment of spousal support 'is premised' upon the
expectation [the wife] would obtain an advanced degree, set out her academic
obligations to enroll for at least nine credit hours for each semester, required
a report to [the husband] about her progress and provided that her failure to
take the minimum hours would be a change of circumstance, entitling [the
husband] to move for support modification." ( Id., at pp. 630-631.) The
paragraph concluded: "'Other than as set forth in this paragraph, spousal
support shall be non-modifiable both as to term and amount.'" ( Id., at p. 631.)

   In January 1986, the wife sought a deferral of the termination date. She had
just learned an internship of 3,000 hours was required to secure her certificate
as a family and child counselor.  The trial court granted her request and
ordered support be paid for an additional four months, until April 1987.  In
affirming the trial court, the appellate court concluded: "[Jurisdiction] was
retained by the court to modify the decree in the event [the wife] failed to
carry out her scholastic obligations.  That retained jurisdiction supports the
extension of the term to carry out the intent of the parties as expressed in
paragraph 7.  [Citation.]" ( Id., at p. 634.)

     The Foreman court's refusal to extend the duration of support was premised
on the absence of language, such as that found in Vomacka and Benson, which
could be construed as reserving jurisdiction to do so.  Our refusal, however, is
based upon express language of termination in the parties' stipulation:  The
clause, "in no event shall [Donald] be obligated to pay spousal support to
[Pamela] after April 30, 1986," is clear and unequivocal.

      But Pamela asserts termination of jurisdiction to modify spousal support
requires a finding of "explicit language of such termination." ( In re Marriage
of Vomacka, supra, 36 Cal.3d at p. 465.) 7 And,  relying on In re Marriage of
Hufford (1984) 152 Cal.App.3d 825 [199 Cal.Rptr. 726], she complains in order to
divest the court of its power to modify, "a specific provision concerning
judicial modification" is required.  ( Id., at p. 835.) Thus, she argues the
stipulation and order here "suffer the same deficiencies as those discussed at
length in Vomacka and in Benson."

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   While
explicit language is not essential to reserve jurisdiction to extend support
beyond a specified termination date ( In re Marriage of Benson, supra, 171
Cal.App.3d at p. 911), explicit language is required to terminate jurisdiction.
( In re Marriage of Vomacka, supra, 36 Cal.3d at p. 465.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    To the contrary, the clause quoted above satisfies both of Pamela's
concerns: It contains "explicit language of termination," and constitutes a
"specific provision concerning judicial modification." In light of the
foregoing, we conclude the trial court lacked jurisdiction to extend spousal
support beyond April 30, 1986.

    The order is reversed.  Appellant to receive costs.


                              45 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In re the Marriage of NANCY ANN and HUGH GALLOWAY KELLEY,
           JR.  NANCY ANN KELLEY, Appellant, v. HUGH GALLOWAY KELLEY,
                                JR., Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 48280

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Four

          64 Cal. App. 3d 82; 134 Cal. Rptr. 259; 1976 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      2051


                               November 23, 1976

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Ventura County, No. D 70037, K. D. Lyders,
Temporary Judge. *

*   Pursuant to Constitution, article VI, section 21.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1) Appellate Review § 48--Presenting and Preserving Questions in Trial Court--
Findings.  --In a marriage dissolution proceeding, the contention that the trial
court erred in not making findings of fact was not open on appeal, where the
contention to that effect was not included in the settled statement.

(2) Dissolution of Marriage § 72--Support of Other Party--Termination of Order.
--A trial court's discretion over duration of spousal support must be exercised
with reference to a showing of need and must not be made arbitrarily. Duration
of marriage must be considered in such showing, and the longer the duration, the
stronger the case is for retention of jurisdiction over spousal support. A
judgment placing the custody of children in the supported spouse militates
toward retention of jurisdiction, while an order of custody to the supporting
spouse does not. The greater the amount of property awarded the supported spouse
and the greater his other resources, the less the indication is in favor of
retention of jurisdiction. The need and earning ability of the supported spouse
must be considered in the context of the parties' accustomed standard of living
so the higher the standard and the lower the earning ability the stronger the
case for retention of jurisdiction.

(3) Dissolution of Marriage § 72--Support of Other Party--Termination of Order.
--The approaching equality of women and men should be reflected in the law and
in the court decisions governing marriage dissolution. Hence, the ability of the
supported spouse to engage in gainful employment, with due regard to the
interest of the children of the parties, must be considered in determining the
issue of retention of jurisdiction over spousal support. Health and age of the
supported spouse are relevant to ability to engage in gainful employment, and
the greater the showing of the ability of the supported spouse to engage in
employment which will produce income supporting the accustomed standard of
living, the less the need for retention of jurisdiction. The actual ability to
engage in gainful employment must, however, be established by evidence, and the
trial court is not permitted to speculate that if the supported spouse
diligently tries to be self-supporting he will succeed.

(4) Dissolution of Marriage § 72--Support of Other Party--Termination of Order--
Retention of Jurisdiction.  --In a marriage dissolution proceeding, there was no
rational support for the failure of the trial court to retain jurisdiction over
its order discontinuing support for the wife after 5 years, where the record
indicated that the marriage had lasted for 22 years, and that the wife was 48
years of age and lacked demonstrated earning ability, income-producing
investments, or other resources for support. When weighed against these factors,
the fact that the husband was awarded the custody of the two children did not
justify failure to retain jurisdiction.

(5) Dissolution of Marriage § 64--Support of Other Party--Adequacy or
Excessiveness--Adequacy of Periodically Reducing Amounts of Support.  --In a
marriage dissolution proceeding, the trial court did not err in making a
reduction of the wife's support after three months with further annual
reductions for the following three years, where the evidence indicated that the
husband had been awarded custody of the two children, and that one child would
shortly enter college, and further supported the expectation that the wife would
diligently develop her secretarial skills which would pay off in increased
earnings, and where the court retained the jurisdiction to modify the amount.

(6) Dissolution of Marriage § 50--Division of Community Property--Property
Subject to Division--Social Security Benefits.  --The power of the court to
award employee "contributions" or the right to old age, survivors or disability
insurance benefits payable under the Social Security Act when it dissolves a
marriage depends upon the characterization of the "contributions" and benefits
as akin to a community property right and upon the impact of the supremacy
clause of the U.S. Const., art. VI, cl. 2. When the "contribution" is legally
analogous to that of an employee to a contributory pension plan or the benefits
to be received are a form of deferred compensation legally similar to rights
granted by a private retirement plan or government pension earned by the
performance of services during marriage, there is a community interest in the
contribution and in the benefits to be received. Despite treatment of the right
as one of deferred compensation, federal preemption precludes a state court's
exercise of power over it when that exercise conflicts with federal law.

(7) Dissolution of Marriage § 50--Division of Community Property--Property
Subject to Division--Social Security Benefits.  --In a marriage dissolution
proceeding, the trial court correctly refused to include the husband's social
security contributions or the eventual right to old age, survivors, and
disability insurance benefits payable under the Social Security Act in
determining the division of community property. The scope and nature of social
security benefits both preclude their characterization as deferred compensation
and disclose a federal statutory scheme in conflict with a state court
exercising jurisdiction to award benefits or employee contributions as community
property in dissolution of marriage. The statutory scheme of old age, survivors,
and disability insurance is one of social insurance designed to provide
financial security to covered workers and families rather than one of deferred
compensation for past labor.

(8) Dissolution of Marriage § 50--Division of Community Property--Property
Subject to Division--Allocation of Debts.  --In a marriage dissolution
proceeding, the trial court did not err in its judgment allocating a debt
between the wife and the husband, where the judgment provided that if either the
husband or the wife made a payment on the obligation, he or she would be
entitled to contributions from the other in proportion to the other's share of
the liability and could offset the credit against any obligation to the other
party, including an obligation for support.

(9) Dissolution of Marriage § 50--Division of Community Property--Property
Subject to Division--Allocation of Debts.  --In a marriage dissolution
proceeding, the trial court erred in its judgment allocating a debt between the
husband and wife, where the judgment provided that any reduction in the balance
of the debt by reason of forgiveness, unenforceability, or payment by a third
party must redound proportionately to the benefit of both the husband and the
wife. Such order improperly restricts the post-dissolution rights of the
parties. A court is not empowered to limit the right of one party to receive a
gift, loan, inheritance, or bequest by requiring that the other should
participate pro rata in it.

COUNSEL: Hathaway, Clabaugh, Perrett & Webster and E. E. Clabaugh, Jr., for
Appellant.

Benton, Orr, Duval & Buckingham and Edwin Duval for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Thompson, J., * with Files, P. J., and Jefferson (Bernard),
J., concurring.

*   Assigned by the Chairman of the Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: THOMPSON

OPINION

     This is an appeal from an interlocutory judgment of dissolution of
marriage. Resolution of the issues raised requires: (1) consideration of an
apparent conflict in the rationale of Court of Appeal decisions dealing with the
power of the trial court to order termination of spousal support in the future
without reservation of jurisdiction to modify the determination (see e.g., In re
Marriage of Dennis (1973) 35 Cal.App.3d 279 [110 Cal.Rptr. 619] and In re
Marriage of Patrino (1973) 36 Cal.App.3d 186 [111 Cal.Rptr. 367]); (2)
determination of the issue of first impression concerning the treatment of
future social security old age and survivor benefits funded by employee taxes
during marriage as community property; and (3) determination of the propriety of
a trial court order which, while providing that the parties pay a community debt
in a designated proportion, also declares that any post-dissolution reduction of
indebtedness must run equally to both parties.

   We conclude that: (1) whatever may be the conflict in the language of the
existing Court of Appeal opinions, they are distillable into guideline limits of
trial court discretion which invalidate a portion of the judgment in the case at
bench; (2) the right to future social security old age and survivors benefits is
not subject to division as community property in the course of a marital
dissolution; and (3) the trial court erred in framing its  order providing for
post-dissolution discharge of community indebtedness in terms that are overly
broad.

   The case at bench reaches us on a settled and engrossed statement per rule 7
(b), California Rules of Court.  The controlling facts are recited from the
statement.

   After a 22-year marriage, Wife filed her petition for dissolution of the
marriage in December 1974.  At the time of trial in July 1975, there were two
minor children of the marriage, Cynthia born in 1957, and Lisa born in 1960.
Husband was 50 years of age and Wife was 48 years old.  Both daughters elected
to live with Husband who was awarded their custody. Cynthia had recently
completed high school and planned to attend college while living at home with
her father.  Lisa, while still in high school, intended to pursue a college
education.

   Husband was employed as a film editor by a concern producing commercial and
industrial films.  His gross earnings were approximately $ 24,200 per year and
his take-home pay about $ 15,600 per annum.  Husband's expenses for himself and
the two daughters totalled approximately $ 13,750 a year.

   Wife, with the benefit of two years of junior college education, had been
employed in medical and dental offices as a secretary-receptionist-bookkeeper
for approximately four years prior to her marriage to Husband, and had performed
similar work during the first year of the marriage. Shortly after separation,
Wife commenced courses in typing, shorthand, and other secretarial skills to
equip herself for employment.  After separation, she unsuccessfully sought
part-time work.  Her progress in her course was satisfactory so that she
contemplated completion of her schooling shortly after trial and expected to
obtain employment at that time.  Wife was in good health.

   During their marriage, Husband and Wife borrowed money from E. B. and Eleanor
Woodworth, Wife's father and mother.  The funds were used to purchase a home in
which the parties resided at the time of separation, automobiles and other
assets, and to pay living expenses.  At the time of trial, Husband and Wife owed
Mrs. Woodworth, Mr. Woodworth having died, $ 11,800 on an obligation carrying
interest at 6 percent per annum, and $ 550 on a noninterest bearing obligation.
It was understood that principal payments were to be made as Husband and Wife
were financially able to pay.

    Husband had acquired vested benefits in the motion picture industry pension
fund.  From 1952 through 1974, "contributions" in the amount of $ 5,686.75 were
made by Husband to the Retirement Survivor's and Disability  Program of the
federal Social Security System.  Only minimal "contributions" were made by Wife
to the program.

   The trial court entered its interlocutory judgment dissolving the marriage
and dividing the community property. The family home having been sold, the
judgment directs that the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to specified
community debts and to attorneys' fees and expenses with the residue of
approximately $ 2,200 awarded to Wife.  Other specific nonliquid property of
modest value is awarded to each of the parties and the court retains
jurisdiction to allocate benefits received from the concededly community
interest in the motion picture industry pension plan.  Spousal support is
awarded Wife at the rate of $ 500 per month from September 22, 1975, the date of
the judgment, to December 21, 1975; $ 300 per month for the first six months of
1976; $ 250 per month for the last six months of that year and to June 30, 1978,
and $ 200 per month from July 1, 1978 through June 30, 1980.  Payments of
spousal support are to terminate on June 30, 1980, "in any event." The judgment
is expressly modifiable "as to amount but not as to term."

   The judgment achieves equalization of the valuation of community property
ordered distributed to Husband and Wife by an allocation of liability for the
Woodworth debt.  While the judgment states that "[no] order is made . . . as to
the manner of payment by the parties . . ." it apportions liability for the debt
allocating slightly over two-thirds to Wife and slightly under one-third to
Husband.  The judgment states: "It is the intent of the Court, as between the
parties hereto, to preclude a foregiveness [sic] of these obligations to [Wife]
and enforcement as to [Husband].  Accordingly, in the event of any proceedings .
. . brought to enforce said obligations: [para. ] A. Each party who makes any
payment on said obligations shall be entitled . . . to contribution from the
other party or to a credit upon any indebtedness . . . to the other party
(whether or not such indebtedness is due), for the other party's proportionate
share of that payment; and, [para. ] B. Any reduction in the aggregate balance
of said indebtednesses resulting from any cause other than a payment made by a
party, whether as the result of payment by a third party or from the release . .
. of either one or both of the parties by the creditor . . . shall redound
proportionately to the benefit of both parties." "Indebtedness" is defined by
the judgment to include an obligation for support.

    Wife, on this appeal from the interlocutory judgment, contends: (1) the
trial court abused its discretion in decreeing periodic reductions of spousal
support and in providing for total termination of support without retention of
jurisdiction to modify the duration of its award; (2) the court erred in not
evaluating prospective social security old age and survivor benefits or
Husband's social security "contributions" in dividing the community property;
and (3) the court erroneously subjected the Woodworth debt to "unreasonable,
arbitrary, and unlawful conditions."  Wife also intimates trial court error in
not making findings of fact.  Any contention to that effect is not included in
the settled statement and therefore is not open on appeal.  (Rule 7 (a), Cal.
Rules of Court.)

Amount and Duration of Spousal Support

   Eliminating fault from the equation but otherwise reenacting the provisions
of former Code of Civil Procedure sections 139 and 139.7, the Family Law Act of
1969 in section 4801 of the Civil Code vests the court hearing a marital
dissolution with discretion to award spousal support in "any amount, and for
such period of time, as the court may deem just and reasonable . . . ." The
statute requires that "just and reasonable" be determined by giving regard to
"the circumstances of the . . . parties, including the duration of the marriage,
and the ability of the supported spouse to engage in gainful employment without
interfering with the interests of the children of the parties in the custody of
such spouse." (Subd. (a), Civ. Code, § 4801.) An order for payment of spousal
support terminates at  the end of the period specified and may not be extended
unless the court retains jurisdiction by the terms of its original order.
(Subd. (d), Civ. Code, § 4801.) The statutory provision limiting the power of
the court to modify the duration of a spousal support order has triggered an
inconsistency in at least the language of California appellate decisions.

   The watershed case is In re Marriage of Rosan (1972) 24 Cal.App.3d 885 [101
Cal.Rptr. 295]. There Division Two of the Fourth District Court of Appeal
reviewed a judgment awarding spousal support to a wife at the rate of $ 400 per
month for one year, $ 300 a month for the next, and $ 200 a month for the third
year, while not retaining jurisdiction to award payments past that period.  (24
Cal.App.3d at p. 891.) The Rosan marriage was 17 years in duration. There were
two children, one of whom was experiencing "emotional problems." The husband's
earnings,  net after taxes, averaged approximately $ 25,000 per year and the
parties enjoyed a high standard of living. The community property was valued at
about $ 20,000 and was divided equally with wife receiving over $ 9,000 in cash
and stock.  Child support was awarded the wife at the rate of $ 150 per month
for one child whose custody was placed with her, and the husband was given the
custody of the other child.  The wife intended to pursue a course of instruction
and eventual career in real estate.

   The Rosan court found that the trial court had abused its discretion, both by
awarding the wife an inadequate amount of spousal support and by not retaining
jurisdiction over support past the three-year period of the award.

   Discarding an argument that the Family Law Act embodies a policy that
husbands be relieved of any long continuing obligation of spousal support which
itself justified the trial court's self-imposed limitation upon its jurisdiction
(24 Cal.App.3d at pp. 895-898), the court in Rosan states: "orders for changes
in support to take effect in the future must be based upon reasonable inferences
to be drawn from the evidence, not mere hopes or speculative expectations." (24
Cal.App.3d at p. 896.) The court, after considering the ability of the supported
spouse to engage in gainful employment, the duration of the marriage, and the
parties' accustomed standard of living (24 Cal.App.3d at pp. 897-898), reversed
the trial court's order providing for prospective reduction in and termination
of spousal support. It emphasized the absence of evidence of the wife's actual
ability to support herself and the future availability of modification
proceedings.

   The issue of trial court failure to retain jurisdiction over the period of
spousal support next reached the Court of Appeal in In re Marriage of Dennis,
supra, 35 Cal.App.3d 279. There the Fifth Division of this district reviewed a
trial court judgment awarding a wife spousal support of $ 200 per month for the
first year following dissolution and $ 100 per month for the next three years,
with no retention of jurisdiction over support past that period.  Community
property divided by the judgment consisted of a home worth $ 30,000 and an
additional $ 5,255 in assets.  Wife was given custody of the one child of the
marriage and $ 150 per month in child support.  She was about 50 years old at
the time of dissolution. Her only source of independent income during marriage
was approximately $ 6 per week earned as a seamstress.  Husband's income, net
after taxes, was $ 866 per month.  Expressing the belief that husband should
support her  for the rest of her life, wife testified that she would go to work
only if forced to do so by "starvation." (35 Cal.App.3d at p. 282.)

   The Dennis court affirmed the portion of the judgment providing for spousal
support at the rate of $ 200 per month for one year and $ 100 for the ensuing
three years, but reversed the portion of the judgment which did not retain trial
court jurisdiction to consider spousal support after the four-year period.  It
states: "It is possible that difficulties not contemplated at this time will
frustrate even a good faith attempt by the  wife to become wholly or partially
self-supporting.  Rosan . . . certainly indicates that after a lengthy marriage
a retention of jurisdiction to modify spousal support should be the norm and
that the burden of justification is on the party seeking termination.  [para. ]
That burden is not met here.  The court had no real assurance that at the end of
the four-year period the wife will be unable to show that, in spite of sincere
efforts on her part, she cannot support herself adequately.  It was not
warranted in burning its bridges." (35 Cal.App.3d at p. 285.)

   The general propositions enunciated in Rosan were applied by the Second
Division of this district in In re Marriage of Cosgrove (1972) 27 Cal.App.3d 424
[103 Cal.Rptr. 733]. There the community property divided in the dissolution
exceeded $ 430,000 and the wife both possessed a present earning capacity as a
practicing medical doctor and received regular substantial monetary gifts from
her family.  In those circumstances, the Court of Appeal found no abuse of
discretion in a trial court judgment not retaining jurisdiction to consider
future spousal support. Dennis was again followed by the division which decided
it in In re Marriage of Wright (1976) 60 Cal.App.3d 253, 256-258 [131 Cal.Rptr.
870].

   The Rosan-Dennis approach is criticized by a per curiam opinion of Division
Two of the First District of the Court of Appeal in In re Marriage of Patrino,
supra, 36 Cal.App.3d 186. There the trial court awarded spousal support
decreasing from $ 250 to $ 100 a month over a one-year period without retention
of jurisdiction over support past the first year after dissolution. The husband
had been awarded custody of the children of the marriage. His income was $ 1,060
per month.  The community property was awarded $ 10,000 in cash to the wife and
the family home and furniture to the husband, with the difference in value
equalized by a promissory note in the amount of $ 10,000 from husband to wife
due in three years.  The marriage had lasted 26 years.  Wife had  worked as a
psychiatric technician for the first 11 years of the marriage but not since.
She required "renewed training to reenter that line of work" but desired to
return to employment.  (36 Cal.App.3d at p. 188.)

   The Patrino court affirmed the trial court order terminating jurisdiction
over spousal support at the end of one year.  It discusses the circumstances of
the parties only in the context of distinguishing Rosan because there the
husband and wife "had been accustomed to a high standard of living" and the wife
had been granted custody of one of the children.  (36 Cal.App.3d at p. 189.)
Patrino rejects the Dennis concept that the retention of jurisdiction to modify
spousal support should be the norm after a lengthy marriage so that the burden
for justifying terminating spousal support is on the party seeking termination.
It says: "To carry such a burden too far would have the effect of destroying the
purpose of the new Family Law Act to reduce the amount of courtroom litigation
involved in settling the rights of the parties to a dissolution proceeding.
[para. ] Prior to passage of the Family Law Act, trial courts had ongoing
jurisdiction to modify awards of spousal support. Now subdivision (d) of section
4801 of the Civil Code provides for absolute termination of spousal support
unless the trial court in its original order retains jurisdiction to extend an
order for support.  The new law thus affords the trial court the discretion to
determine if support should be absolutely terminated after a period of time.  In
this way, the court can settle the rights of the parties at one time and to some
extent curtail endless modification proceedings." (36 Cal.App.3d at p. 189;
italics in original.)

   The Patrino court concludes that the trial court's exercise of discretion in
a manner terminating jurisdiction over spousal support at the end of one year is
supported by the wife's expressed desire to return to employment and the amount
of community property distributed to her.  (36 Cal.App.3d at p. 188.)

    The Rosan-Dennis reasoning is criticized and the Patrino reasoning praised,
although Patrino is distinguished on its facts, in an opinion of the Third
District of the Court of Appeal in In re Marriage of Lopez 1 (1974) 38
Cal.App.3d 93 [113 Cal.Rptr. 58]. On a record showing that husband was earning $
70,000 per year, Lopez reverses a trial court award of spousal support of $ 200
per month for two years on the basis that the  trial court abused its
discretion, both as to amount and duration of support.  In so doing, however,
the Lopez court accepts Patrino's statement of the governing principle while
rejecting Dennis.  (38 Cal.App.3d at pp. 114-119.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   "Carter,
J., retired judge of the superior court sitting under assignment by the Chairman
of the Judicial Council" is the author of Lopez.  Judge Robert D. Carter was the
trial judge in Patrino.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Resolution of the case at bench requires critical analysis of the
Rosan-Dennis v. Patrino-Lopez controversy.

   The Patrino-Lopez reliance upon subdivision (d) of Civil Code section 4801 as
indicating a policy of the Family Law Act encouraging the trial court finally to
settle the rights of the parties in order to curtail future modification
proceedings is suspect.  Subdivision (d) of section 4801 is not novel to the
Family Law Act. It is a recodification of former Civil Code section 139.7 which
predated the Family Law Act by almost five years.  Former section 139.7 changed
the prior law only by providing that the trial court, in order to retain
jurisdiction over spousal support, must do so expressly in its judgment, while
the previous rule was that jurisdiction terminated only if the judgment
expressly so stated.  We have found nothing in the literature or legislative
reports preceding the enactment of the Family Law Act which refers to a policy
favoring trial court judgments framed to reduce future applications for
modifications of support.

     The Dennis-Rosan principle is helpful in the sense that it places in
context the general proposition that trial court discretion over duration of
spousal support must be exercised with reference to the showing made and not
arbitrarily.  Both sets of cases, plus the report of the Assembly Judiciary
Committee on the Family Law Act (1969 Assem. Com. Rep. on the Family Law Act, 4
Assem. J. (1969) p. 8054), while by no means all inclusive, are instructive on
what must go into the showing.

   Duration of the marriage must be considered.  ( Civ. Code, § 4801, subd. (a)
.) The longer the duration, the stronger the case is for retention of
jurisdiction over spousal support. ( Rosan, 24 Cal.App.3d at pp. 897-898; Dennis
, 35 Cal.App.3d at p. 285.)

   The manner in which child custody is awarded is significant.  A judgment
placing the custody of children in the supported spouse militates toward
retention of jurisdiction over spousal support, while an award of custody to the
supporting spouse does not.  ( Patrino, 36 Cal.App.3d at p. 189.)

    The court must consider the division of community property and the supported
spouse's other resources for support.  The greater the amount of property
awarded the supported spouse and the greater his other resources, the less the
indication is in favor of retention of jurisdiction. ( Patrino, 36 Cal.App.3d at
p. 189; Cosgrove, 27 Cal.App.3d at p. 434.)

   There is significance in the parties' accustomed standard of living. The need
and earning ability of the supported spouse must be considered in the context of
that standard so the higher the standard and the lower the earning ability the
stronger the case for retention of jurisdiction. ( Rosan, 24 Cal.App.3d at pp.
897-898; Patrino, 36 Cal.App.3d at p. 189.)

     The "approaching equality [of women and men] should be reflected in the law
governing marriage dissolution and in the decisions of courts with respect to
matters incident to dissolution." (1969 Assem.  Com. Rep. on the Family Law Act,
4 Assem. J. (1969) p. 8062.) Hence,  the ability of the supported spouse to
engage in gainful employment, with due regard to the interest of the children of
the parties, must be considered in determining the issue of retention of
jurisdiction over spousal support. (Id., p. 8058; Civ. Code, § 4801, subd. (a).)
Health and age of the supported spouse are relevant to his ability to engage in
gainful employment. ( Dennis, 35 Cal.App.3d at p. 285.) The greater the showing
of the ability of the supported spouse to engage in employment which will
produce income supporting the accustomed standard of living, the less the need
for retention of jurisdiction. ( Cosgrove, 27 Cal.App.3d at p. 434.) The actual
ability to engage in gainful employment must, however, be established by
evidence from which the inference may be drawn; the trial court is not permitted
to speculate that if the supported spouse diligently tries to support himself he
will succeed.  ( Rosan, 24 Cal.App.3d at pp. 895-896; Dennis, 35 Cal.App.3d at
p. 285.)

     In the case at bench, the marriage was of long duration, 22 years, a factor
indicating that jurisdiction over the duration of spousal support should be
retained.  The community property distributed in dissolution is minimal and
there is no evidence supporting the inference that Wife will have other
resources available to her, again factors tending toward the retention of
jurisdiction. Wife's willingness to support herself is demonstrated but there is
nothing in the record to indicate that her efforts at self-support will be
successful.  Her age supports an inference to the contrary.  The standard of
living of the parties appears to be neither  particularly high nor particularly
low so that this factor is a neutral one.  The only factor militating against
retention of jurisdiction over the duration of spousal support is the award of
custody of the children of the marriage to Husband.

   In sum, while the trial court was not required to base its decision upon the
numerical weight of factors for and against retention of jurisdiction over the
duration of spousal support ( Edwards v. Edwards (1975) 52 Cal.App.3d 12 [124
Cal.Rptr. 742]), it was required to consider the relative weight of the factors
in combination.  When the facts are so considered, there is no rational support
for the portion of the judgment which fails to retain jurisdiction. In view of
the 22-year marriage, Wife's age and lack of demonstrated earning ability, and
the lack of income-producing investments or other resources for support, the
only fair conclusion from the record is that retention of jurisdiction over
spousal support past June 30, 1980, is required.  These factors in combination
are such that the award of custody of the children to Husband does not justify
the trial court's action.

   The portion of the judgment which fails to retain jurisdiction over the
duration of spousal support must thus be reversed.   The portion of the judgment
awarding spousal support in periodically reducing amounts is another matter.
Dennis teaches that a lesser showing is required to support such a modifiable
order than one which burns the court's bridges by divesting it of jurisdiction
despite error in its prognostication of the future.  (35 Cal.App.3d at p. 284.)

   Here that lesser showing is present.  The first reduction of spousal support
from $ 500 per month to $ 300 after three months is justified by Husband's
anticipated additional expense flowing from the enrollment of a daughter in
college.  The future annual reductions, first from $ 300 per month to $ 250 per
month, and then to $ 200, find support in the expectation that Wife will
diligently develop her secretarial skills which will pay off in increased
earnings. Should the court's expectations prove erroneous, it will have the
power to correct its miscalculation.

Social Security Old Age, Survivors and Disability Insurance Benefits

     The power of the court to award "employee contributions" or the eventual
right  to old age, survivors or disability insurance (OASDI) benefits payable by
the Social Security Act when it dissolves a marriage  depends upon: (1) the
characterization of the "contributions" and benefits as akin to a community
property right; and (2) the impact of the supremacy clause of the United States
Constitution.  (Art. VI, cl. 2.)

   If the "contribution" is legally analogous to that of an employee to a
contributory pension plan or the benefits to be received are a form of deferred
compensation legally similar to rights granted by a private retirement plan or
government pension earned by the performance of services during marriage, there
is a community interest in the "contribution" and in the benefits to be
received.  ( In re Marriage of Brown (1976) 15 Cal.3d 838 [126 Cal.Rptr. 633,
544 P.2d 561]; In re Marriage of Fithian (1974) 10 Cal.3d 592 [111 Cal.Rptr.
369, 517 P.2d 449], cert. den., 419 U.S. 825, 1060 [42 L.Ed.2d 48, 657, 95 S.Ct.
41, 644], disapproved on unrelated grounds at 15 Cal.3d 851, fn. 14; Phillipson
v. Board of Administration (1970) 3 Cal.3d 32 [89 Cal.Rptr. 61, 473 P.2d 765],
disapproved on unrelated grounds at 15 Cal.3d 851, fn. 14; Waite v. Waite (1972)
6 Cal.3d 461 [99 Cal.Rptr. 325, 492 P.2d 13], disapproved on unrelated grounds
at 15 Cal.3d 851, fn. 14.) Despite treatment of the right as one of deferred
compensation, federal preemption precludes a state court's exercise of power
over it if that exercise conflicts with federal law.  ( Free v. Bland (1962) 369
U.S. 663, 666 [8 L.Ed.2d 180, 183, 82 S.Ct. 1089]; Wissner v. Wissner (1950) 338
U.S. 655 [94 L.Ed. 424, 70 S.Ct. 398]; In re Marriage of Fithian, supra, 10
Cal.3d 592, 597-598.)

     The scope and nature of OASDI benefits both preclude their characterization
as deferred compensation and disclose a federal statutory scheme in conflict
with state court action exercising jurisdiction to award benefits from or
employee "contributions" to OASDI as community property in dissolution of
marriage.

   OASDI "contributions" and benefits have some of the attributes of payments to
and benefits received from a private retirement plan and some of the attributes
of a government pension. The employee's and employer's obligation to pay social
security taxes used to fund part of the benefits are based upon the employee's
earnings. (Int. Rev. Code, § 3101.) Eligibility for and amount of benefits is
determined by the number of "quarters" of covered employment or other period of
earnings. (1974 Social Security and Medicare Explained (CCH) § 504 --
hereinafter CCH.) OASDI benefits are commonly integrated into private retirement
plans in which the employee's interest is community property. (Treas. Reg., §
1.401-3, subd. (e)(1) (1976).)

    Whatever may be the similarities of the OASDI system to private retirement
or government pension plans, there are differences both in manner of
contribution and computation of benefits which outweigh them.

   In general, only a person who is "fully insured" in the OASDI system is
entitled to retirement benefits.  (CCH, § 506.) Leaving aside situations where
an individual dies before he otherwise attains the status, a person becomes
"fully insured" when he works 40 calendar quarters in covered employment. (CCH,
§ 505.) Once the status of "fully insured" is obtained, future employment does
not affect the amount of benefit except as the amount of covered earnings
results in a greater or lesser "average monthly wage" upon which benefits are
computed.  (CCH, § 508-508.2.)

   OASDI retirement benefits are of two classes: direct or "primary," and
derivative or "family." Primary benefits are payable to a retired, fully insured
worker who is 62 years of age or older.  (CCH, § 503.) The benefit, while based
upon average earnings from covered employment (CCH, § 508), is increased in the
case of individuals who delay their retirement past age 62 (CCH, § 509.5), and
decreased in the case of persons under 72 years of age who earn in excess of
specified amounts from employment  after retirement. (CCH, § 525.1.) Derivative
or "family" benefits are paid to the spouse (age 62 or older), unmarried
dependent or minor children, and divorced wife (aged 62 or older) of the retired
worker covered by OASDI.  (CCH, § 503.) The derivative benefits are in addition
to the direct benefit and do not reduce the primary benefit payable.  (CCH, §
511.) The benefit payable to a divorced wife of a covered worker does not reduce
the benefit payable to the wife of the worker.  (CCH, § 512.1.) In the case
where there are both a wife and a divorced wife, the benefit to each is equal to
one-half that of the worker's primary benefit.  (Id.)

   The amount of an employee's "contribution" or earnings does not necessarily
determine the quantum of his benefits under OASDI.  Once he has attained the
status of "fully insured," his future income is significant in determining his
average income upon which benefits will be based, but future employee and
employer taxes do not in themselves increase his benefits.  A fully insured
worker who is age 52 receives no more in benefits if he works at maximum wage to
age 62 than a worker who first commences covered employment at maximum
compensation at  age 52.  In the context of the case at bench, Husband, if he
continues to work to age 62, will, except as averaging of wages may raise or
lower the amount, receive the same OASDI benefit as if he had not worked in
covered employment prior to dissolution of the marriage.  The family benefits
derivative from his employment will also be the same.

   The amount of benefits is subject to adjustment based upon future conduct
having nothing to do with contributions or past labor.  If the worker defers
retirement and does not elect to draw his benefit at age 62, his future benefits
will be increased.  If he retires and elects to draw benefits but nevertheless
works so that he is compensated in excess of statutory amounts, his benefits
will be reduced.

   The family portion of OASDI benefits depends not upon the covered worker's
earnings or "contributions," but upon the status of the recipient of the
benefits.  The existence of a spouse increases the total benefit by 50 percent,
and that of a divorced wife by another 50 percent per divorced wife.

   In essence, the statutory scheme of OASDI is thus one of social insurance
designed to provide financial security to covered workers and their families
rather than one of deferred compensation for past labor.  The statute has been
so characterized by the United States Supreme Court in Weinberger v. Salfi
(1975) 422 U.S. 749 [45 L.Ed.2d 522, 95 S.Ct. 2457] in the context of an issue
of due process arising out of the classification of "survivors" eligible for
social security benefits.  (See also Flemming v. Nestor (1960) 363 U.S. 603,
609-610 [4 L.Ed.2d 1435, 1443-1444, 80 S.Ct. 1367], characterizing OASDI
benefits as "a form of social insurance"; and Richardson v. Belcher (1971) 404
U.S. 78, 80-81 [30 L.Ed.2d 231, 234-235, 92 S.Ct. 254].) It has been so
denominated by the Supreme Court of Washington in Caughey v. Employment Security
Department (1972) 81 Wn.2d 597 [503 P.2d 460, 462-463, 56 A.L.R.3d 513] in the
context of the rationality of a classification treating pension and retirement
plan receipts, but not OASDI benefits, as employment income for the purposes of
eligibility for unemployment insurance benefits.  Weinberger and Caughey,
although decided in a different context, are persuasive here.

   When the statutory scheme of OASDI is recognized as primarily one of federal
social insurance, it is apparent that exercise of state court jurisdiction
awarding community property by evaluating employee  "contributions" or right to
future benefits conflicts with the federal law.  The federal law specifically
provides benefits for wives (CCH, § 512), divorced wives (CCH, § 512.1), widows
(CCH, § 515), and surviving divorced wives (id.).  If all or any part of OASDI
contributions or benefits are included in the mix of community property
divisible on dissolution of marriage, what is a uniform federal scheme of
benefits becomes one that varies depending upon the community property law of
various states.  (See Free v.  Bland, supra, 369 U.S. 663, 669 [8 L.Ed.2d 180,
185].)

   We thus conclude that the trial court correctly refused to include Husband's
social security "contributions" or the eventual right to OASDI benefits in
determining the division of community property.

Woodworth Debt

   The trial court judgment allocates liability for the Woodworth debt in the
ratio of approximately two-thirds to Wife and one-third to Husband.  That
allocation is not questioned on appeal.  The judgment also provides: (1) if
either Husband or Wife makes a payment on the obligation, he (she) will be
entitled to contribution from the other in proportion to the other's share of
the liability and may offset the credit against any obligation to the other
party, including an obligation for support; and (2) any reduction in the balance
of the debt by reason of forgiveness, unenforceability, or payment by a third
party must "redound proportionately" to the benefit of both Husband and Wife.

     The first condition is directly related to the obligation allocated to
Husband and Wife respectively, and is consequently appropriate and proper.   The
second condition is not.  It purports to exercise a power the court does not
possess.  The requirement that any reduction in the balance of the Woodworth
debt by forgiveness, unenforceability, or payment by a third party unduly
restricts the post-dissolution rights of the parties.  The court was not
empowered to limit the right of one party to receive a gift, loan, inheritance,
or bequest by the requirement that the other would participate pro rata in it.

   The judgment is modified as follows: (1) The last sentence of paragraph 7 is
stricken.  There is substituted for that sentence the words  "The court retains
jurisdiction over spousal support." (2) Subparagraph B of paragraph 8 is
stricken.  The judgment is affirmed as modified.  Appellant is to recover her
costs on appeal.


                              46 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In re the Marriage of DOROTHY M. and JACK R. BECK. DOROTHY
                M. BECK, Respondent, v. JACK R. BECK, Appellant.

                                  No. D023508.

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FOURTH APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION ONE

           57 Cal. App. 4th 341; 67 Cal. Rptr. 2d 79; 1997 Cal. App.
          LEXIS 677; 97 Cal. Daily Op. Service 6939; 97 Daily Journal
                                   DAR 11128


                            August 26, 1997, Decided

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Rehearing Denied September 15, 1997.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    APPEAL from a postjudgment order of the Superior Court of San
Diego County. Super. Ct. No. D56535. Wesley R. Mason III, Judge.

COUNSEL: Bruce M. Beals and Cristelle C. Beck for Appellant.

Annis & Spievak and James R. Spievak for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Work, J., with Kremer, P. J., and McDonald, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: WORK

OPINION

     WORK, J.

   Jack R. Beck appeals that portion of a postjudgment order modifying an
interlocutory judgment of dissolution of marriage purporting to reinstate
spousal support to his former wife, Dorothy. He contends the trial court lacked
jurisdiction to reinstate spousal support 16 years after the date established by
the 1972 judicial decree which the trial court had entered upon the parties'
stipulation, even though the 14-year marriage qualifies as one of long duration.
Concluding the trial court was without jurisdiction, we reverse that part of the
order awarding spousal support, attorney fees and costs. In all other respects,
we affirm the order.

    I

   After 14 years, the Becks' marriage ended in an interlocutory judgment of
dissolution filed January 13, 1972, providing "[Jack] is to pay to [Dorothy] the
sum of $ 502.00 per month as support for [Dorothy] for a period of seven years."
Support payments began on November 1, 1971, and Jack made monthly payments as
ordered. Dorothy never requested a modification of spousal support during the
seven-year period which ended in November 1978, nor thereafter until the present
proceedings.

   In 1993, Dorothy was informed by an acquaintance that she might have an
interest in benefits to which her ex-husband would be entitled at his
anticipated retirement in June 1994. On November 29, 1993, Dorothy filed an
order to show cause to adjudicate an omitted pension and establish a "Qualified
Domestic Relations Order." On April 14, 1994, Dorothy filed a request to modify
spousal support and for attorney fees and costs. These motions were
consolidated.

   The trial court denied Dorothy's motion to adjudicate a portion of the
retirement as an omitted asset, concluding the law at the time of the
dissolution of marriage divested it of  jurisdiction to award an interest in
Jack's retirement benefits which did not vest until one year three months after
the final judgment of dissolution. Dorothy does not appeal this ruling. However,
rejecting Jack's claim it had lost jurisdiction to modify the support order on a
request made long after its original term expired, the trial court determined
the fact the parties' marriage was long term gave it jurisdiction to modify the
1972 spousal support order. Accordingly, it ordered support reinstated and
required Jack to pay to Dorothy $ 800 per month until her death or remarriage,
Jack's death, or on further order of the court. Jack was also ordered to pay
Dorothy's attorney fees and costs of $ 10,000.

   The trial court purported to justify its ruling on equitable grounds,
referring to the current large disparity in the parties' financial positions.
The court commented that had Dorothy just delayed her dissolution action for 15
months, she would have been entitled to a portion of so much of Jack's
retirement benefits which would have been vested at that time.

   II

      We resolve the Becks' jurisdictional issue in light of statutory
provisions which were relevant at the time this original spousal support order
expired in 1978. Then, and at the time of the parties' dissolution, the law was
unequivocal. Former Civil Code section 4801, subdivision (d)  stated: "An order
for payment of an allowance for the support of one of the parties shall
terminate at the end of the period specified in the order and shall not be
extended unless the court in its original order retains jurisdiction." This
provision was a substantial reenactment of former Civil Code section 139.7
(Stats. 1965, ch. 1109, § 1, p. 2755), effective September 17, 1965, a
legislative measure designed to put both spouses on notice regarding the court's
jurisdiction to extend spousal support. (See In re Marriage of Morrison (1978)
20 Cal. 3d 437, 446-447 [143 Cal. Rptr. 139, 573 P.2d 41]; Dahlstet v. Dahlstet
(1969) 272 Cal. App. 2d 174, 176 [77 Cal. Rptr. 45]; Historical Note, 12A West's
Ann. Civ. Code (1983 ed.) former § 4801, p. 631.)

   At all times relevant to our issue, the law regarding continuing court
jurisdiction to modify spousal support orders made no distinction based on the
length of marriage. Further, the holding of Tolle v. Superior Court (1937) 10
Cal. 2d 95, 97 [73 P.2d 607], that where a judgment provides spousal support
payments for a definite term without reserving the right to modify, the court
has no power to make additional allowances after judgment has been entered and
the order has been satisfied, was well established. ( Long v. Long (1941) 17
Cal. 2d 409, 410 [110 P.2d 383]; Dahlstet v. Dahlstet, supra, 272 Cal. App. 2d
at p. 178.) An order purporting to provide spousal support, made after subject
matter jurisdiction has been exhausted, is a nullity. ( Tolle v. Superior Court,
supra, 10 Cal. 2d at p. 98, citing Barry v. Superior Court (1891) 91 Cal. 486,
487 [27 P. 763].)

   III

     We are cognizant of and agree with the well-established judicial policy
that language in spousal support agreements, especially those following
long-term marriages, should be read to favor reservation of jurisdiction when it
is subject to such implication. Indeed, Dorothy refers us to appellate decisions
such as In re Marriage of Jones (1990) 222 Cal. App. 3d 505, 514 [271 Cal. Rptr.
761], and In re Marriage of   Liss (1992) 10 Cal. App. 4th 1426, 1429-1430 [13
Cal. Rptr. 2d 397], which did so in finding continuing jurisdiction. Those two
cases, however, turn on facts quite different to those relevant to the Becks'
conundrum and were reviewed in light of a later statutory scheme quite unlike
that applicable to our review.

     Resolution of both Jones and Liss was based on the statutory provisions
contained in former Civil Code section 4801 as amended in 1987 (Stats. 1987, ch.
1086, § 2, pp. 3676-3678; now Fam. Code, § 4336). The 1987 amendment totally
changed the thrust of the former statute, but only for cases to which it applied
on or after January 1, 1988. Jones and Liss were  such cases; this case is not.
As a result, the decrees in Jones and Liss were scrutinized by the new statutory
provision which mandates, "[e]xcept upon written  agreement of the parties to
the contrary or a court order terminating spousal support, the court retains
jurisdiction indefinitely where the marriage has been of long duration." (Former
Civ. Code, § 4801, subd. (d).) Because there were no exceptions to the
strictures of the amended statute, continuing jurisdiction was found in Jones
and in Liss.

   Although citing Jones and Liss, Dorothy does not argue the provisions of
Family Code section 4336, or its identical predecessor, Civil Code section 4801,
as amended in 1987, apply to this case. Presumably, she concedes the support
order we review is not one "filed on or after January 1, 1988" or a proceeding
"pending on January 1, 1988, in which the court has not entered a permanent
spousal support order or in which the court order is subject to modification." (
Fam. Code, § 4336, subd. (d)(1) & (2).) Certainly, the Becks' judgment filed 16
years before January 1, 1988, and containing no language implying the court
intended to reserve power to modify its 7-year spousal support order beyond
November 1978, cannot be interpreted reasonably as one still "subject to
modification" on a request made in 1994.

   IV

   Dorothy offhandedly also cites, but does not discuss, Family Code section
3651, a reenactment of former Civil Code section 4811, which, by its terms, and
with respect to property settlement agreements entered into on or after January
1, 1970, states: "a support order may be modified or terminated at any time as
the court determines to be necessary." ( Fam. Code, § 3651, subd. (a).) Although
the trial court did not purport to support its order on this statute, Dorothy's
bare reference to it in her appellate brief implies she believes it may serve
that purpose. It is an issue we have addressed before, and one not relevant to
this case.

   In In re Marriage of Foreman (1986) 183 Cal. App. 3d 129 [228 Cal. Rptr. 4],
a case with facts similar to those we review, the reviewing court found no
language in the spousal support order which reasonably could be interpreted as
reserving judicial jurisdiction to avoid the terminating effect of the pre-1988
Civil Code section 4801, subdivision (d). It concluded the scope of Civil Code
section 4811, subdivision (b), the predecessor to Family Code section 3651, was
limited to articulating the court's power to modify the terms of a support order
within the time period designated in the original order of support, and to its
ability to extend the period of support where there was an express reservation
of jurisdiction in the original decree. (In re Marriage of Foreman, supra, 183
Cal. App. 3d at p. 134.) We are satisfied  that interpretation is correct and
that Family Code section 3651 does not support a finding of jurisdiction here.

   V

   Dorothy also heavily relies on certain portions of the decision in In re
Marriage of Vomacka (1984) 36 Cal. 3d 459 [204 Cal. Rptr. 568, 683 P.2d 248],
the only case cited by the trial court in support of its jurisdictional finding.
She quotes a phrase plucked extracontextually from that decision stating there
is a "fundamental jurisdiction of trial courts to modify existing spousal
support orders to extend support payments past the last date they can act." ( Id
. at p. 474.) Although the Supreme Court did articulate that proposition as one
of the several policies it used to analyze the language of the particular
interlocutory decree under review in that case, the decision did not hold, as
Dorothy would suggest, that a court always retains jurisdiction to modify or
extend support orders upon requests made after expiration of the term set forth
in the decree. In Vomacka, the trial court's jurisdiction to extend the
court-ordered term of spousal support was specifically found to exist because
Mrs. Vomacka requested an extension before the end of the term originally stated
and where the decree language reasonably could be construed as reserving
jurisdiction to do so. The Supreme Court held in that context the trial court
had fundamental jurisdiction to grant her request and to extend support beyond
the original cutoff date. (Ibid.)

   It is only because the Supreme Court interpreted the language in the
Vomackas' interlocutory decree as impliedly giving the  trial court retained
jurisdiction to enter orders modifying and/or extending the spousal support
order, that it concluded the otherwise applicable terminating effect of then
Civil Code section 4801, subdivision (d) was avoided. Cases postdating Vomacka,
such as In re Marriage of Segel (1986) 177 Cal. App. 3d 1030, 1033 [223 Cal.
Rptr. 430], In re Marriage of Katz (1988) 201 Cal. App. 3d 1029, 1033 [247 Cal.
Rptr. 562], and In re Marriage of Benson (1985) 171 Cal. App. 3d 907, 913 [217
Cal. Rptr. 589], are to the same effect, as is In re Marriage of Foreman, supra,
183 Cal. App. 3d at page 133.

   The Becks' judgment contains no language referring to the court's power to
modify the spousal support order even during the seven-year term agreed upon by
the parties. The entire recitation is: "Respondent is to pay petitioner the sum
of $ 502.00 per month as support for petitioner for a period of seven years."
This language was adopted verbatim from the property settlement agreement
drafted by Dorothy's attorney (Jack was not represented by counsel) and does not
imply an intent to reserve court jurisdiction to modify or to extend spousal
support on a request made for the first time long after the stated support term
expired.

    VI

   The trial court expressed concern that 23 years after dissolution, Dorothy
and Jack now find themselves in economically disparate situations. However,
neither the trial court nor Dorothy suggests why such disparity, standing alone,
is a basis for reinstating jurisdiction to award spousal support which the court
lost in November 1978.

   VII

   In a puzzling argument, Dorothy again refers to the language of In re
Marriage of Vomacka, supra, 36 Cal. 3d at page 469, where the court adopted a
policy stated earlier in In re Marriage of Moore (1980) 113 Cal. App. 3d 22, 28
[169 Cal. Rptr. 619], to the effect that where there is ambiguity in the
language of a marital property agreement it must be decided in favor of the
right to spousal support. From this premise, Dorothy attempts a springbokian
leap to conclude that "[h]ere, because the jurisdictional issues [sic] was not
mentioned in the Interlocutory Judgment, there is not even an ambiguity as to
its meaning. Therefore, pursuant to Vomacka, the trial court properly exercised
its jurisdiction to modify support." However, Dorothy cannot span the chasm
separating her premise and conclusion absent some analytical bridge. Because she
offers none, and we are unable to conjecture one, we reject her apparent
proposition that, as a matter of law, a doctrine requiring us to resolve
language ambiguities in favor of retaining judicial jurisdiction in marital
cases, mandates we construe unambiguous language in the same manner.

   DISPOSITION

   The modification of the January 13, 1972, interlocutory judgment of
dissolution of marriage awarding spousal support and attorney fees and costs is
reversed. In all other respects, the order is affirmed. Requests by each party
for attorney fees on appeal are denied. Parties shall bear their own costs.

   Kremer, P. J., and McDonald, J., concurred.

   A petition for a rehearing was denied September 15,  1997.


                              47 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            In re the Marriage of CELIA and LOREN HATCH COBB.  CELIA
                COBB, Respondent, v. LOREN HATCH COBB, Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 14615

           Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District,
                                  Division One

            68 Cal. App. 3d 855; 137 Cal. Rptr. 670; 1977 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1372


                                 March 21, 1977

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of San Diego County, No. D-41304, Earl H.
Maas, Jr., Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1a) (1b) (1c) Dissolution of Marriage § 69--Support of Other Party--
Modification, Revocation, and Extension--Change of Conditions Improper
Considerations.  --A trial court's order increasing a wife's spousal support
from $ 1 to $ 484.10 a month was based on improper considerations and was
excessive, where the amount was the exact amount of the wife's community
interest in the husband's military pension, which had not been asserted or
disposed of in the dissolution proceedings, where the trial court's order was
based to a substantial degree on what it termed the "crystallization" of the law
concerning community interest in military pensions during the interval since the
dissolution, and where, although the order stated the modification was partially
based on the wife's health and needs, it was apparent the trial court did not
determine the amount ordered with those considerations, or the husband's ability
to pay, in mind. A change or clarification of the law concerning property rights
does not qualify as a change of circumstance which warrants a modification of
spousal support.

(2) Dissolution of Marriage § 69--Support of Other Party--Modification,
Revocation, and Extension--Change of Conditions.  --The change of circumstance
which authorizes a court to modify a support order means a change in the
circumstances of the respective parties, that is, a reduction or increase in the
husband's ability to pay, or an increase or decrease in the wife's needs, or
both.

(3) Dissolution of Marriage § 63--Support of Other Party--Guiding Consideration.
--Spousal support must be determined according to the needs of both parties and
their respective abilities to meet those needs.

(4) Dissolution of Marriage § 68--Support of Other Party--Modification,
Revocation, and Extension--Factors Considered.  --In modifying an order for
spousal support, a court is limited to considering the conditions existing at
the time the modification is sought and may not provide for future contingencies
which may or may not happen.

COUNSEL: Adrian D. Vining for Appellant.

Patricia H. Mason for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Ault, J., with Brown (Gerald), P. J., and Cologne, J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: AULT

OPINION

     Several years after her marriage to Loren Hatch Cobb had been dissolved,
Celia Cobb filed an order to show cause in the dissolution proceeding in which
she requested the court in the alternative to:


        (1) award her $ 500 a month as a division of community property not
     disposed of at trial, i.e., as her community property interest in
     Loren's retirement pension from the United States Navy; or

        (2)  increase the spousal support payable to her from $ 1 a month
     to $ 500 a month.



   The trial court denied her first request, ruling the retirement issue should
have been litigated in 1970 at the time of the interlocutory hearing and hence
was res judicata.  However, the court increased the spousal support from $ 1 a
month to $ 484.10 a month, a sum the court must have considered equal to exactly
one-half of the community property interest in the pension.

   Celia has not taken an appeal.  Loren appeals from that portion of the order
increasing the spousal support payable to Celia from $ 1 a month to $ 484.10 a
month.

   Background

   In 1970 Celia petitioned the court for the dissolution of her 22-year
marriage to Loren and listed as community property subject to disposition  3
automobiles, savings bonds, furniture and a savings account.  Loren's response
added to the list only their house and certain life insurance policies.
Although at the time of the dissolution Loren was on active duty in the United
States Navy with more than 28 years of service, nothing in the record indicates
the parties considered there might be a community property interest in his
pension rights.  In any event, the parties did not place that asset before the
court for disposition.

   On September 18, 1970, the parties entered into a stipulation in open court
concerning the disposition of their community property. They agreed Loren should
receive the bonds and the insurance policies and that Celia should receive one
of the automobiles, the residence, the household furnishings and spousal support
as follows: $ 400 a month for one year, $ 300 a month thereafter so long as
Loren remained in active duty; after his retirement $ 150 a month for one year
and $ 1 a month thereafter until the further order of the court.  At the same
hearing the court ordered entry of the interlocutory judgment of dissolution and
incorporation of the oral stipulation in the judgment.  No mention was made of
Loren's pension rights in either the stipulation or the judgment.

   On October 2, 1970, the court signed the interlocutory judgment approving the
stipulation as fair, just and equitable and ordering the parties to comply with
its terms.  The court also signed a formal stipulated order setting forth the
terms of the stipulation.  On November 17, 1971, the final judgment of
dissolution was entered, making final all the provisions of the interlocutory.

   In December 1971 Celia first sought to increase her spousal support,
realizing her access to Navy medical facilities had then been foreclosed.  In
support of her request, Celia declared her spousal support was barely enough to
sustain her, let alone pay for medical care, and that she was uninsurable.  She
also said her medical problems left her unable to seek or obtain employment.
She filed a November 1971 letter [a  copy] from Dr. Schorn of Navy Hospital
setting forth her many, serious medical problems and stating that she would be
unable to support herself and would probably need prolonged medical treatment
and even hospitalization in the future.

   In opposition Loren declared Celia was receiving medical care under the
auspices of the United States government at the time of the stipulated
settlement and was aware that her right to such treatment would terminate upon
entry of the final judgment of dissolution. He pointed out that the stipulation
had been approved by the court and  incorporated in the interlocutory judgment
and also disclosed that he had remarried and would retire from active duty at
the end of the month.

   On January 12, 1972, the court denied Celia's request for modification of her
spousal support and on January 24 signed a formal order that the terms of the
interlocutory and final judgments remain in effect.  Celia did not appeal.

   On February 1, 1972, after 30 years of active federal service, Loren retired
from the Navy as a Lieutenant Commander and commenced receiving retired pay
pursuant to 10 United States Code section 6326.

   In 1975 Celia filed the order to show cause under consideration in which she
requested the court to award her $ 500 a month, either as a division of the
community interest in Loren's retirement pension not disposed of at trial, or as
increased spousal support. Before the hearing she filed a letter from Dr. Moll
dated August 1970 and refiled the same November 1971 letter from Dr. Schorn,
describing her physical ailments at those times.  In addition she filed one
recent letter (dated Apr. 8, 1975) from Dr. Fitz, reporting that increasing
degenerative arthritic changes had taken place since 1973 and predicting she
would not be able to continue to work "for any lengthy time in the future." He
concluded: "On the basis of that past and previous diagnosis,  this patient will
most probably have recurring medical problems which will require financial
support for the future, over and above that of her orthopedic problems."

   Celia's financial declaration disclosed her gross monthly income was $ 427 ($
426 from working as a food handler and $ 1 from spousal support).  Her
deductions and monthly expenses left her with a deficit of $ 84 a month, even
without providing for payment of medical bills.  She had $ 500 in the bank but
no other property.

   Loren's financial declaration showed he was receiving $ 1,275.73 gross
pension a month, was working as a real estate broker, and had, in addition to
his insurance, a $ 12,000 interest in real property and over $ 1,400 on deposit
in various financial institutions.  However, after deductions, expenses and
monthly payments on an automobile and travel trailer, he reported a deficit of $
40.24 a month.

   In its order, the trial court disposed of the retirement issue first.
Although it found Loren, by virtue of 28 years of service in the Navy, had
acquired vested retirement rights at the time of the dissolution, it ruled the
parties had the opportunity to litigate the community property  interest in such
rights at that time.  Having failed to do so, it concluded the matter was res
judicata and dismissed "petitioner's motion for a present determination and
disposition of the community rights therein." 1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Since
neither the pleadings nor the judgment in the dissolution action mention Loren's
pension as a community asset, the court was without jurisdiction to consider the
matter at a modification hearing.  Property which is not mentioned in the
pleadings as community property and which is left unadjudicated by a decree of
divorce or dissolution is subject to future litigation, the parties being
tenants in common meanwhile ( In re Marriage of Brown, 15 Cal.3d 838, 850-851
[126 Cal.Rptr. 633, 544 P.2d 561]; In re Marriage of Elkins, 28 Cal.App.3d 899,
903 [105 Cal.Rptr. 59]; Estate of Williams, 36 Cal.2d 289, 292-293 [223 P.2d
248, 22 A.L.R.2d 716]). The property rights of tenants in common cannot be
adjudicated in a motion or order to show cause, and can only be settled in an
independent action. The trial court properly dismissed the part of the order to
show cause requesting a division of Loren's pension, but its comment about res
judicata should be disregarded, since the court lacked jurisdiction to modify
its judgment with respect to property rights.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     Relative to Celia's alternate claim for increased spousal support, the
court found: "That since the trial of the within matter on September 18, 1970,
and the judicial consideration of petitioner's request for modification of
spousal support on January 12, 1972, there have occurred sufficient changes of
circumstance to warrant the Court's present consideration of petitioner's
request for increase in spousal support, to-wit, the fact that the law
concerning community property interests in military pension is now crystallized
and the other evidence of petitioner's health and needs herein presented."

   Accordingly, it ordered: "The Interlocutory Judgment of Dissolution of
Marriage hereinbefore made and entered is modified as to spousal support only to
provide as follows: Respondent is ordered to pay to petitioner as spousal
support each month, a sum equal to 11.4/15% of the gross retirement pension
received by respondent from the United States Government, which said sum at this
time equals $ 484.10 per month."

   Discussion

     It is apparent from the language of the order itself that the trial court
based its modification of spousal support to a substantial degree upon what it
termed the "crystallization" of the law concerning community interests in
military pensions. We deem this an improper consideration, and no authority has
been cited to support the proposition that a change or clarification of the law
concerning property rights qualifies as a change of circumstance which warrants
a modification of spousal support.  The change of circumstance which authorizes
a court to modify a support order means a change in the circumstances of  the
respective parties, i.e., a reduction or increase in the husband's ability to
pay and/or an increase or decrease in the wife's needs (see 6 Witkin, Summary of
Cal. Law (8th ed. 1974) pp. 5047-5049).   The fact that Celia's community
property interest in Loren's pension might have been discovered and asserted had
the dissolution taken place in 1975 rather than in 1970 (because of development
of the related law in the interval) is not a change of circumstance which
authorized the court to order a modification of spousal support.

   We are also satisfied from the record and the terms of the order that the
trial court actually computed Celia's community interest in Loren's pension and
then awarded her the exact amount of that interest ($ 484.10) as increased
spousal support. Celia's moving papers showed that 22.8 years of Loren's 30
years of service in the Navy occurred during their marriage. Loren's response
showed his monthly retirement pay to be $ 1,275.73.  Thus the proper formula to
determine Celia's community interest would be: 1/2 x 22.8/30 x $ 1,275.73.
Correctly computed this would be $ 484.78, not the $ 484.10 stated in the order.
The unique fraction used in the order (11.4/15) can only have had its origin in
the miscalculation of a portion of the formula, i.e., 1/2 x 22.8/30.  Instead of
multiplying the fraction (22.8/30) by 1/2, the trial court obviously reduced it
to 11.4/15 by dividing both the numerator and denominator by 2.

     It has long been recognized that spousal support must be determined
according to the needs of both parties and their respective abilities to meet
those needs.  (See e.g.  In re Marriage of Rosan, 24 Cal.App.3d 885, 892 [101
Cal.Rptr. 295], relying on Civ. Code, § 4801, subd. (a) of the Family Law Act;
Marxer v. Marxer, 185 Cal.App.2d 400, 404 [8 Cal.Rptr. 323], under the former
divorce law.)

   While the order under consideration states the modification and spousal
support was in part based upon Celia's health and needs, it is apparent from
what we have previously said that the trial court did not determine the amount
ordered with these considerations, or with Loren's ability to pay, in mind.

    Furthermore, Celia's showing that her needs had substantially changed since
the court's 1972 order denying modification was, at best, meager.  In any event,
the showing of changed circumstances was insufficient to justify an increase in
spousal support from $ 1 a month to $ 484.10 a month.

    Although she now argues both the stipulated settlement in 1970 and the 1972
order were based on the assumption her physical condition would either improve
or stabilize, she produced no evidence to that effect in the court below.  The
two letters which set forth her complaints most effectively described her
condition before 1972, and the letter from Dr. Fitz did not show that her
condition at the time of the most recent hearing was significantly worse.  His
prediction that she might not be able to continue to work in the future did not
justify the increase.   A court is limited to considering the conditions
existing at the time the modification is sought and may not provide for future
contingencies which may or may not happen ( In re Marriage of Kuppinger, 48
Cal.App.3d 628, 639 [120 Cal.Rptr. 654]; Philbin v. Philbin, 19 Cal.App.3d 115,
122 [96 Cal.Rptr. 408]).

     Because the trial court's order increasing spousal support was based upon
improper considerations and because the increase ordered was excessive under the
evidence, the order must be reversed.

   The order appealed from is reversed.  The trial court is directed to
reconsider the application for increased spousal support in accordance with the
views expressed in this opinion.  A substantial time has elapsed since the
application was heard, and neither party should be precluded from producing
additional evidence updating the factual matters which legitimately bear on the
application.  Celia's community interest in Loren's retirement pension, if any,
should be litigated in an independent action.


                              48 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of MARY JO and FRANK ALEX RAMER.  MARY JO
               RAMER, Appellant, v. FRANK ALEX RAMER, Respondent

                                  No. E001660

           Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

            187 Cal. App. 3d 263; 231 Cal. Rptr. 647; 1986 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2251


                               November 24, 1986

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Riverside County, No. D 39259, J. William
Mortland, Judge.

COUNSEL: Charles H. Carter for Appellant.

Michael H. Clepper for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Kaufman, J., with Rickles, Acting P. J., and Cramer, J., *
concurring.

*   Assigned by the Chairperson of the Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: KAUFMAN

OPINION

     This is the second time this marital dissolution case has come before this
court.  Sadly, we observe the trial court has repeated and indeed exacerbated
the abuses of discretion disclosed on the first appeal.  The result is a
continuing miscarriage of justice of which we have seldom seen the like.

   On wife's first appeal we reversed the judgment in several respects and
remanded the case to the trial court with directions to make certain
determinations and appropriate orders.  After a new trial limited to the issues
specified in our dispositional order, wife again appeals, contending: (1) she
was entitled to a statement of decision and the statement issued by the trial
court was inadequate; (2) the increase in the spousal support award from $ 550
per month to $ 900 per month was inadequate; (3) the trial court abused its
discretion in permitting husband to pay off the arrearage on spousal support at
the rate of $ 100 per month; (4) the trial court abused its discretion in
refusing to hear wife's order to show cause for increased spousal support, child
support and attorney's fees; (5) the trial court erred in refusing to permit
wife to show she was entitled to a separate property credit of $ 5,800 against
the family residence; (6) the court erred in ordering a payment of $ 5,066.62 to
husband as an equalization payment upon sale of the family residence; (7) the
court's order with respect to husband's civil service pension was erroneous and
incomplete and the trial court should have divided the community property by
awarding the family residence to wife and the husband's pension to husband with
appropriate adjustments; and (8) the court erred in refusing to permit wife to
produce evidence about various insurance policies and about a $ 10,000 loan she
alleges was taken out by husband shortly before separation.

Background Facts

   The parties were married on August 22, 1959, and separated after about 22
years of marriage on June 18, 1981.  There are four  children of the marriage,
two of whom were still minors at the time of the original trial on April 21 and
July 9, 1982: Mary Shannon Ramer, born September 8, 1964, and Joseph Benjamin
Ramer, born October 13, 1969.  The original judgment filed September 20, 1982,
ordered husband to pay $ 300 per month child support for each of the two
children.  However, Mary became 18 years of age on September 8, 1982, at which
time child support for her terminated, so the child support order contained in
the judgment was obsolete on the date it was issued.

   On or about November 24, 1982, it was stipulated by the parties that husband
would keep the children named on his group medical coverage through his
employment so long as it was available and they were eligible for coverage.
Subsequently, in about May 1985, in response to an order to show cause for child
support, spousal support and attorney fees pending the present appeal, the
monthly child support for Joseph was increased to $ 450 per month and has
thereafter remained at that figure.

   Joseph has a learning disability and as of April 1984 needed remedial
schooling costing $ 247 per month.  Wife included this expense as one of her
expenses in her income and expense declaration dated September 14, 1984,
submitted in connection with the trial on remand following the first appeal.

    In 1963, approximately four years after the marriage, husband commenced
employment as a federal civil service employee and has been so employed
continuously ever since.  As a federal employee husband is a participant in the
federal civil service retirement program on account of which he is required to
make monthly contributions from his pay.  As of June 13, 1981, five days before
the parties' separation, the contributions to the retirement system from
husband's pay amounted to $ 28,356.60.  Husband does not become eligible for
longevity retirement until he reaches the age of 554 years, sometime in 1993.
In the judgment following the original trial, the trial court declined to
characterize, value or dispose of the federal civil service retirement rights.
On remand the trial court determined that eighteen years, four months and seven
days of husband's federal civil service employment were during the marriage and
that the community property interest in retirement benefits should be calculated
on that basis.  However, the court declined presently to value the retirement
rights and either to award the retirement benefits to husband with an offsetting
award of the family residence to wife or to make any division of the retirement
benefits.

   At the time of the original trial the family residence was being occupied by
wife, the two minor children and one or more of the parties' adult children.
The court determined its value to be $ 80,000, subject to encumbrances
consisting of first and second trust deeds having unpaid balances of $ 18,650
and $ 8,334.21, respectively, for a net value of approximately $ 53,000.  The
monthly payments on the two trust deeds totaled $ 517.90.  The original judgment
of September 20, 1982, gave wife the exclusive use of the family residence until
October 1, 1982, but required that she make the first and second trust deed
payments and that she pay the taxes and insurance.  It provided the residence
was to be sold and the net proceeds divided equally after the payment to husband
of a sum equalizing the division of the community property unless wife should
purchase husband's interest for $ 26,000 cash by October 1, 1982, or failing
that, unless husband should purchase wife's interest at the same price within 30
days after October 1, 1982.  The judgment on remand extended wife's right to
occupy the family residence until Joseph reaches the age of 18, but thereupon
the court ordered the residence sold and the net proceeds divided equally except
that husband should first be paid $ 5,066.62 plus interest to equalize the
division of the community property.

   At the time of the original trial, husband had a gross monthly income of $
3,881 and was paying federal income taxes of $ 1,008, state income taxes of $
288,  monthly retirement contributions of $ 271.71, and insurance (presumably
medical) of $ 91.71, for a net disposable income of $ 2,221.99.  By contrast,
wife had not been gainfully employed during the marriage and was not employed at
the time of separation or at the time of trial.  Although  wife had nearly
completed a four-year college education, the record indicated she possessed no
special skills or training that would qualify her for remunerative employment
and there was evidence she was not in good health.  On those facts the court
awarded wife the sum of $ 550 per month spousal support in the interlocutory
judgment out of which she was ordered to pay the monthly installments on the
trust deeds on the house in the amount of $ 517.90 together with the real
property taxes and insurance premiums.  On the first appeal we held: "Under
these circumstances an award to wife of only $ 550 per month spousal support is
unconscionable, particularly in light of the fact that spousal support husband
is ordered to pay will be deductible from his income for income tax purposes.
(See In re Marriage of Rosan [(1972)] 24 Cal.App.3d [885,] 894-895  [101
Cal.Rptr. 295]; see also In re Marriage of Andreen [(1978)] 76 Cal.App.3d [667,]
671-672 [143 Cal.Rptr. 94].)"

   The trial on remand was had on October 9, 1984.  In anticipation of that
trial wife submitted an updated income and expense declaration setting forth
expenses of $ 3,249 and income of $ 1,048 per month including spousal and child
support. The evidence disclosed that wife was still not employed except that she
had had one or two short term part-time jobs from which work she had received
minimal compensation.  Wife's only other income was $ 108 per month in rents
from some acreage in Idaho and $ 90 per month dividends from some stock.

   Husband on the other hand remarried on October 7, 1982, three weeks after
rendition of the interlocutory decree.  His new spouse was then employed and as
of January 1, 1983, was earning $ 1,378.67 gross monthly. Husband's gross income
had by then increased to $ 4,092.72 gross per month.  Their combined disposable
income was $ 3,788.10 per month as of January 1, 1983.

   The evidence showed that by January 1, 1984, husband's monthly gross had
increased to $ 4,302.29; his new wife's earnings had increased to $ 1,740.66 per
month gross and that their combined net disposable monthly income was $
3,992.93.  By July 1984 the gross earnings of husband and his new wife had
increased to $ 4,327.07 and $ 1,747.59 per month, respectively, and their
combined net disposable income was $ 4,039.32 per month.  Based on these figures
the trial court increased its award of spousal support to wife from $ 550 per
month to $ 900 per month and in accordance with the directions of this court
made that award retroactive to June 15, 1982, resulting in an arrearage of $
10,500.  Husband was ordered to pay the arrearage $ 100 or more per month
including interest at the rate of 10 percent per annum.

Discussion

   1. Statement of Decision

   Wife first contends the trial court rendered an inadequate statement of
decision under Code of Civil Procedure section 632, and that wife is therefore
entitled to the benefit of Code of Civil Procedure section 634, which provides
that when a statement of decision does not resolve a controverted issue or is
ambiguous, and the omission or ambiguity was brought to the attention of the
trial court, it shall not be inferred on appeal that the trial court resolved
the issue in favor of the prevailing party.

    The statement of decision was grossly inadequate because among other things
it did not reveal what if any figures the court determined as representing the
parties' income and expenses.  Although we think it makes little difference
because the facts are relatively undisputed and the parties have submitted
detailed income figures to us, we are persuaded wife is correct that no findings
should be implied against her under the circumstances here disclosed.

     Trial on remand lasted less than one day and wife was therefore required to
request a statement of decision before submission of the matter.  Through
counsel she did so.  However, Code of Civil Procedure section 632 requires that
the request for a statement of decision "specify those controverted issues as to
which the party is requesting a statement of decision," and this wife failed to
do on the day of the trial.  However, several days later she filed a written
request specifying the issues and in response the court ordered husband's
attorney to prepare and submit a statement of decision. None was forthcoming and
eventually the trial court adopted its notice of intended decision as the
statement of decision without further hearing.

   Normally, the failure to specify issues in a timely fashion would foreclose
wife from attacking the sufficiency of the statement of decision on appeal.
However, it is somewhat unrealistic to expect counsel on the day of trial to
submit a written request with a full specification of the controverted issues to
be covered.  Where, as here, the issues were limited in the first instance by
the directions of this court in the decision of the first appeal, neither the
trial court nor the adverse party suggested the request for statement of
decision made on the day of trial was deficient on account of its failure to
specify the controverted issues to be covered, the requesting party shortly
thereafter designated the issues to be covered, and the court ordered a
statement of decision to be made, implied findings should not be indulged and we
shall not indulge any.

     2. Spousal Support

    Wife contends that the new spousal support of $ 900 per month retroactive to
June 15, 1982, is grossly inadequate and constitutes an abuse of judicial
discretion as does the order for payment of the $ 10,500 arrearage at $ 100 per
month.  We agree.

   Wife requested the court to value husband's nonmatured pension rights and
award those to him while awarding her the family residence, but as it did at the
original trial, the court declined to do so.  As a result, wife and the
remaining minor child are still occupying the family residence and wife is still
paying the trust deed payments, taxes and insurance pursuant to court order.
The trust deed payments amount to $ 517.90, leaving wife with only $ 382.10 to
pay taxes and insurance on the house and to support herself from the $ 900
ordered by the court.  And out of that wife had to pay for the son's remedial
schooling $ 247 per month or $ 97 more than the $ 150 by which the child support
order was subsequently increased in May 1985.  Wife's only other income is $ 108
per month in rents from some acreage she owns in Idaho, $ 90 per month dividends
from some stock she owns and a few dollars per month from odd jobs.  To add
insult to injury, under the order for disposition of the family residence,
one-half of the principal being paid by wife on the trust deeds plus one-half of
the payments for taxes, insurance and maintenance accrue to the benefit of
husband.

   By contrast, husband's monthly disposable income was $ 2,221.99 at the time
of the original trial and $ 2,689.21 at the time of the trial on remand.  In
addition, his new wife earned $ 1,747.59 per month gross, and by husband's own
figures at the time of the trial on remand he and his new wife had net
disposable income of $ 4,039.32 per month available to meet their expenses.

    Husband urges that there is no law indicating all of his new wife's earnings
should be combined with his for the purpose of computing the amount available
for spousal support and that any such rule would deter remarriage of the
supporting spouse. We do not agree.  The new spouse's earnings are considered
available to defray expenses of the new community and thus obviously increase
the amount available for payment of support.  ( Gammell v. Gammell (1979) 90
Cal.App.3d 90, 92-93 [153 Cal.Rptr. 169]; see also In re Marriage of Williams
(1984) 155 Cal.App.3d 57, 63 [202 Cal.Rptr. 10].) The proper method for
determining what funds are available is to treat the combined income of  the
supporting spouse and the new spouse as the income of the new community and
deduct the combined expenses of the new community therefrom to the extent they
are reasonable or necessary.  In the case at bench no detailed schedule of the
expenses of the new  community was presented, but from the figures that were
presented it is abundantly clear the new community was living well while wife
and the dependent child were not.  During this litigation wife has entirely
consumed an inheritance of $ 35,000 for living expenses for herself and the
children of the parties.  The record indicates that husband and his new wife
have purchased as their residence a condominium on which their trust deed
payments and association fees alone amount to some $ 1,500 per month.

    As we attempted to make clear in our earlier decision, "[when] the order
made by the trial court affords one of the spouses a significantly higher
standard of living than the other and affords the other a significantly lower
standard of living than was accustomed during the marriage, an abuse of
discretion is indicated.  ( In re Marriage of Andreen, supra, 76 Cal.App.3d at
pp. 671-672; In re Marriage of Rosan, supra.)" That is precisely the situation
in the case at bench.  In addition, we again observe that spousal support
payments by husband to wife would be deductible to the new community for federal
income tax purposes, thereby making available to both parties funds that would
otherwise be paid to the Internal Revenue Service.  Figures prepared by a
certified public accountant estimate that if spousal support had been increased
by $ 300 to $ 1,200 per month the cost to husband and his new wife would have
been about $ 135 per month and that if the amount of spousal support had been
increased $ 600 to $ 1,500 per month the extra cost after tax consequences would
have been about $ 272 monthly.

   As to deterring remarriage, we can only say that to the extent the rule makes
persons realize that they may not pursue their own pleasures in utter disregard
of an earlier marriage of 22 years that has produced four children and a
dependent spouse, it is to be commended rather than faulted.

   We conclude the $ 900 per month spousal support order was grossly inadequate
under the circumstances and that the order therefor constitutes a manifest abuse
of discretion.

   3. Payments on Spousal Support Arrearage

    In connection with her argument relative to spousal support, wife contends
that the court's order that husband pay the spousal support of $ 10,500,
including interest at 10 percent, at a minimum rate of $ 100 per month also
constitutes an abuse of discretion. Quite so.

   Of course, inasmuch as we have held the ordered support of $ 900 per month
inadequate, the arrearage will be substantially more than the $ 10,500 and a
payment of $ 100 per month would not even cover the interest on the larger
amount.  But even at the $ 10,500 figure the interest alone would have  been $
87.50 per month, and a $ 100 per month payment would require wife to wait 20
years for payment of support she was required to do without because of the
court's original abuse of discretion and that can only be viewed as a further
abuse of discretion.

    Although the earnings figures supplied to the court by the parties in
connection with the trial on remand were those from 1984, husband suggests that
because the arrearage was computed retroactively to June 15, 1982, the 1982
income and expense figures should have been used to compute the proper amount of
support and the arrearages. Even assuming the issue was properly preserved for
appeal, we do not agree.  Where a support award is reversed on appeal as
inadequate the trial court on remand should attempt to fix the amount of support
on an equitable basis bearing in mind that the supported spouse has been
deprived of adequate support during the pendency of the appeal and to that end
should consider the income and expense figures at the time of the retrial. ( In
re Marriage of Jacobs (1981) 126 Cal.App.3d 832, 835-836 [179 Cal.Rptr. 169]; In
re Marriage of Jacobs (1980) 102 Cal.App.3d 990, 993 [162 Cal.Rptr. 649].)

4. Motion for Modification of Spousal Support/Child Support

   After our opinion on the first appeal was filed, wife filed an order to show
cause (OSC) for increased child support, spousal support and for attorney's
fees.  Although originally set on the order to show cause calendar for an
earlier date, by stipulation the motion for modification was continued to the
same date as the date for trial on remand and assigned by the presiding judge to
the trial judge.  The trial judge, however, refused to hear the motion for
modification in conjunction with the trial on remand, indicating he was
obligated to correct errors in the judgment, but that the regular family law
department was fully able to consider wife's motion for modification. Wife
contends the trial court abused its discretion in refusing to hear concurrently
wife's motion for modification of spousal support/child support and for
attorney's fees.

    We agree the trial court should have heard and determined both matters
simultaneously.  Since the 1984 figures were being used, the evidence would have
been much the same and the trial court might even have found some of the
information developed in connection with the request for modification helpful in
dealing intelligently with the issues to be tried on remand.  Moreover, it is
relatively clear that both parties and the presiding judge who set the OSC for
the same date intended and expected the matters be heard together, not an
unreasonable proposition.

   However, in view of our determination the $ 900 support order constitutes an
abuse of discretion, the trial court's refusal to hear the motion for
modification in conjunction with the trial on remand may still be cured if this
matter is to be tried yet again.  And if the matter is to be retried a third
time we shall direct that it be assigned to a different trial judge.

   5. The Pension

     Wife contends the trial court improperly refused to divide the community
property interest in husband's pension, that the trial court should have
effected a division by awarding the pension to husband and awarding the family
residence to wife with an equalizing payment from husband to wife to offset the
value of the pension, and that, in any event, the court should have made
protective orders to secure wife's interest against husband's death or
withdrawal of employee contributions in contravention of her community property
rights.

    We agree the court should have made protective orders restraining husband
from withdrawing funds from or assigning or hypothecating any interest in the
retirement benefits without prior approval of the court, ordering husband to
name wife and keep her named as the beneficiary of any benefits payable or
available in the event of his death and ordering that in the event husband
should violate said orders in any fashion, the retirement benefits should
immediately be valued and divided and that husband or his estate should
indemnify wife for any loss to her caused by husband's failure to abide by the
court's orders or otherwise protect wife's community property interests in the
retirement benefits. (See Civ. Code, § 4800.8 (Stats. 1986, ch. 686, § 1, eff.
Jan. 1, 1987; see generally In re Marriage of Becker (1984) 161 Cal.App.3d 65
[207 Cal.Rptr. 392].)  We are unable, however, to conclude the trial court
abused discretion in not presently dividing the retirement benefits.

   In the original judgment the court failed to characterize or divide the
husband's pension fund.  On the first appeal we reversed, directing the trial
court to characterize husband's retirement, determine the amount of community
interest therein, and make any appropriate orders for division.  We noted the
California Supreme Court has encouraged trial courts to award pension rights to
the employee spouse, compensating the other spouse with other community property
( In re Marriage of Gillmore (1981) 29 Cal.3d 418, 428 [174 Cal.Rptr. 493, 629
P.2d 1]), but we also recognized that under appropriate circumstances a trial
court is authorized to reserve jurisdiction over the manner in which future
retirement benefits are to be divided or disposed of.

   Following the trial on remand, the trial court did characterize the
retirement benefits and assign as community property a proportion equal to
eighteen years, seven months and four days divided by the total term of
employment at the time husband retires.  Although this court favorably referred
to the possibility of division of the community property by awarding the
retirement benefits to husband and awarding the family residence to wife, with
adjustments made for the differential in value of the two assets, our favorable
reference did not constitute a directive.

   Evidence adduced at the first trial placed the value of the retirement rights
at between $ 78,000 and $ 84,000.  The equity in the family residence, on the
other hand, amounted to about $ 53,000.  In view of the substantial demands on
husband's current income, the fact that husband is not yet eligible to retire
and the fact that no other substantial community assets were available from
which to provide an equalizing payment, we cannot say the court's refusal to
make an immediate division and its reserving jurisdiction over the pension
rights was an abuse of discretion. The cases relied on by wife to establish her
right to immediate payment of her interest in the retirement were cases in which
the right to receive the retirement was fully matured and was contingent only
upon the election of the employee spouse whether to retire or to continue
working.

   6. Credit of $ 5,800 to Wife

    Wife contends the trial court erred in failing to consider her claim for
reimbursement of $ 5,800 she alleges she contributed to the purchase of the
family residence. At the first trial, the court received testimony from wife
that she contributed $ 5,800 from her separate property as a down payment on the
home.  In its judgment following the first trial, the court found there was no
agreement to preserve the $ 5,800 as a separate property interest to be
reimbursed to wife.  Wife now contends that the subsequent passage of Civil Code
section 4800.2 mandates that wife should be reimbursed for her contribution
absent a written agreement to the contrary.

   As the California Supreme Court recently held in In re Marriage of Fabian
(1986) 41 Cal.3d 440 [224 Cal.Rptr. 333, 715 P.2d 253], section 4800.2 of the
Civil Code may not be retroactively applied to require reimbursement. The trial
court determined on substantial evidence that there was no oral agreement for
reimbursement. Thus, the trial court's ruling on the first trial was legally
correct, and the court did not err in refusing to further consider the issue
which was not before it in the trial on remand.

   7. The Equalization Payment

    In the original judgment the court awarded community property to wife at a
total value of $ 3,765.50.  Deducting from that figure $ 761 the  court found
wife had paid on account of community debts, the court found wife had received
community property in the net amount of $ 3,040.50.

   The court awarded community property items of a value of $ 6,064.50 to
husband, but found that husband was entitled to credit for payments he made on
community debts in the amount of $ 8,006.62, giving husband community property
having a value of minus $ 2,062.12.  The court then ordered wife to pay husband
the sum of $ 2,533.31 (one-half the difference between what she got and what he
got) to equalize the division of community property.

   On the first appeal, we reversed the order with respect to the equalization
payment in order to permit the court flexibility in characterizing and dividing
the community property on remand.  Following the trial on remand, the court
ordered that husband be paid $ 5,066.62 out of the proceeds of the  sale of the
family residence after the remaining minor child reaches the age of majority.
The $ 5,066.62 ordered by the court to be paid from the sale of the residence
was exactly twice the equalization payment the court ordered wife to pay
directly to husband in the original judgment. Wife takes exception to this, but
she is in error.

   In the original judgment the court ordered wife to make a cash payment of
one-half the difference between the community property received by wife and the
community property received by husband.  In the judgment following remand the
court ordered reimbursement to husband from the eventual sale of the community
property residence of the whole amount of the difference between the property
received by husband and the property received by wife.  Except for arithmetic
errors in calculating the amount of the difference between the property received
by wife and the property received by husband, the court's order was sound.
Since husband was to be paid out of community property, one-half of which was
already his, rather than in cash by wife, he had to get twice the amount wife
was originally ordered to pay.

   However, the net community property received by wife ($ 3,765.50 minus $ 761)
was $ 3,004.50, not $ 3,040.50.  In addition, the credit to husband for
community obligations paid results in a net figure of minus $ 1,942.12, not
minus $ 2,062.12 ($ 6,064.50 minus $ 8,006.62).  Thus, the difference between
what wife received and what husband received was $ 4,946.62 not $ 5,066.62.
This difference may be compensated by crediting $ 2,473.31 (one-half the
difference), together with interest thereon at the rate of 7 percent per annum
from September 20, 1982, against the spousal support arrearage owed to wife as
her separate property.

    8. The Loan and Insurance Policies

   Finally, wife contends she should have been allowed to produce evidence at
the trial on remand relating to various insurance policies and about a  $ 10,000
loan allegedly taken out by husband shortly before separation rather than some
years earlier as he testified.

   In its original judgment, the court awarded to each of the parties various
insurance policies at certain values.  Wife evidently wanted to relitigate the
valuation of these policies, intimating that husband concealed their true value
at the original trial. In addition, wife wished to present evidence with respect
to the loan secured by the second deed of trust on the family residence,
alleging that husband misled her and the court at the time of trial by
testifying he took out the loan in 1976 or 1977, whereas, she alleged, he in
fact took out the loan approximately five months before the date of separation.

   Wife had a full opportunity to investigate and litigate these issues at the
original trial. None of these issues was raised in the first appeal and none was
within the purview of the issues mentioned in the order remanding the case to
the trial court.  Thus,  these matters were not properly in issue at the trial
on remand.

    The trial court did, in its judgment on the first trial, reserve
jurisdiction to adjust the cash surrender value of the American National
Insurance policy.  If counsel can verify the true value of that insurance
policy, an application for relief may still be presented to the trial court
under the reservation of jurisdiction.  This does not, however, require a
reversal of any of the issues presented on this appeal.  If the trial court
should find the insurance policy had a different value than that assigned to it,
an equalization payment can be ordered.

   The foregoing conclusions would normally lead to reversal of the judgment in
several important respects and a remand of the case for a third trial as to
those issues.  In recognition of the fact that this matter has already been
greatly overlitigated, both parties have requested this court to resolve their
dispute itself so as to avoid further trial court proceedings and the
possibility  of yet another appeal.  We would accommodate the parties if we felt
we had the authority to do so but we are unaware of any authority giving this
court the power to fix the amount of spousal support or make decisions with
respect to other matters committed to the discretion of the trial court.   In an
effort, however, to honor the request of the parties insofar as possible, we
shall modify and affirm the judgment as modified on the condition that the
modification is consented to by both parties.  Otherwise, as we see it, we have
no alternative but to reverse those portions of the judgment we have determined
to be erroneous.

    Accordingly, on the condition that both parties file their written consent
to the modification with the clerk of this court within 20 days of the date this
opinion is filed or, alternatively, within said time file with the clerk of this
court a stipulation for a different modification executed by the parties and
their respective attorneys, the judgment is hereby modified as hereinafter set
forth and as so modified is affirmed.  Otherwise the judgment is reversed as to
the spousal support order, the ascertainment of the arrearages on payment of
spousal support, the order for payment of such arrearage at $ 100 or more per
month and the order that husband should be reimbursed from the proceeds of sale
of the family residence the sum of $ 5,066.62.  Upon failure of the condition
hereinabove specified, the judgment is also reversed as to the order for sale of
the family residence, so the trial court may have greater flexibility and may
consider the possibility of awarding the family residence to wife with an
offsetting credit against husband's arrearages in spousal support payments and
interest thereon.  If the condition hereinabove specified is not fulfilled and
the judgment stands reversed in these respects, the trial court is directed to
assign the case to a judge other than the judge who conducted the trial on
remand following the first appeal, to redetermine the amount of spousal support
to which wife was entitled from and after June 15, 1982, in accordance with the
views expressed in the opinion, to redetermine the amount of arrearages on such
spousal support and the amount of interest due thereon, to credit husband
against said arrearages and interest the sum of $ 2,473 together with interest
thereon at the rate of 7 percent per annum from and after September 20, 1982,
which amounts to $ 736, for the purpose of equalizing the division of the
community property thus far made;  and to make protective orders with respect to
wife's community interest in the federal civil service retirement rights as set
forth in the opinion.  Whether the judgment stands reversed with directions or
modified and affirmed, wife shall recover costs on appeal together with the sum
of $ 5,000 on account of her reasonable attorney fees on appeal in addition to
any attorney fees previously ordered by the trial court.

   The conditional modification of the judgment is as follows: As and for
spousal support for wife during the period June 15, 1982, through December 31,
1982, husband shall pay to wife the sum of $ 1,000 per month; for the period
January 1, 1983, through December 31, 1983, the sum of $ 1,250 per month; for
the period January 1, 1984, through June 30, 1987, the sum of $ 1,350 per month;
for the period July 1, 1987, through June 30, 1988, the sum of $ 1,250 per
month, which amount shall thereafter automatically reduce further by $ 100 on
July 1 of each year commencing July 1, 1988, until the figure reaches $ 650 per
month at which time it shall continue at that amount until the death or
remarriage of wife or until further order of the court.  The court reserves full
jurisdiction to modify or terminate spousal support at any time upon a showing
of changed circumstances.

    Husband's arrearages on the payment of spousal support as of December 31,
1986, are determined to be $ 27,425 plus interest at the rate of 7 percent per
annum on shortages in payment as they occurred which amounts to $ 4,806. 1 Thus,
the total of the arrearages and interest as of December 31, 1986, is $ 32,231.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   The
accrued interest figure is not a precise calculation but a close approximation
based on the assumption that $ 550 a month spousal support was paid by husband
during the period June 15, 1982, through October 1984 and that $ 1,000 was paid
against spousal support ($ 900 current and $ 100 on arrearages) from November 1,
1984, through December 1986.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    To equalize the division of the community property previously made, husband
is entitled to credit against the $ 32,231 arrearages and interest on spousal
support of $ 2,473 together with interest thereon at the rate of 7 percent per
annum from September 20, 1982, which amounts to $ 736, a total credit of $
3,209.  After said credit the spousal support arrearage with interest as of
December 31, 1986, totals $ 29,022.

   The former family residence of the parties located at 3625 Hillview in
Riverside, California, is awarded to wife as her sole and separate property
subject to first and second trust deeds having unpaid balances of approximately
$ 18,000 and $ 7,500, respectively, any unpaid real property taxes and any liens
or encumbrances incurred by wife, which obligations are assigned to wife and
from which she shall hold husband free and harmless.  Husband shall execute and
deliver to wife a grant deed conveying his interest in the property to wife,
warranting that he has created or suffered no liens or encumbrances on the
property other than the two aforementioned deeds of trust and any unpaid real
property taxes.

   As and for his equity in said former family residence husband shall be
credited the sum of $ 27,250 against the arrearages and interest owing on
spousal support of $ 29,022, leaving as of December 31, 1986, a total unpaid on
said spousal support and interest of $ 1,772 which shall be paid by husband to
wife together with 10 percent interest on the unpaid balance thereof from and
after January 1, 1987, in monthly installments of $ 100 or more until paid in
full.

   The court reserves full jurisdiction over any and all federal civil service
retirement rights of the parties resulting from husband's federal civil service
employment.  Husband and his agents, servants and privies are enjoined and
restrained from withdrawing any funds from or assigning or hypothecating any
interest in the retirement benefits without prior approval of the Riverside
Superior Court and husband is ordered to name wife (Mary Jo Ramer) and keep her
named as the beneficiary of any benefits payable or available in the event of
husband's death.  In the event husband should violate any of the foregoing
orders or in any fashion impair the interests of wife in said retirement rights,
the federal civil service retirement benefits shall immediately be valued and
divided and husband and/or his estate shall indemnify wife for any loss to her
caused by husband's failure to abide by the aforesaid orders or his failure
otherwise to protect her interest in the retirement benefits.

   All orders for child support heretofore made by the Riverside Superior Court
are reconfirmed, including the stipulated order that husband shall keep the
children of the parties named as insureds on his group medical insurance program
through his employment so long as the same is available and so long as a child
is eligible for coverage.

   All orders to show cause re attorney fees and/or modification of child or
spousal support heretofore filed by wife and still pending are ordered
dismissed.

   (The foregoing modification shall be effective only if the condition
concerning written consent of each party filed with the clerk is fulfilled.)


                              49 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In re the Marriage of VIVIENNE MADALYN and ROBERT EVERETT
             MELTON.  VIVIENNE MADALYN MELTON, Appellant, v. ROBERT
                           EVERETT MELTON, Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 57886

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division One

            107 Cal. App. 3d 559; 165 Cal. Rptr. 753; 1980 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1984


                                 June 26, 1980

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A petition for a rehearing was denied July 23, 1980.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Los Angeles County, No. NCD 6029 G, Clinton
Rodda, Temporary Judge. *

*   Pursuant to Constitution, article VI, section 21.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 63--Support of Other Party--Guiding
Considerations--Discretion of Trial Court.  --In a marriage dissolution
proceeding, although wide discretion is vested in the trial court in determining
the amount and duration of spousal support, the discretion is not unlimited. In
order not to be arbitrary, discretion must be exercised along legal lines,
taking into consideration the circumstances of the parties, their necessities
and the financial ability of the husband. Discretion is abused whenever, in its
exercise, the court exceeds the bounds of reason, all circumstances before it
being considered.

(2) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 70--Support of Other Party--
Modification--Hearing and Order--Reduction in Spousal Support Payments.  --In a
hearing on a request for modification of spousal support payments that an
ex-husband had previously been ordered to pay his former wife, the trial court
did not abuse its discretion in ordering payments at a much lower rate than
under the terms of the original support order, where the former husband's health
had deteriorated to the extent his ability to work was affected; his ex-wife's
health, although impaired, had remained unchanged for several years; her monthly
income had increased; and her expenses had decreased. The payments under the
modification order, though a lesser amount than in the original support order,
represented a greater amount than was being paid prior to the modification order
as the result of reductions effected by prior modification orders.

(3a) (3b) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 70--Support of Other Party--
Termination of Order--Abuse of Discretion.  --The trial court abused its
discretion in modifying a previous spousal support order by limiting future
support payments by the former husband to his ex-wife to a one-year period. The
limitation on future payments impliedly indicated the trial court did not intend
to retain jurisdiction beyond the one-year period, and the order, if allowed to
stand, would consequently irrevocably terminate spousal support after one year.
The marriage had been lengthy (24 years) and the modification order was based on
speculation by the judge that the former husband would be unable to continue
working within a year, although he testified he did not intend to retire until 3
more years. The record did not clearly indicate the ex-wife would be able to
meet her financial needs at the time selected by the trial court for termination
of jurisdiction.

(4) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 70--Support of Other Party--
Termination of Order--Limitation on Trial Court's Discretion.  --The trial court
in a marriage dissolution proceeding is prohibited from terminating jurisdiction
over spousal support after a lengthy marriage unless the record contains
evidence that the supported spouse will be able to support herself adequately at
the time selected for termination of jurisdiction. And orders respecting spousal
support to take effect in the future must be based on reasonable inferences from
the evidence, not mere hopes or speculative expectations. Retention of
jurisdiction to modify spousal support should be the norm, and the burden of
justification of termination is on the party seeking termination.

COUNSEL: Jones & Jones and Arthur T. Jones for Appellant.

Edwards, Edwards & Ashton and Mark U. Edwards for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Jefferson (Bernard), P. J., with Hanson (Thaxton), J., and
Radin, J., + concurring.

+   Assigned by the Chairperson of the Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: JEFFERSON

OPINION

     Vivienne Madalyn Melton appeals from an order modifying spousal support
provisions originally ordered in an interlocutory judgment entered in 1969,
granting her a decree of separate maintenance and granting Robert Everett Melton
a decree of divorce.

   The parties were married in 1943 and separated in 1967.  Their two children
were over the age of majority when the interlocutory judgment was entered in
October 1969.  That judgment approved an "integrated property settlement
agreement" and awarded property in accordance therewith, including an award to
Robert of military retirement benefits and a private pension plan with Jet
Propulsion Laboratories.  It further ordered that he pay, for Vivienne's support
and maintenance, $ 450 a month, commencing October 1, 1969, until further order
of the court. 1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   The
record on appeal has been augmented, upon application of appellant, to include
the complaint, answer and cross-complaint, interlocutory judgment, and property
settlement agreement.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     The settlement agreement provided that payment for her support continue
until death of either party and that it be permanent and not subject to change
unless either of the following conditions occur: (1) Wife shall incur
substantial medical expenses which are not provided for or covered by husband's
military benefits or any other coverage; and/or (2) Husband shall suffer a
substantial reduction in his pay or earning power.

   In June 1973, the spousal support order was amended to provide that he pay
her $ 375 a month until occurrence of certain conditions, and then $ 225 a
month.

   In November 1976, Vivienne sought modification of the order from $ 225 a
month to $ 425 a month; and Robert requested reduction  or termination of
support payments.  In December 1976, the court ordered that spousal support be
reduced $ 50 a month for six-month intervals through December 1977, and reserved
jurisdiction over spousal support thereafter.

   After December 1977, Robert did not pay any spousal support to Vivienne.  In
August 1978, she filed the herein request for modification, seeking
reinstatement of spousal support in the amount of $ 225 a month.  Her supporting
declaration stated that she was physically disabled as a result of a cerebral
vascular accident which occurred in 1969; that she has only partial use of her
right arm, hand and leg; that she was unable to perform duties in an office,
factory, or hospital; that in 1974 and 1975 she did occasional work as a
cleaning lady, earning $ 520 in 1975; that in 1976 she earned $ 300, and had to
sell her car because she could not afford to maintain it; that she has worked as
a practical nurse for an elderly gentleman; that she attempted to qualify for
Social Security benefits, but was rejected because of the above work; that she
was not qualified for public assistance; that Robert's military retirement
benefits have increased 75 percent since 1969, and he receives veteran
disability benefits of over $ 100 a month; that Robert was able to work and was
presently employed; and that Robert's present wife was gainfully employed.

   Vivienne's financial declaration stated a monthly income of $ 200, monthly
expenses of $ 421, and $ 800 cash on hand.  She testified at the hearing that
she abandoned her appeal from the modification order of 1975 upon insistence by
Robert that their children did not like the idea   of her appealing; in 1977 she
was forced to let her apartment in Glendale go and give away her belongings, and
go to Idaho "in order to survive"; in Idaho she has been doing housework for an
elderly gentleman in return for her room but she has to pay for her groceries,
clothes and telephone.  In addition, she was earning $ 300 a month working part
time for a woman; that she was not paying the $ 160 rent listed in her financial
statement (as part of $ 421 total expenses).  Vivienne stated that she had come
to court requesting $ 225 a month spousal support so that she could have her own
apartment.

   In his response declaration, Robert stated that he was unable to pay spousal
support because he has arteriosclerosis heart disease, first noticed in April
1977, which limits his ability to work. He had a heart attack in January 1978,
and was not able to work for four months thereafter.  He declared that he was
then employed on a "job shopping" basis as a contractor at Jet Propulsion
Laboratory (his former employer).  Since the heart attack, he knows he must
retire as soon as possible.  He and his present wife know that they cannot
maintain their home when he retires, so they have purchased a truck-trailer for
$ 16,500 in which they plan to live.  His present wife's employment at Jet
Propulsion Laboratory terminated in 1974 on disability status; she has had three
or four part time jobs; and in the last month her take home pay was $ 130 a
week.

   His financial declaration set forth that his then gross monthly income was $
2,272.40, consisting of $ 1,496.40 salary, $ 663 federal retirement and $ 113
military disability; he declared that his net monthly income was $ 1,867.80
after taxes; that his monthly expenses were $ 1,734.66, including $ 272 for the
home mortgage, $ 110 for a gardener and housekeeper, $ 168 for payments on the
truck/trailer, and $ 510 a month for automobile payments.

   Robert testified at the hearing that he had been "putting in pretty good
time" working, but that he has to take off three or four days a month by reason
of his heart condition. He has dizzy spells, which his physician believes are
caused by fibrulation wherein the heart vibrates instead of pumping blood.  He
said that he would be 61 years of age in January 1980; and planned to retire in
January 1981 because of his heart condition. Robert further testified that he
hoped to continue working until January 1981 in order to get the trailer and
truck paid for; that he did not know what he and his wife would do with the
house  at  this time.  On cross-examination, he admitted that he told the court
at a previous modification hearing in 1976 that he thought he would have to sell
the home at that time.

   At conclusion of the hearing, the court pronounced: "It will be ordered that
Mr. Melton pay to Mrs. Melton for a period of 12 months only the sum of $ 100
per month . . . [starting] December 15th [1978] and continuing for a 12-month
period only . . . .  [para. ] This was a long marriage but I think from the
sound of it, in all probability, Mr. Melton will have to retire or cease work on
disability basis before the time he says in about a year.  That will be the
order." A minute order to that effect was entered that date. 2 The herein appeal
is from the minute order.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Although
written findings of fact could have been requested ( Civ.  Code, § 4801),
neither party requested findings.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Vivienne contends on this appeal that the trial court abused its discretion
(1) in failing to reserve jurisdiction as to spousal support upon expiration of
the 12-month period, and (2) in awarding spousal support of "only" $ 100 a month
for 12 months.

     Although wide discretion is vested in the trial court in determining the
amount and duration of spousal support, the discretion is not unlimited.  In
order not to be arbitrary, discretion must be exercised along legal lines,
taking into consideration the circumstances of the parties, their necessities
and the financial ability of the husband.  Discretion is abused whenever, in its
exercise, the court exceeds the bounds of reason, all circumstances before it
being considered.  ( In re Marriage of Lopez (1974) 38 Cal.App.3d 93, 114 [113
Cal.Rptr. 58].)

   The circumstances to be considered in fixing spousal support are set forth in
section 4801 of the Civil Code as follows: (1) the earning capacity of each
spouse; (2) the needs of each party; (3) the obligations and assets of each
party; (4) the duration of the marriage; (5) the ability of the supported spouse
to engage in gainful employment; (6) the time required for the supported spouse
to acquire appropriate education, training, and employment; (7) the age and
health of the parties; (8) the standard of living of the parties; (9) and any
other factors which the court deems just and equitable.

   It has also been said (see Gammell v. Gammell (1979) 90 Cal.App.3d 90, 93
[153 Cal.Rptr. 169]) that a husband's remarriage with its additional  benefits
is a factor to be considered in modifying support payments, and, although the
second wife's income may be her separate property, as a pragmatic matter, this
income either directly or indirectly reduces the needs of the husband and,
consequently, it either directly or indirectly affects the husband's ability to
meet the needs of the former wife.

     As to amount ($ 100 a month) of spousal support ordered herein, we are not
disposed to hold abuse of discretion since, under the circumstances presented,
the relative position of the parties had not changed appreciably.  At the
current hearing, his health had deteriorated to the extent that his ability to
work was affected.  Vivienne's health, although impaired, remained unchanged
from 1976; since 1976 her monthly income has increased, and her expenses (after
deducting the $ 160 rent expense which she admittedly does not pay) have
decreased.  The reinstatement of spousal support for her in the sum of $ 100 a
month was an increase over the amount existing when the present order was made.

     As to duration of the ordered support, however, we find an abuse of
discretion. We hold that the trial court abused its discretion in limiting the
ordered support to a one-year period and in not retaining jurisdiction over
spousal support upon expiration of the twelve-month period.

     It was stated by the Supreme Court in In re Marriage of Morrison (1978) 20
Cal.3d 437, 448 [143 Cal.Rptr. 139, 573 P.2d 41], that the guidelines set forth
in the Rosan-Dennis line of  cases 3 prohibit a trial court from terminating
jurisdiction over spousal support after a lengthy marriage unless the record
contains evidence that the supported spouse will be able to adequately support
herself at the time selected for termination of jurisdiction. In Morrison, the
court held that, under the circumstances presented there, the trial court abused
its discretion in divesting itself of jurisdiction to award future spousal
support.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   In re
Marriage of Rosan (1972) 24 Cal.App.3d 885 [101 Cal.Rptr.  295]; In re Marriage
of Dennis (1973) 35 Cal.App.3d 279 [110 Cal.Rptr. 619]; In re Marriage of
Brantner (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 416 [136 Cal.Rptr. 635]; and other cases. (See
cases cited in Morrison, supra, 20 Cal.3d at pp. 442 and 443.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The Rosan court observed that orders for support to take effect in the
future must be based upon reasonable inferences to be drawn from the evidence,
not mere hopes or speculative expectations. (See Rosan, supra,  24 Cal.App.3d
885, 899; see also In re Marriage of Morrison, supra, 20 Cal.3d 437, 453; In re
Marriage of Stenquist (1978) 21 Cal.3d 779, 789 [148 Cal.Rptr. 9, 582 P.2d 96];
Lovitz v. Lovitz (1976) 65 Cal.App.3d 299, 304-305 [135 Cal.Rptr. 9].)

   The Dennis court emphasized that after a lengthy marriage, retention of
jurisdiction to modify spousal support should be the norm, and that the burden
of justification is on the party seeking termination. ( Dennis, supra, 35
Cal.App.3d 279, 285.)

     Here, in the case before us, the order of spousal support was for 12 months
"only." This limitation impliedly indicated that the trial court did not intend
to extend jurisdiction to modify spousal support beyond the 12-month period. (
In re Marriage of Stenquist, supra, 21 Cal.3d 779, 789.) Consequently, the
order, if allowed to stand, would irrevocably terminate spousal support. (See
Lovitz, supra, 65 Cal.App.3d 299, 304.)

   The order limiting spousal support for 12 months was made on December 12,
1978, and, as pointed out herein, the court, in pronouncing the order, stated:
"This was a long marriage but I think from the sound of it, in all probability,
Mr. Melton will have to retire or cease work on disability basis before the time
he says in about a year." It is thus apparent that the order was based on
speculation.  Robert himself testified that he did not intend to retire until
January 1981 -- more than two years after the termination order was made.  Also,
it is to be noted that Robert testified that he was "putting in pretty good
time" in his present employment; and, although he testified that he intended to
retire because of his heart condition, he also testified that he intended to
continue working until January 1981, to pay off his truck and trailer.

   This had been a lengthy marriage (24 years), and the record does not clearly
indicate that Vivienne will be able to meet her financial needs at the time
selected by the trial court for termination of jurisdiction. 4 In light of the
circumstances presented, we must hold that the trial court abused its discretion
in limiting the spousal support to a 12-month period and terminating
jurisdiction thereafter.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   We also
note an apparent inconsistency in the court's order in that while increasing the
spousal support over the then-existing spousal support, it also terminated the
support in 12 months.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The order entered in the minutes on December 12, 1978, providing that
"Respondent is ordered to pay as spousal support to petitioner the sum of $
100.00 per month for a period of 12 months, payable one-half on the 1st and 15th
of each month, commencing December 15, 1978," is modified to provide as follows:
"Respondent is ordered to pay as spousal support to petitioner the sum of $
100.00 per month, payable one-half on the 1st and 15th of each month, commencing
December 15, 1978, and continuing until further order of court." As so modified,
the order is affirmed.  Respondent Robert Everett Melton is to pay Vivienne
Madalyn Melton's costs on appeal and her reasonable  attorney's fees on appeal
to be fixed by the trial court.


                              50 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In re the Marriage of GERALD W. and EILEEN CAULEY.  GERALD
             W. CAULEY, Respondent, v. EILEEN J. CAULEY, Appellant.

                                    H028589

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SIXTH APPELLATE DISTRICT

          138 Cal. App. 4th 1100; 41 Cal. Rptr. 3d 902; 2006 Cal. App.
            LEXIS 566; 2006 Cal. Daily Op. Service 3417; 2006 Daily
                                Journal DAR 4916


                             April 24, 2006, Filed

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY: Review denied by, Request denied by In re Cauley & Cauley,
2006 Cal. LEXIS 8503 (Cal., July 12, 2006)

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Santa Clara County, No. 1-02 FL110381,
James P. Kleinberg, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports

(3) Dissolution of Marriage § 72--Spousal Support--Termination--Intraspousal
Domestic Violence--Rebuttable Presumption--Nonmodifiable Spousal Support
Provision--Reasonable Expectations.--Termination of a former husband's spousal
support obligation to his former wife was proper, despite a nonmodifiable
spousal support provision in the parties' settlement agreement, because the wife
had been convicted of intraspousal domestic violence against the husband and
failed to rebut the presumption of Fam. Code, § 4325, that an award of spousal
support not be made to a former spouse who was a convicted abuser. The parties
could not have reasonably expected that the husband would finance his own abuse
by the wife.

   [11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (10th ed. 2005) Husband and Wife, § 371.]

COUNSEL: Robin Yeamans for Appellant.

Tammara S. Bloom for Respondent.

JUDGES: Mihara, J., with Rushing, P. J., and McAdams, J., concurring.

OPINION

    MIHARA, J.--Under Family Code section 4325, there is a rebuttable
presumption that an award of spousal support not be made to a spouse who has
been convicted of intraspousal domestic violence. 1 Appellant Eileen J. Cauley
has been convicted of domestic violence against respondent Gerald W. Cauley. The
parties' settlement agreement provided that spousal support was not subject to
modification or termination. The trial court found that the presumption of
section 4325 applied here and had not been rebutted. It then  granted
respondent's motion to terminate spousal support to appellant. We find no merit
to appellant's contentions and affirm.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1    All
further statutory references are to the Family Code unless stated otherwise.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

I. Statement of Facts

   On November 25, 2002, respondent filed a petition for dissolution of
marriage. The parties had been married for 18 years. In March 2003, respondent
requested a temporary restraining order. His declaration stated that appellant
had threatened his life in numerous telephone messages and calls and had
physically attacked him several times during the prior year. The court issued
the temporary restraining order, which was due to expire in July 2003.

   On June 25, 2003, the parties signed a stipulation for judgment. It provided
in relevant part: "Husband shall pay Wife for her support and maintenance $
5,250.00 per month, payable via direct deposit on the 10th day of each calendar
month commencing immediately after the effective date of this Agreement. These
spousal support payments shall continue until Wife's remarriage or the death of
either Husband or Wife, whichever occurs first, or until further order of the
court. These payments shall be non-modifiable with the following exceptions
which may form the basis for a modification of the above amount: 1) Wife's
cohabitation with a partner; 2) Husband's loss of income either due to
disability, or job loss." The trial court retained jurisdiction as to spousal
support until March 31, 2010. Respondent also agreed to take his request for a
restraining order off calendar with prejudice. 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2    On
August 25, 2003, the judgment of dissolution was filed.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   On August 6, 2003, appellant flew to Florida where respondent was living with
his girlfriend and her son. During the next couple of days, appellant removed
items from the exterior of respondent's house, sprayed herbicide in the garden,
ripped out plants, killed his fish, stole personal property, and threw numerous
items in the bay behind the house. At some point during appellant's crime spree,
respondent opened his door, and she sprayed herbicide in his face. When his
girlfriend arrived, appellant sprayed her as well. Appellant was eventually
arrested for domestic battery.

   On August 12, 2003, respondent obtained a temporary restraining order in
Florida. On September 10, 2003, appellant did not appear at the hearing, and the
trial court made the restraining order effective for one year. It ordered
appellant to have no contact with respondent.

   On August 15, 2003, appellant sent respondent's attorney a letter in which
she threatened to accuse respondent of rape if he did not have the domestic
battery charges dropped. A few days later, appellant contacted the police
department and reported that respondent had raped her.

    Appellant also repeatedly violated the restraining order. She sent written
and electronic correspondence to respondent. She made telephone calls, and left
messages on his voice mail. Appellant threatened respondent, his wife, members
of their families, and his employer. Between September 2003 and March 2004,
appellant made more than 1,000 calls, and left nearly 500 messages, which
totaled almost 70 hours of recordings. Though respondent changed his home
telephone to an unlisted number, appellant was able to obtain his new cell phone
number within a few weeks, and the calls continued. In February 2004, appellant
threatened the president of the company that employed respondent. On March 22,
2004, appellant left over 52 messages on respondent's voice mail.

   Since appellant had left Florida, the prosecutor was seeking her extradition
from California for violations of the restraining order. In the meantime, on
March 30, 2004, respondent requested a restraining order in California so that
California authorities could prosecute her if she continued to harass him. On
the same date, respondent filed a motion for modification and termination of
spousal support based on appellant's acts of domestic violence.

   In the spring of 2004, Florida issued a warrant for appellant's arrest on the
charge of felony aggravated stalking and a $ 1,000,000 bond was set. On April
16, 2004, appellant was arrested in San Jose and eventually extradited to
Florida. On May 17, 2004, she pleaded guilty to felony aggravated stalking and
was placed on five years' probation. Appellant's conditions of probation
required her to attend anger management training, receive alcoholic/psychiatric
treatment, and not contact the victims.

   Meanwhile, on April 26, 2004, the court in California ordered a temporary
cessation in spousal support under section 4325, and set the case for a review
hearing on October 18, 2004. 3 The court also granted respondent's request for a
restraining order. Appellant was ordered to have no contact with respondent, his
wife, and her son for three years.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3    Though
appellant was in custody, she attended this hearing.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   On May 17, 2004, appellant was released from custody in Florida. Less than
two weeks later, appellant again began making telephone calls in which she
threatened to harm respondent and his coworkers. She made over 91 calls between
May 28 and October 11, 2004. Though the trial court had set spousal support
temporarily at $ 0, appellant repeatedly threatened respondent if he did not pay
her. Based on this conduct, Florida again charged appellant with felony
aggravated stalking as well as violation of the conditions of her probation.

   On October 13, 2004, the review hearing on the spousal support order was
held. Appellant did not attend. The trial court then set a hearing for appellant
to present evidence to rebut the presumption that she was not entitled to
spousal support. Counsel agreed to provide declarations and to use the hearing
for cross-examination and argument. Later that same afternoon, appellant was
arrested on the Florida charges.

    Prior to the hearing on December 15, 2004, respondent submitted two
declarations. Though appellant did not submit a declaration, her counsel made an
offer of proof on her behalf at the hearing. He stated that there was a
nonmodifiable settlement agreement that provided for spousal support, that
appellant was a convicted felon who was an alcoholic with no job and no
training, and that appellant made the telephone calls to find out when she would
receive her support payments. Respondent's counsel argued that respondent and
his family had lived through "two years of sheer hell," that appellant had been
in numerous alcohol treatment programs, and that appellant had violated court
orders in both Florida and California.

II. Discussion

A. Termination of Spousal Support

   Section 4325, subdivision (a) states: "In any proceeding for dissolution of
marriage where there is a criminal conviction for an act of domestic violence
perpetrated by one spouse against the other spouse entered by the court within
five years prior to the filing of the dissolution proceeding, or at any time
thereafter, there shall be a rebuttable presumption affecting the burden of
proof that any award of temporary or permanent spousal support to the abusive
spouse otherwise awardable pursuant to the standards of this part should not be
made."

   Relying on section 3591, appellant contends that the trial court erred in
applying section 4325 in the present case. Section 3591, subdivision (c) states
in relevant part that "[a]n agreement for spousal support may not be modified or
revoked to the extent that a written agreement ... specifically provides that
the spousal support is not subject to modification or termination." Here the
parties agreed that spousal support would not be modified or terminated unless
appellant cohabited with a partner or appellant suffered a loss of income.
Respondent counters that enforcement of the settlement agreement would violate
the public policy against domestic violence.

   "In determining whether a contract violates public policy, courts essentially
engage in a weighing process, balancing the interests of enforcing the contract
with those interests against enforcement. ... But the cases make clear that the
judicial power to declare public policy in the context of contract
interpretation and enforcement should be exercised with great caution. ' " '
"The  power of the courts to declare a contract void for being in contravention
of sound public policy is a very delicate and undefined power, and, like the
power to declare a statute unconstitutional, should be exercised only in cases
free from doubt." ' " ' " (Rosen v. State Farm General Ins. Co. (2003) 30
Cal.4th 1070, 1082 [135 Cal. Rptr. 2d 361, 70 P.3d 351], citations omitted.)

   In resolving the issue before us, we turn to the Restatement on Contracts,
which provides that "[a] promise or other term of an agreement is unenforceable
on grounds of public policy if legislation provides that it is unenforceable or
the interest in its enforcement is clearly outweighed in the circumstances by a
public policy against the enforcement of such terms." (Rest.2d Contracts, §
178(1).) Courts will examine the interest in enforcement of a contract term,
taking into account "the parties' justified expectations, [¶] ... any forfeiture
that would result if enforcement were denied, and [¶] ... any special public
interest in the enforcement of the particular term." (Rest.2d Contracts, §
178(2).) Courts will then weigh the public policy against enforcement,
considering "the strength of  that policy as manifested by legislation or
judicial decisions, [¶] ... the likelihood that a refusal to enforce the term
will further that policy, [¶] ... the seriousness of any misconduct involved and
the extent to which it was deliberate, and [¶] ... the directness of the
connection between that misconduct and the term." (Rest.2d Contracts, § 178(3).)

   In this case, we conclude that the public policy against enforcement of the
nonmodifiable spousal support provision clearly outweighs any interest in its
enforcement. Though there is a strong public policy in favor of enforcing the
spousal support provisions of the parties' settlement agreement and appellant
would forfeit a substantial amount of spousal support if there were no
enforcement, the parties could not have reasonably expected that respondent
would finance his own abuse by appellant. Balanced against these factors, we
note that there is a significant public policy against domestic violence. As was
noted in the analysis from the Assembly Judiciary Committee, "granting spousal
support to a convicted abuser is unconscionable and constitutes unjust
enrichment. ... [S]pousal support orders in such domestic violence cases
potentially force victims of abuse to remain dangerously entangled in the
abuser's web of violence and intimidation." (Assem. Com. on Judiciary, 3d
reading analysis of Sen. Bill No. 1221 (2001-2002 Reg. Sess.) as amended Aug.
23, 2001, p. 3.) Refusal to enforce the spousal support provision will further
this policy against domestic violence, because appellant will have fewer
financial resources to continue her harassment of respondent. We must also
emphasize that appellant's misconduct is extremely serious and has continued
despite incarceration and court orders in California and Florida. Moreover,
there is a direct connection between appellant's misconduct and the
nonmodifiable spousal support provision. As previously stated, appellant has
relied on  respondent's obligations to provide her with the financial ability to
harm him. While we acknowledge the fundamental principle that former spouses are
free to specify the terms of their settlement agreement, we decline to enforce
the spousal support provision in the present case. 4 Accordingly, the trial
court did not err in concluding that appellant failed to rebut the presumption
of section 4325.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4    Our
conclusion that section 4325 applies even when the parties have a nonmodifiable
agreement is supported by other statutes. Section 4323 provides that there is a
rebuttable presumption that the supported party needs less spousal support when
cohabiting with another, while section 4337 states that the supporting party's
obligation to pay spousal support terminates upon the death of either party or
the remarriage of the supported party. Both statutes, however, create an
exception when the parties agree otherwise in writing. In contrast to these
statutes, section 4324 provides that a spouse who is convicted of attempting to
murder the other spouse will not be entitled to spousal support. As with section
4325, section 4324 makes no reference to a contrary agreement by the parties.
Had the Legislature intended to create such an exception in sections 4324 and
4325, it could have easily so provided. This omission reflects an intent by the
Legislature that section 4325 applies regardless of any agreement between the
former spouses.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Appellant also claims that respondent has other remedies. She points out
that she has 83 counts of contempt pending against her in California and is
facing additional charges in Florida, and thus she could potentially be
incarcerated. This factor has no relevance. The fact that appellant has
continued to threaten and harass respondent despite court orders does not render
section 4325 inapplicable. Moreover, appellant's references to termination of
spousal support as punishment misconstrue the effects of section 4325. Section
4325 embodies a legislative determination that victims of domestic violence  not
be required to finance their own abuse. 5

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5
Appellant argues that when respondent entered into a nonmodifiable support
agreement, he gambled that she would not engage in domestic violence and lost.
However, we remain unpersuaded that victims must be required to financially
support those who have been convicted of harming them.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Appellant next asserts that section 4325 does not apply to a modification of
spousal support.

   Section 4325 applies "[i]n any proceeding for dissolution of marriage" where
one spouse is convicted of domestic violence against the other spouse "within
five years prior to the filing of the dissolution proceeding, or at any time
thereafter." Thus, the statute expressly states that the presumption is
triggered by a supported party's criminal conviction at any time after the
filing of the dissolution.

   Even if the statutory language were not clear, the legislative history of
section 4325 supports this interpretation. Senate Bill 1221, which provided the
basis for section 4325, initially proposed a six-month time frame. It was then
amended to two years before or after the filing of the dissolution (Sen. Bill
No. 1221 (2001-2002 Reg. Sess.) as amended in Sen. Apr. 19, 2001). In response,
the Assembly Committee on Judiciary prepared an analysis of the bill, which
questioned the time limitation. "[I]t is unclear why ... there should be any
arbitrary deadline limiting the applicability of the rebuttable presumption
after the dissolution proceedings are commenced (currently 2 years in the bill).
For example, if six years after a higher-earning spouse is ordered by the court
to pay spousal support to her lower-earning former husband, the former husband
is criminally convicted of perpetrating domestic violence against the supporting
spouse, should not the rebuttable presumption apply, such that the court, upon
notice of the entry of judgment of the conviction, would be required to
terminate the support order absent the presumption being rebutted?" (Assem. Com.
on Judiciary, analysis of Sen. Bill No. 1221 (2001-2002 Reg. Sess.) July 3,
2001, p. 8; underscoring omitted.) The bill was eventually amended to its
present form. (Sen. Bill No. 1221 (2001-2002 Reg. Sess.) as amended in Assem.
July 11, 2001). Thus, section 4325 applies to a modification of a spousal
support order.

B. Section 4320

   Appellant next contends that the trial court abused its discretion in
terminating spousal support without considering the factors of section 4320. 6
We disagree.  When a supported spouse fails to rebut the presumption of section
4325, "support to the abusive spouse otherwise awardable pursuant  to the
standards of this part should not be made." Both sections 4320 and 4325 are
included in part 3, chapter 2 of the Family Code. Thus, the Legislature has
specified that the trial court is not required to consider the factors outlined
in section 4320 in making its determination under section 4325.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6    Section
4320 provides in relevant part: "In ordering spousal support under this part,
the court shall consider all of the following circumstances: [¶] (a) The extent
to which the earning capacity of each party is sufficient to maintain the
standard of living established during the marriage, taking into account all of
the following: [¶] (1) The marketable skills of the supported party; the job
market for those skills; the time and expenses required for the supported party
to acquire the appropriate education or training to develop those skills; and
the possible need for retraining or education to acquire other, more marketable
skills or employment. [¶] (2) The extent to which the supported party's present
or future earning capacity is impaired by periods of unemployment that were
incurred during the marriage to permit the supported party to devote time to
domestic duties. [¶] (b) The extent to which the supported party contributed to
the attainment of an education, training, a career position, or a license by the
supporting party. [¶] (c) The ability of the supporting party to pay spousal
support, taking into account the supporting party's earning capacity, earned and
unearned income, assets, and standard of living. [¶] (d) The needs of each party
based on the standard of living established during the marriage. [¶] (e) The
obligations and assets, including the separate property, of each party. [¶] (f)
The duration of the marriage. [¶] (g) The ability of the supported party to
engage in gainful employment without unduly interfering with the interests of
dependent children in the custody of the party. [¶] (h) The age and health of
the parties. [¶] (i) Documented evidence of any history of domestic violence, as
defined in Section 6211, between the parties, including, but not limited to,
consideration of emotional distress resulting from domestic violence perpetrated
against the supported party by the supporting party, and consideration of any
history of violence against the supporting party by the supported party. [¶] (j)
The immediate and specific tax consequences to each party. [¶] (k) The balance
of the hardships to each party."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

C. Statement of Decision

   Appellant also argues that the trial court committed reversible error by
failing to issue a statement of decision.

   Section 3654 provides: "At the request of either party, an order modifying,
terminating, or setting aside a support order shall include a statement of
decision." When the trial court fails to render a statement of decision, it is
reversible error. (In re Marriage of Sellers (2003) 110 Cal.App.4th 1007, 1010
[2 Cal. Rptr. 3d 293].) However, where a party remains silent at the hearing and
fails to bring the issue to the trial court's attention, he or she waives the
right to a statement. (Id. at p. 1011.)

   On October 13, 2004, appellant requested a statement of decision. The trial
court initially ordered respondent's counsel to prepare a proposed statement of
decision. However, when respondent's counsel requested clarification of the
court's orders, the trial court and counsel discussed the need to schedule a
rebuttal hearing for appellant to provide evidence to sustain her burden under
section 4325. The trial court set the matter for hearing on November 29, 2004.
It was then continued to December 15, 2004. At the conclusion of the hearing,
the trial court stated its findings and order on the record. Appellant failed to
mention her request for a written statement of decision. Accordingly, she has
waived the issue on appeal. (In re Marriage of Ditto (1988) 206 Cal.App.3d 643,
647 [253 Cal. Rptr. 770].)

D. Evidence of Domestic Violence

   Relying on section 4325, subdivision (b), appellant contends that respondent
failed to present a certified copy of her conviction. There is no merit to this
contention. Subdivision (b) refers to "documented evidence of a convicted
spouse's history as a victim" (italics added) as a factor that the trial court
may consider in determining whether the convicted spouse has met the rebuttable
presumption. 7 There is no mention in section 4325 as to the type of evidence
that is necessary to raise the rebuttable presumption that support should not be
awarded.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7    Section
4325, subdivision (b) states: "The court may consider documented evidence of a
convicted spouse's history as a victim of domestic violence, as defined in
Section 6211, perpetrated by the other spouse, or any other factors the court
deems just and equitable, as conditions for rebutting this presumption."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -



III. Disposition

   The order is affirmed. Costs are awarded to respondent.

   Rushing, P. J., and McAdams, J., concurred.

   Appellant's petition for review by the Supreme Court was denied July 12,
2006, S143928.


                              51 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In re the Marriage of HELEN and JOSEPH SAMMUT, JR.  HELEN
            SAMMUT, Plaintiff and Respondent, v. JOSEPH SAMMUT, JR.,
                            Defendant and Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 45255

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                 Division Three

            103 Cal. App. 3d 557; 163 Cal. Rptr. 193; 1980 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1601


                                 March 20, 1980

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of San Mateo County, No. 132203, Allan J.
Bollhoffer, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1) Income Taxes § 14--Returns--Disclosure--Privilege.  --The privilege against
disclosure of income tax returns is a judicially created rule.

(2) Income Taxes § 14--Returns--Disclosure--Privilege--Spousal Support
Proceedings.  --No exception to the judicially created privilege against
disclosure of income tax returns was applicable in proceedings to modify an
interlocutory judgment of divorce by increasing the wife's spousal support,
where there was no indication that the wife intentionally relinquished her
privilege of confidentiality, where the nature of the law suit was not
inconsistent with the continued assertion of the privilege, and where there were
no public policy considerations which would permit discovery of income tax
returns in litigation between former spouses in spousal support modification
proceedings.

(3) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69--Property Rights of Parties--
Support of Other Party--Modification--Change of Conditions.  --In spousal
support modification proceedings, there was sufficient evidence of changed
conditions to warrant an increase in spousal support, and the trial court did
not abuse its discretion in modifying the spousal support award, where the
original support sum was set at $ 200 a month because the husband was putting
most of the profits from the family business back into the corporation rather
than taking a large salary, and where, as a result of income subsequently
received by the husband from an inheritance, he no longer had a cash problem and
was able to meet his wife's needs.

(4) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 33--Pendente Lite Orders--Attorney's
Fees and Costs--Right to Fees and Costs.  --In modification of spousal support
proceedings, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in awarding the wife
attorney fees where the wife's financial declaration showed her expenses
exceeded her income, while the husband's ability to pay the fees and costs was
clear. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, an appellate court assumes
that the attorney fees and costs were properly evaluated. Such an award is
addressed to the sound discretion of the trial court and its determination will
not be disturbed on appeal absent a clear showing of abuse.

COUNSEL: MacInnis & Donner and James Martin MacInnis for Defendant and
Appellant.

Schapiro & Thorn and Suzie S. Thorn for Plaintiff and Respondent.

Neil J. Christal for Appellant.

Edward A. Friend for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Scott, J., with White, P. J., and Rhodes, J., + concurring.

+   Assigned by the Chairperson of the Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: SCOTT

OPINION

     Joseph Sammut, Jr., appeals from an order modifying his interlocutory
judgment of divorce from Helen, increasing her spousal support, and awarding
attorney's fees to the wife.

   Appellant contends that the court erred in denying his request to inspect
copies of respondent wife's state and federal income tax returns for several
years immediately prior to the modification hearing.  We conclude that in a
proceeding for the modification of a spousal support award, the federal and
state income tax returns of the parties are privileged and are not discoverable
absent an agreement by the parties to the contrary.

   We will defer a discussion of the facts until we reach appellant's contention
that there was not substantial evidence to support the spousal support
modification order.

   Revenue and Taxation Code section 19282 provides: "Except as otherwise
provided in this article, it is a misdemeanor for the Franchise Tax Board or any
member thereof, or any deputy, agent, clerk, or other officer or employee of the
state (including its political subdivisions), or any former officer or employee
or other individual, who in the course of his or her employment or duty has or
had access to returns, reports, or documents required under this part, to
disclose or make known in any manner information as to the amount of income or
any particulars set forth or disclosed therein." In Webb v. Standard Oil Co.
(1957) 49 Cal.2d 509, 513 [319 P.2d 621], the California Supreme Court stated
that inasmuch as the purpose of the statute is to encourage "a taxpayer to make
full and truthful declarations in his return, without fear that his statements
will be revealed or used against him for other purposes," the prohibition
effectively creates a privilege, "and the privilege should not be nullified by
permitting third parties to obtain the information by  adopting the indirect
procedure of demanding copies of the tax returns." The court applied the
privilege to both state and federal income tax forms because "forcing disclosure
of the information in the federal tax return would be equivalent to forcing
disclosure of the state returns and would operate to defeat the purposes of the
state statute." ( Id., at pp. 513-514.)  The privilege against disclosure of
income tax returns is recognized as a judicially created rule.  ( Wilson v.
Superior Court (1976) 63 Cal.App.3d 825 [134 Cal.Rptr. 130]; Miller v.  Superior
Court (1977) 71 Cal.App.3d 145 [139 Cal.Rptr. 521].)

   In Sav-On Drugs, Inc. v. Superior Court (1975) 15 Cal.3d 1 [123 Cal.Rptr.
283, 538 P.2d 739], after discussing the privilege created by a similar section
(Rev. & Tax. Code, § 7056), the court acknowledged that there may be
circumstances under which discovery of tax returns would be permissible, when it
stated (at p. 8): "It may be noted in conclusion that no attempt has been made
herein to define the full ambit of the privilege considered above, nor are we
called upon to determine whether under other circumstances discovery of tax
returns and records would be permissible." Thus, the court laid the foundation
for "judicially created [exceptions] to the judicially created rule." ( Miller
v. Superior Court, supra, 71 Cal.App.3d at p. 148.)  Appellant urges here that a
person should be able to obtain the income tax returns of a former spouse
incident to a spousal support modification hearing as an exception to the
judicially created privilege.

   Courts have held that the privilege is waived or does not apply where (1)
there is an intentional relinquishment ( Crest Catering Co. v. Superior Court
(1965) 62 Cal.2d 274, 278 [42 Cal.Rptr. 110, 398 P.2d 150]), (2) the "gravamen
of [the] lawsuit is so inconsistent with the continued assertion of the
taxpayer's privilege as to compel the conclusion that the privilege has in fact
been waived" ( Wilson v. Superior Court, supra, 63 Cal.App.3d at p. 830), or (3)
a public policy greater than that of confidentiality of tax returns is involved
( Miller v. Superior Court, supra, 71 Cal.App.3d at p. 149).

   It appears that neither the first nor the second circumstance exists here
which would give rise to a waiver of the privilege.  There is no indication that
the wife intentionally relinquished her privilege of confidentiality. There was
no agreement to that effect at the time of the property settlement and the
spousal support agreement made incident to the interlocutory decree. No other
circumstances appear to us or are  urged by the parties which would suggest an
intentional relinquishment of the privilege.

   Nor does the second circumstance, as discussed in Wilson, supra, pertain to a
spousal support modification proceeding.  In Wilson, such a finding was made
where a taxpayer brought suit against the accountant who allegedly had
negligently and improperly handled certain tax problems for her.  Pointing out
that the plaintiff's complaint "placed in issue the existence and the content of
her tax returns and the tax consequences of the computations thereon," the court
held that the lawsuit was inconsistent with continued assertion of the privilege
and that the privilege was therefore waived. (63 Cal.App.3d at p. 830.) That
case is not applicable here, where the wife's income tax returns were not at
issue.

   Appellant's contention rests on the assertion that there is a public policy
greater than that of confidentiality of tax returns in a case where there is a
dispute as to spousal support in modification proceedings.  Appellant relies
principally on the rationale of Miller v. Superior Court, supra, 71 Cal.App.3d
145. In Miller, a wife sought to enforce payment of child support. She declared
that her former husband was $ 6,340 in arrears.  Husband testified that he was
unable to provide any support for his three children.  However, husband opposed
wife's motion for order for production and inspection of federal and state tax
returns filed by husband for the past six years.  The court held that the policy
favoring the confidentiality of tax returns "must give way to the greater public
policy of enforcing child support obligations" (p. 149).  However, in arriving
at this conclusion, the Miller court noted that subsequent to the decision in
Webb, the Legislature enacted Revenue and Taxation Code section 19286.5, which
provides that the Director of Social Services or deputy directors may inspect
income tax records of applicants or recipients of assistance and the responsible
relatives of such applicants or recipients in order to verify or determine the
eligibility or entitlement of an applicant for, or recipient  of, public social
services or the obligation of a responsible relative.  The court concluded:
"Although the children in the instant enforcement proceeding are not recipients
of public social services, and thus are denied access to tax return information
which may be disclosed to a public agency, the same policy considerations apply
no less to parties attempting to enforce child support obligations by private
means in order that the children who stand to benefit thereby may not become
public charges." ( Id., at  p.  149.) It is clear that the Miller court had a
legislative enactment directing its path to a conclusion that in child support
cases, public policy favored disclosure of income tax records.  No such
legislative enactment reflects a similar legislative disposition in spousal
support cases.  We also note that the Miller court was careful to circumscribe
the limits of their holding when they stated: "Our decision is limited to the
narrow issue of the assertion of the privilege of nondisclosure of income tax
returns in the context of proceedings to enforce child support obligations" (at
p. 149).

   The most recent tax return privilege case, In re Marriage of Brown (1979) 99
Cal.App.3d 702 [160 Cal.Rptr. 524], lends some guidance.  In that case, a former
husband sought an order modifying an interlocutory divorce decree so as to
require the former wife to pay child support. The former husband sought the
production of income tax returns filed by the wife's present husband.  The court
pointed out that the Miller court had carefully limited its decision, as we have
quoted above, and concluded that the Miller rationale did not apply to this
situation because the former husband was not seeking to enforce payment of
arrearage under an existing order for child support, but was seeking to modify
the interlocutory decree. The court further stated that the public interest in
preservation of the marital relationship enunciated in the spousal privilege
barred disclosure of the present husband's tax returns.  As to this latter
consideration, we observe the same result can occur in a Miller type case.
Hence, that inhibiting factor does not appear significant to us.  We are
unpersuaded, however, that there are any real factors upon which to predicate
the nonexistence of the privilege in the instant case.  The Legislature has
evidenced a greater public interest in assuring adequate child support as
opposed to spousal support. (See, e.g., Civ. Code, § 4701 [providing for
mandatory assignment of wages of defaulting spouse where child support payments
are in arrears for a certain amount], and § 4811 [providing for modification or
revocation of child support orders at the discretion of the court even when
there has been an agreement between the parents].) Furthermore, there appear to
be ample discovery methods available to ascertain income of former spouses which
can be pursued, either in support of or in opposition to a motion to modify
support.  We conclude, therefore, that there are no public policy considerations
which would permit discovery of income tax returns in litigation between former
spouses in spousal support modification proceedings.

     Appellant next contends that the evidence is insufficient to support the
modification ordered by the court.  The parties separated in  September of 1966,
after 26 years of marriage. They were divorced in February of 1968, after having
entered into a marital settlement agreement.  The settlement agreement also
included their two adult sons as additional contracting parties.  The husband
agreed to pay the wife $ 200 a month spousal support, which sum was subject to
modification by the court upon a change of circumstances.  The parties owned a
business known as Artichoke Enterprises, Inc., the stock shares of which were
divided equally.  The wife agreed to sell her shares to her sons at the rate of
$ 400 per month, the precise value of the shares to be determined each year by a
certain formula.  In consideration of the wife's agreement to sell her shares to
her sons, the husband agreed to transfer all of his shares in the business in
trust to the children, reserving for himself all voting rights and powers in
connection with the shares of stock during his lifetime.  In addition to spousal
support, the buy-out income of $ 400 per month, and some $ 200 per month in
dividends, the wife received $ 600  per month in salary from the corporation.
She continued to work for the business in a clerical capacity.  Her net monthly
income was $ 637.90.  Her total monthly expenditures were $ 1,451.29.  The court
ordered spousal support increased by $ 600 per month, to a total of $ 800.  In
addition to his income from the business in the amount of $ 1,840, the husband
received $ 5,618 per month in dividends as the beneficiary of a life estate, the
proceeds of an inheritance from husband's parents subsequent to the divorce.
Husband contends that there is no substantial evidence to support the finding of
changed circumstances.  "The change of circumstance which authorizes a court to
modify a support order means a change in the circumstances of the respective
parties, i.e., a reduction or increase in the husband's ability to pay and/or an
increase or decrease in the wife's needs." ( In re Marriage of Cobb (1977) 68
Cal.App.3d 855, 860-861 [137 Cal.Rptr.  670].) In determining such ability or
need, the court must consider, among other factors: "(1) The earning capacity
and needs of each spouse; (2) The obligations and assets, including the separate
property, of each; (3) The duration of the marriage; . . . (7) The standard of
living of the parties; (8) Any other factors which it deems just and equitable."
(Civ.  Code, § 4801, subd. (a).)

   There was evidence that the original support sum was set at $ 200 a month
because the husband was putting most of the profits back into the corporation
rather than taking a large salary. As a result, he had insufficient cash for the
business to pay more than $ 200 a month.  The wife's decision to forego higher
spousal support was in part influenced by her interest in maintaining the value
of the community property  shares of stock in the business.  As a result of the
income from the husband's inheritance, the husband no longer had a cash problem
and was now adequately able to meet the wife's needs.  This appears to be a
sufficient showing of a change in circumstances to justify a modification of the
order.  The increase, although substantial, does not amount to an abuse of
discretion.  Appellant incorrectly includes in his argument as to spousal
support received by the wife, the $ 400 a month from the buy-out agreement.  The
wife received her stock pursuant to the division of the community property;
hence, the $ 400 a month represented a sale of her capital assets.  Appellant
vaguely attempts to argue that the total financial arrangement made at the time
of the interlocutory decree fixed the rights and liabilities of the parties
permanently.  It is clear, however, that the agreement provides for a
modification of spousal support on change of circumstances.  Therefore, the
assertion that the increase in spousal support constitutes a departure from the
structure of the original agreement is without foundation.  We conclude that the
court did not abuse its discretion in modifying the spousal support award.

     Appellant's final contention is that the trial judge's award of attorney's
fees and costs to respondent was not supported by substantial evidence.  We find
no merit to the contention.  The wife's financial declaration shows her expenses
exceed her income.  On the other hand, the husband's ability to pay attorney's
fees and costs is clear.  In the absence of evidence to the contrary, this court
assumes that the attorney's fees and costs were properly evaluated. Such award
is addressed to the sound discretion of the trial court, and absent a clear
showing of abuse, the trial court's determination will not be disturbed. ( In re
Marriage of Harris (1976) 65 Cal.App.3d 143 [134 Cal.Rptr. 891].)

   Judgment is affirmed.


                              52 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of JEANNE and ROBERT H. ANINGER.  ROBERT
              H. ANINGER, Appellant, v. JEANNE ANINGER, Respondent

                                  No. B038780

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Seven

            220 Cal. App. 3d 230; 269 Cal. Rptr. 388; 1990 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 462


                                  May 11, 1990

PRIOR-HISTORY:      Superior Court of Los Angeles County, No. D112742, Abraham
Gorenfeld, Temporary Judge. *

*   Pursuant to California Constitution, article VI, section 21.

COUNSEL: Allen E. Botney for Appellant.

Jack I. Esensten for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Johnson, J., with Lillie, P. J., and Woods (Fred), J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: JOHNSON

OPINION

     Robert H. Aninger appeals from an order increasing his spousal and child
support payments, dividing the proceeds of the sale of the family residence
between him and his ex-wife and ordering him to pay the attorney's fees of his
ex-wife incurred in the proceeding.

   We reverse the order as to the modification of spousal support and modify the
award of attorney's fees.  In all other respects we affirm.

   Facts and Proceedings Below

   The Aningers' marriage was dissolved in September 1984.  The judgment of
dissolution incorporated the terms of a marital settlement agreement between the
parties covering support payments and sale of the family residence, among other
things.  As to support, the agreement called for Mr. Aninger to pay family
support in the sum of $ 290 per week ($ 1,256 per month) from August 1984
through August 1989 and $ 174 per week ($ 753 per month) from September 1989
through June 1994 at which time the support would be reduced to zero with the
court retaining jurisdiction over spousal support without any termination date.
As to sale of the family residence, the agreement provided the residence would
be listed for sale no later than June 1989.  If Ms. Aninger elected to sell the
residence before June 1987, the proceeds were to be divided equally between the
parties.  If she elected to sell between June 1987 and June 1988, the proceeds
were to be divided 45 percent to Ms. Aninger and 55 percent to Mr. Aninger.
And, if Ms. Aninger elected to sell between June 1988 and June 1989 the proceeds
were to be divided 40 percent to her and 60 percent to Mr. Aninger.

   In March 1988, Ms. Aninger petitioned for an order increasing the family
support payments to $ 750 per month per child ($ 1,500 per month)  and $ 750 per
month spousal support (a total of $ 2,250 per month).  She also requested the
court to divide the proceeds from the sale of the family residence 45 percent to
her and 55 percent to Mr. Aninger.  In support of the modification, Ms. Aninger
alleged the two minor children are older and their needs are greater than when
the original order was made in September 1984 and Mr. Aninger "has much greater
income and earning power now."

   The Aningers were married for 20 years and had 2 children, Susan born in
November 1970 and Michael born in February 1976.  Mr. Aninger's income and
expense declaration showed net monthly disposable income of $ 4,744 and monthly
expenses of $ 4,007 not counting his support payments.  Ms. Aninger's income and
expense declaration showed a net monthly disposable income of $ 1,198 plus $
1,255 per month family support payments  from Mr. Aninger for a total of $ 2,453
per month; her monthly expenses totalled $ 2,689.

   At the hearing, Ms. Aninger testified her income and expenses had both
increased since filing her financial statement.  Her new gross income was $
22,500 per year which the court calculated as $ 1,503 net per month.  The family
residence had been sold and she had purchased a condominium for $ 280,000 using
$ 140,000 of the proceeds from sale of the family residence as a down payment.
Her mortgage payment was now $ 1,002 per month plus $ 190 a month condominium
fee and $ 233 per month property tax.

    In support of her claim to 45 percent of the proceeds from the sale of the
residence Ms. Aninger introduced a letter written by her attorney to Mr. Aninger
dated May 27, 1988, accompanied by real estate listing documents for the family
residence. The letter stated, in part, "It is necessary that the documents be
signed and the listing effectuated pursuant to the terms of the Court Order as
to sales between June of 1987 and June of 1988."

   Ms. Aninger's counsel presented documentation showing attorney's fees of $
6,500 plus costs of $ 164.50.

   After receiving the evidence and hearing argument of counsel, the trial court
modified the support order to $ 629 per month per child ($ 1,258 per month) and
$ 705 per month for spousal support to continue until Mr. Aninger's death, Ms.
Aninger's remarriage or further order of court.  The court ordered the proceeds
from the sale of the family residence divided 55 percent to Mr. Aninger and 45
percent to Ms. Aninger.  Mr. Aninger was ordered to pay Ms. Aninger's attorney's
fees and costs in the sum of $ 6,664.50.

   Mr. Aninger filed a timely appeal.

   Discussion

I. There Was No Showing of a Change of Circumstances to Justify Modification of
the Spousal Support Order.

     Orders modifying support will not be set aside on appeal without a clear
showing of abuse of discretion. ( In re Marriage of Hopwood (1989) 214
Cal.App.3d 1604, 1607 [263 Cal.Rptr. 401].) Although the trial court possesses
broad discretion in modifying spousal support orders, ( In re Marriage of
Morrison (1978) 20 Cal.3d 437, 454 [143 Cal.Rptr. 139, 573 P.2d 41]), it abuses
that discretion when it modifies the order in the absence of a "material change
of circumstances" ( Hopwood, supra, 214 Cal.App.3d at pp. 1607-1608),  or where
its findings are not supported by substantial evidence. ( In re Marriage of
Norvall (1987) 192 Cal.App. 3d 1047, 1060 [237 Cal.Rptr. 770].)

     Where, as here, the record lacks express findings of fact or a statement of
decision all intendments favor the ruling below and we must assume the trial
court made whatever findings are necessary to sustain its order.  Of course,
each implied finding must be supported by substantial evidence. The evidence is
viewed in the light most favorable to respondent who is entitled to the benefit
of every reasonable presumption.  We accept as true all evidence favorable to
respondent and discard contrary evidence as unaccepted by the trier of fact.  (
In re Marriage of Catalano (1988) 204 Cal.App.3d 543, 548 [251 Cal.Rptr. 370].)

     The Aningers entered into a marital settlement agreement covering spousal
support, and this agreement was "accepted, reviewed, and approved" by the trial
court and incorporated into the judgment of dissolution. Such a marital
settlement agreement is a contract between the parties.  (See, e.g., Civ. Code,
§ 4811, subd. (b); In re Marriage of Hentz (1976) 57 Cal.App.3d 899, 901 [129
Cal.Rptr. 678]; In re Marriage of Rabkin (1986) 179 Cal.App.3d 1071, 1081 [225
Cal.Rptr. 219]; Modglin v. Modglin (1966) 246 Cal.App.2d 411, 415 [54 Cal.Rptr.
582].)  Where the agreement permits modifications, those modifications require a
showing of a change in circumstances.  ( Hentz, supra, 57 Cal.App.3d at p. 901;
In re Marriage of Norvall, supra, 192 Cal.App.3d at p. 1063, fn. 8.) Moreover,
in determining what constitutes a change in circumstances the trial court is
bound to give effect to the intent and reasonable expectations of the parties as
expressed in the agreement.  ( Modglin, supra, 246 Cal.App.2d at p. 415; Hentz,
supra, 57 Cal.App.3d at p. 901; In re Marriage of Zlatnik (1988) 197 Cal.App.3d
1284, 1287 [243 Cal.Rptr. 454]; In re Harbach (1987) 195 Cal.App.3d 629, 634
[240 Cal.Rptr. 698]; Rabkin, supra, 179 Cal.App.3d at p. 1080.)

    Thus, the trial court's discretion to modify the spousal support order is
constrained by the terms of the marital settlement agreement. The court may not
simply reevaluate the spousal support award.  In Modglin, supra, 246 Cal.App.2d
at page 415, the court explained: "We have no right to assume that the parties
when they made their stipulation for alimony of $ 200 per month for one year,
and $ 100 per month thereafter, did not know precisely what they were doing.  We
have no way of knowing what multitude of factors, or even what single
consideration, entered into those stipulations.  There is no suggestion, even
remote, that any of them were illegally induced.

   "In these circumstances, even though respondent's business has spread beyond
the County of San Bernardino and his business and net earnings are  probably
geometrically increased over and above what they were at the time of the
interlocutory decree, we do not feel justified, on the showing here made, in
reopening the divorce litigation, and in effect setting aside a bargain
originally made in open court under the supervision of a superior court judge."

   The decisions in Hentz, Rabkin and Harbach, supra, are illustrative of the
court's duty to give effect to the parties' expectations as reflected in the
marital settlement agreement.

   In the Hentz case, the husband and wife entered into a marital settlement
agreement providing the husband would support the wife until he died or she
remarried.  Before the occurrence of either event the husband initiated
proceedings to modify the support order by terminating spousal support. The
appellate court affirmed denial of the modification stating: "The court, by
including the stipulation in its own decree, presumes that the parties arrived
at a fair support award, after arm's-length negotiations, that took into
consideration all of the circumstances as they then existed.  The court
thereafter should not permit a party to change this contractual arrangement,
absent changed circumstances, as it would allow a party to repudiate and change
a legal contract for no reason at all.  Because marital support provisions in
property settlement agreements are modifiable by law . . . it is necessary to
give some legal protection to the original agreement, otherwise it is
meaningless.  The 'changed circumstances' rule provides this protection." (57
Cal.App.3d at pp. 901-902) (Citation omitted.)

   In Rabkin, the court reversed an order which reduced the monthly spousal
support the husband had agreed to pay because the reduction was not for a reason
contemplated in the agreement; in fact it violated the terms of the agreement.
The parties had agreed the wife's spousal support would be $ 1,500 per month and
the sale of the family residence would not constitute grounds for a change in
spousal support. Nevertheless, the trial court granted the husband a reduction
in spousal support based, in part, on the income the wife derived from sale of
the family residence. Reversing the order, the appellate court pointed out: "As
for the sale of the family residence and wife's resulting right to receive
approximately $ 1,800 in monthly mortgage payments, such right constituted the
single major asset awarded to wife as her one-half share of the community
property. The parties' agreement, which was very carefully drafted by skilled
attorneys, provided that wife would receive her share of the community property
and spousal support. It makes no more sense to reduce wife's spousal support
because she received her rightful share of the community property than it would
to increase wife's spousal support because husband received his rightful share
of the community property. . . . In any event, the parties' agreement expressly
provided that the sale of the marital residence could not be considered a change
in circumstances justifying a modification of spousal support. " (179 Cal.App.3d
at p. 1081.) (Italics in original, fn. omitted.)

    In Harbach, the court affirmed a modification extending by four months the
termination date for spousal support agreed to by the parties.  The court
reasoned: "The decree here, taken as a whole, contemplated Nancy's attainment of
an advanced degree.  The time span estimated by the parties within which the
degree could be obtained fell short by four months.  The court made a finding
Lee and Nancy both contemplated the degree would be awarded by December 31,
1986.  In construing the modification decree, the court took into account this
mutual mistake of the parties and extended the spousal support by four months to
effectuate the intent of the parties.  That retained jurisdiction supports the
extension of the term to carry out the intent of the parties as expressed in
paragraph 7." (195 Cal.App.3d at p. 634.)

     The policy of this state is to encourage a supported spouse to achieve
self-support as quickly as possible and to the extent of her or his ability.
This policy is reflected in Civil Code section 4801 which provides the court, in
setting spousal support, shall consider, among other things, the "marketable
skills of the supported spouse" and the "ability of the supported spouse to
engage in gainful employment." The policy of encouraging self-support is also
evident in numerous cases dealing with questions of spousal support including,
for example, In re Marriage of McElwee (1988) 197 Cal.App.3d 902, 911 [243
Cal.Rptr. 179]; In re Marriage of Sheridan (1983) 140 Cal.App.3d 742, 749 [189
Cal.Rptr. 622]; and In re Marriage of Brantner (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 416, 419-421
[136 Cal.Rptr. 635]. (See also Hogoboom & King, Cal. Practice Guide, Family Law
(1989) at [para.] 6:113, p. 6106.)

     In the case before us the parties agreed to a "step-down" order decreasing
support at specified intervals.  (See, e.g., In re Marriage of Smith (1978) 79
Cal.App.3d 725, 739 [145 Cal.Rptr. 205].) These orders are fashioned to
encourage self-support and rest on the assumption the supported spouse will have
an increased ability to provide her own support at the time of each step-down. (
In re Marriage of Sheridan, supra, 140 Cal.App.3d at p. 748.) This assumption by
the parties in entering into the agreement provides the basis for determining
whether there has been a change in circumstances.  If these assumptions fail to
materialize on schedule, despite reasonable efforts on the part of the supported
spouse, the court may find a change of circumstances justifying modification of
the support order. (See Sheridan, supra, 140 Cal.App.3d at p. 748; In re
Marriage of Schaffer (1984) 158 Cal.App.3d 930, 935  [205 Cal.Rptr. 88]; In re
Marriage of Hoffmeister (1987) 191 Cal.App.3d 351, 365 [236 Cal.Rptr. 543].)

     The only change in circumstances that would open the door to modification
of Ms. Aninger's support order would be a showing that despite her reasonable
efforts she was unable to support herself.  Other factors such as Mr. Aninger's
salary were irrelevant.  ( Schaffer, supra, 158 Cal.App.3d at p. 934.) These
factors, presumably, were considered by Ms. Aninger and her counsel in
negotiating the marital settlement agreement. Now, four years later, the trial
court could not simply discard the negotiated agreement and design a new one
more to its liking.  A change in circumstances must first be found.  (Cf.  In re
Marriage of Norvall, supra, 192 Cal.App.3d at p. 1063, fn. 8; Modglin v.
Modglin, supra, 246 Cal.App.2d at p. 415.)

   Ms. Aninger neither alleged nor proved any change in circumstances affecting
her ability to become self-supporting. Her application alleges the changes in
circumstances to be: "[t]he minor children are older and their needs are greater
than when the order was made in 1984" and Mr. Aninger "has much greater income
and earning power now." Neither of these alleged changes in circumstance were
relevant to her support.  The needs of the children are a separate issue.  The
fact her ex-husband's income has increased had no bearing on her ability to earn
a living (see Schaffer, supra, 158 Cal.App.3d at p. 934),  and is irrelevant
absent a showing, not made here, the initial support order was inadequate to
meet her needs due to Mr. Aninger's inability to pay.  (See, e.g., In re
Marriage of Hopwood, supra, 214 Cal.App.3d at p. 1607.) Furthermore, the
evidence showed Ms. Aninger's employment income was increasing.  In fact, it
increased $ 300 per month between the time she applied for modification and the
hearing on her request.

     The only factor adversely affecting Ms. Aninger's ability to meet her needs
was an increase of $ 783 per month in her housing cost resulting from her
purchase of a $ 280,000 condominium. When Ms. Aninger lived in the family
residence her housing costs were $ 642 per month.  When the residence was sold,
Ms. Aninger received approximately $ 166,000 and another $ 19,000 was held in
escrow pending resolution of the dispute over the distribution percentages.
(This amount was subsequently awarded to Ms. Aninger.) Ms. Aninger used $
140,000 of the proceeds for a down payment on the condominium resulting in a
mortgage payment of $ 1,002 per month, a condominium fee of $ 190 a month and
property tax of $ 233 per month.

   It cannot be said the increased housing cost was an unanticipated occurrence
justifying an increase in spousal support. The parties agreed the family
residence would be listed for sale no later than June 1989.  Thus, one of the
assumptions built into the parties' settlement agreement was that Ms. Aninger
would be moving into a new residence sometime after the dissolution of the
marriage. Presumably this circumstance was considered by the parties in
establishing the support level.  (See, e.g., Bratnober v. Bratnober (1957) 48
Cal.2d 259, 262-263 [309 P.2d 441]; Hentz, supra, 57 Cal.App.3d at p. 901;
Rabkin, supra, 179 Cal.App.3d at p. 1080.) Furthermore, it would defeat the
intent and reasonable expectations of the parties that Ms. Aninger would achieve
self-support if the court allowed her to manufacture a change in circumstances
by going into debt far beyond her means.  Ms. Aninger received $ 185,000 from
the sale of the family residence to use toward purchase of a new residence.  It
is beyond doubt Ms. Aninger could have outright purchased adequate living
quarters for that amount of money or made a sufficient down payment to bring her
housing expense within her means.

   By undertaking a debt beyond her reasonable means to pay presently or in the
foreseeable future, Ms. Aninger failed to make a reasonable effort to become
self-supporting. Such a failure does not constitute a change of circumstances
justifying an increase in spousal support. (Cf.  Sheridan, supra, 140 Cal.App.3d
at p. 749; In re Marriage of Berland (1989) 215 Cal.App.3d 1257, 1262-1264 [264
Cal.Rptr. 210].)

   Even assuming a $ 280,000 condominium is more in keeping with Ms. Aninger's
standard of living during marriage than a $ 185,000 condominium, the settlement
agreement did not contemplate Ms. Aninger would be able to maintain her former
standard of living.  The level of support agreed to and its termination after 10
years clearly does not contemplate at the end of 10 years Ms. Aninger, a
secretary, would be earning as much as Mr. Aninger, a corporate executive.

     In the case before us, the trial court ignored the threshold question of
whether there had been a change in circumstances and proceeded to remake the
support order according to its own ideas of what was fair and reasonable.  "When
a court remakes a bargain at the request of one party for no other reason than
that party's later dissatisfaction with the agreement, a court not only
diminishes the bargaining process itself, but strays from the judicial restraint
essential to a rational judicial process." ( Harbach, supra, 195 Cal.App.3d at
p. 636 (Wiener, J., dis.).)

   Here, Jeanne and Robert Aninger negotiated an agreement on spousal support
based on their views of what was in their best interests.  There being no
showing of a failure of the expectations underlying that agreement, the  trial
court was without authority to remake the agreement in  ways inconsistent with
the expectations and intent of the parties.

II. The Court Acted Within Its Authority in Bringing The Child Support Up to the
"Agnos" Level.

     Modification of a child support order stands on entirely different footing
from modification of a spousal support order. In adopting the Agnos Child
Support Standards Act of 1984 (Civ. Code, §§ 4720- 4732) (hereafter Agnos) the
Legislature recognized some child support orders entered before its effective
date, such as the Aningers', might not meet the Agnos minimum standards.
Therefore, the Legislature provided Agnos itself "constitutes a change in
circumstances for the purpose of allowing the modification of child support
orders entered prior to July 1, 1985." (Civ. Code, § 4730; and see Norvall,
supra, 192 Cal.App.3d at pp. 1051-1052.) Furthermore, even before Agnos, Civil
Code section 4811, subdivision (a) provided "even when there has been an
agreement between the parties on the subject of child support, [such support]
may be modified or revoked at any time at the discretion of the court." Finally,
quite apart from legislation, case law has long put the child's interests before
the contractual expectations of the parents.  ( In re Marriage of Catalano,
supra, 204 Cal.App.3d at p. 552, and cases cited therein.) A parent cannot
improvidently contract away her child's right to support.  ( Singer v. Singer
(1970) 7 Cal.App.3d 807, 812 [87 Cal.Rptr. 42].)

     In the case before us the child support and spousal support were lumped
together in one undifferentiated sum of $ 290 per week ($ 1,256 per month).
However, that sum was scheduled to go down to $ 174 per week in September 1989,
after Susan's 18th birthday and her anticipated graduation from high school.
Thus, the trial court could reasonably infer the difference of $ 116 per week
must represent support for one child.  Under this assumption, Mr. Aninger was
paying less than the Agnos minimum according to the court's unchallenged
calculation.

   We find no abuse of discretion in the court's child support order.

III. The Allocation of the Proceeds From the Sale of the House Is Supported by
Substantial Evidence.

     Under the terms of the marital settlement agreement, Ms. Aninger was
entitled to 45 percent of the net proceeds from sale of the family residence "if
[she] elects to sell" between June 1987 and June 1988.  Only the election to
sell, not the sale itself, had to occur within the June 1987 - June 1988 period.
The agreement did not specify any particular means by  which Ms. Aninger was to
manifest her election to sell.  The only evidence of her election to sell within
the June 1987 - June 1988 period was a letter from her counsel to Mr. Aninger
transmitting various real estate listing documents and stating, "It is necessary
that the documents be signed and the listing effectuated pursuant to the terms
of the Court Order as to sales between June of 1987 and June of 1988." The
letter was dated May 27, 1988.

   The trial court found this letter and transmittal of the listing documents
was sufficient evidence Ms. Aninger had elected to sell the residence and her
election had occurred prior to June 1988.  The evidence was sufficient to
support the trial court's finding.

IV. The Court Abused its Discretion in Ordering Mr. Aninger to Pay All of Ms.
Aninger's Attorney's Fees.

     The decisions whether and in what amount to award attorney's fees and costs
are in the broad discretion of the trial court and will not be reversed on
appeal unless a clear showing of abuse of discretion is made.  ( In re Marriage
of Frick (1986) 181 Cal.App.3d 997, 1022 [226 Cal.Rptr. 766].) This is not to
imply the trial court's decision need not satisfy any standard and is governed
only by the individual judge's particular notions of what is fair and
reasonable.  Since 1985, Civil Code section  4370.5 has required the trial
court, in deciding whether to award attorney's fees, to consider: "(1) the need
for the award to enable each party . . . to have sufficient financial resources
to adequately present his or her case . . . [and] (2) [t]he extent to which the
conduct of each party and the attorney furthers or frustrates the policy of the
law to promote settlement of litigation, and . . . cooperation between the
parties and attorneys." The attorney's fee award in this case is unjustifiable
under either consideration.

     The purpose of a fee award is to assure a party has adequate resources to
properly litigate the controversy.  ( In re Marriage of Sullivan (1984) 37
Cal.3d 762, 768 [209 Cal.Rptr. 354, 691 P.2d 1020].) Civil Code section 4370
states a court may make an award of attorney's fees and costs "as may be
reasonably necessary for . . . maintaining or defending the proceeding . . . ."
Section 4370.5 directs the court to consider "[t]he need for the award to enable
each party . . . to have sufficient financial resources to adequately present
his or her case . . . ." Thus, except in cases of bad faith discussed below, the
threshold question is whether the party needs the award to assure her a
meaningful opportunity to maintain or defend the proceeding.  ". . .
California's public policy favors providing 'a parity between spouses in their
ability to obtain legal representation.'" ( In re Marriage of Green (1989) 213
Cal.App.3d 14, 27 [261 Cal.Rptr. 294], quoting from In re Marriage of Hatch
(1985) 169 Cal.App.3d 1213, 1215-1216  [215 Cal.Rptr. 789]; and see In re
Marriage of Harrison (1986) 179 Cal.Ap.3d 1216, 1231 [225 Cal.Rptr. 234]; In re
Marriage of Lister (1984) 152 Cal.App.3d 411, 420 [199 Cal.Rptr. 321]; and
Hoffmeister, supra, 191 Cal.App.3d at p. 366.) The foregoing statutes and cases
lead us to the conclusion if the party does not need an award of attorney's fees
and costs in order to "adequately present his or her case" it is an abuse of
discretion to award them notwithstanding the opposing party's ability to pay.
(Cf.  In re Marriage of Grinius (1985) 166 Cal.App.3d 1179, 1191 [212 Cal.Rptr.
803] [court did not abuse discretion in denying attorney's fees where before
trial both the wife and her attorney received $ 5,000 from the sale of community
property even though the husband had at least $ 340,000 in separate property].)

     Historically, the provisions of Civil Code section 4370 favored the wife
because she usually had less income and because of case law holding the wife
could not be required to "'"impair the capital of her separate estate in order
to defray her litigation costs."'" ( In re Marriage of Stephenson (1984) 162
Cal.App.3d 1057, 1090 [209 Cal.Rptr. 383] and cases cited therein.) However, in
1985 the Legislature adopted Civil Code section 4370.5, subdivision (c)
providing: "The court may order payment of the award from any type of property,
whether community or separate, principal or income." The intent of this
legislation was to overrule cases holding the court could not require the wife
to use the capital of her separate estate in order to defray her litigation
expenses.  (18 Cal. Law Revision Com. Rep. (Mar. 1985) p. 357.) We believe that
intent should be given effect in this case.

     Here the evidence shows Ms. Aninger has adequate means to meet her own
attorney's fees and costs.  At the time of the hearing she had at least $ 25,000
in the bank and she was awarded $ 19,000 by the court as additional proceeds
from the sale of the residence.  Thus her liquid assets were sufficient to meet
her attorney's fees and costs of $ 6,664.50.

   Ms. Aninger argues that regardless of her need, attorney's fees and costs
should be imposed on Mr. Aninger for refusal to attempt to settle her claim and
cooperate with her counsel.  (Civ. Code, § 4370.5, subd. (b)(2); In re Marriage
of Norton (1988) 206 Cal.App.3d 53, 57-59 [253 Cal.Rptr. 354].) Unlike Norton,
the trial court in this case made no finding Mr. Aninger or his counsel behaved
unreasonably and that the order to show cause should not have been brought, nor
is there any evidence Mr. Aninger harassed his former wife.  The only evidence
of a failure to cooperate was the failure of Mr. Aninger's  counsel to respond
to two letters from Ms. Aninger's counsel inviting settlement discussions
relative to modification of the child and spousal support. Given the fact we
have reversed the spousal support order on which Ms. Aninger's counsel appears
to have expended most of his  efforts, we cannot say Mr. Aninger acted
unreasonably in failing to compromise with his former wife on this issue.  And,
while Mr. Aninger, or his counsel, can be faulted for failing to at least
attempt to settle the child support and property distribution issues we do not
believe that failure was so blameworthy as to warrant sanctions in the full
amount of Ms. Aninger's attorney's fees.  (Cf.  Norton, supra, 206 Cal.App.3d at
p. 58.) Surely, the conduct of Mr. Aninger and his counsel is a far cry from the
conduct that warranted sanctions in Norton, ( id. at p. 59); In re Marriage of
Green, supra, 213 Cal.App.3d at pp. 27-29 and In re Marriage of Melone (1987)
193 Cal.App.3d 757, 765 [238 Cal.Rptr. 510]. Therefore, we modify the order by
reducing the attorney's fee award to $ 1,625.  ( Haldane v. Haldane (1962) 210
Cal.App.2d 587, 598 [26 Cal.Rptr. 670].)

V. Mr. Aninger's Appeal Is Not Frivolous.

     Even though we have ruled against him on some issues, Mr. Aninger's appeal
is not frivolous within the meaning of In re Marriage of Flaherty (1982) 31
Cal.3d 637, 650 [183 Cal.Rptr. 508, 646 P.2d 179]. It was not brought to harass
the respondent or delay the effect of an adverse judgment.  Nor are the issues
on which he lost "totally and completely without merit." ( Id. at p. 650.)

   The portion of the trial court's order modifying the amount and duration of
spousal support is reversed.  The portion of the trial court's order awarding
attorney's fees is modified to award $ 1,625.  In all other respects the order
is affirmed.  The parties are to bear their own costs on appeal.


                              53 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          JETER R. MATTHEWS, JR., Plaintiff and Appellant, v. NATALIE
                     O. MATTHEWS, Defendant and Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 17812

           Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

            74 Cal. App. 3d 683; 141 Cal. Rptr. 634; 1977 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1960


                                November 3, 1977

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Orange County, No. 132098, Mark A. Soden,
Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1a) (1b) (1c) (1d) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 78--Property
Settlement Agreements--Effect and Enforcement.  --In an action by a wife to
enforce a pre-1967 property settlement agreement, the trial court properly
determined that the agreement was integrated and ordered the husband to pay the
wife one-third of his military retirement income without requiring the wife to
prove changed circumstances, notwithstanding that the husband had previously
succeeded in having other spousal support provisions in the agreement modified.
The agreement provided for property division, child custody and support, and
spousal support payments of $ 80 per month, provided that, when the last child
reached majority, husband would pay one-third of his retirement income to wife
for life. Testimony of the wife indicated that the retirement pay provision had
been one of the factors that caused her to agree to the property division
provisions.

(2a) (2b) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 79--Property Settlement
Agreements--Modification and Revocation--Integrated Payments.  --An integrated
pre-1967 property settlement agreement provision for spousal support is
modifiable only if the agreement so stipulates or the parties consent.

(3) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 80--Property Settlement Agreements--
Modification and Revocation--Grounds--Changed Circumstances.  --Spousal support
provisions in a pre-1967 property settlement agreement are in the nature of
alimony and subject to modification upon a showing of changed circumstances
where the support provisions have been found to be severable from the property
distribution provisions.

(4) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 77--Property Settlement Agreements--
Severability of Terms--Jurisdiction to Determine.  --The question whether a
property settlement agreement is an integrated bargain may be determined in a
subsequent proceeding for modification of spousal support where the issue was
not resolved at the time the interlocutory divorce decree was entered.

(5) Judgments § 96--Res Judicata--Collateral Estoppel--Matters Concluded--
Necessity of Determination of Issue.  --The collateral estoppel aspect of res
judicata precludes parties from relitigating in a subsequent proceeding on a
different cause of action any issue which was actually and necessarily
determined in a former proceeding.

(6) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 77--Property Settlement Agreements--
Severability of Terms--Factors Considered.  --An agreement between a husband and
wife providing that the purpose of the parties is to reach a final settlement of
their rights and duties with respect to both property and support, that they
intend each provision to be in consideration for each of the other provisions,
and that they waive all rights arising out of the marital relationship except
those expressly set out in the agreement will be deemed conclusive evidence that
an integrated agreement was intended.

(7) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 79--Property Settlement Agreements--
Modification and Revocation--Integrated Agreements.  --The fact that a pre-1967
property settlement agreement provides for modifiable support provisions neither
destroys its integrated character nor permits the support provisions to be
modified contrary to the terms of the agreement.

COUNSEL: Myles R. Creed for Plaintiff and Appellant.

Bruce R. Fink for Defendant and Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Tamura, Acting P. J., with Kaufman and Morris, JJ.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: TAMURA

OPINION

     Husband appeals from an order directing payment of spousal support in
accordance with the terms of a pre-1967 marital property settlement agreement
incorporated in and made a part of the interlocutory decree. The central issue
is whether an order modifying spousal support, which order was made after entry
of the interlocutory decree, was res judicata on the question whether the
spousal support and division of property provisions of the settlement agreement
were severable or part of an integrated bargain.

   In January 1966, pursuant to a written stipulation of the parties, the
divorce action was heard as a default matter on the wife's cross-complaint and
an interlocutory decree was entered.  The decree approved, incorporated by
reference, and ordered the parties to comply with the terms of a property
settlement agreement which provided for division of property,  custody of the
children, and spousal and child support.  The decree also ordered spousal
support in language paralleling the provisions of the agreement.   The agreement
provided in pertinent part: "Husband shall pay to the Wife as and for her
support and maintenance the sum $ 80.00 per month, by military allotment,
commencing with the 1st day of September, 1965.  Such payments to continue each
month thereafter, but will terminate upon the death of either party, or the
remarriage of Wife; provided, however, that the support payable to Wife, after
the last of the said minor children marries, reaches majority, dies, becomes
self-supporting or enters the armed services, shall never be less than a sum
equal to 33 1/3% of Husband's United States Marine Corps retirement pay, if, at
that time Major Matthews has so retired or in any event a sum not less than 33
1/3% of the amount of retirement pay Husband would have received had he so
retired from the United States Marine Corps."

   In June 1971, the husband instituted show cause proceedings seeking
modification of spousal support on the ground of changed circumstances.
Following the hearing, the court denied the request and ordered the husband to
continue paying $ 80 per month as previously ordered.

   In February 1974, the husband again instituted show cause proceedings to be
relieved of paying spousal support. Following a contested hearing, the court
signed and filed an order dated April 1, 1974, reducing spousal support from $
80 per month to $ 1 per year and continuing at that rate until wife dies,
remarries or until further order of court.  No appeal was taken from that order
and it has long since become final.

   In December 1975, wife made a motion to compel husband to make spousal
support payments in accordance with the terms of the property settlement
agreement. She alleged the last child had been emancipated and under the terms
of the agreement she was entitled to at least one-third of husband's military
retirement pay. Following an evidentiary hearing, the judge entered a minute
order of his intended decision to  require husband to pay the wife, as spousal
support, one-third of his monthly retirement pay. Upon husband's request, the
court made findings of fact and conclusions of law.  The court concluded that
the property settlement agreement was an integrated bargain and that the
provisions for spousal support were made in consideration of the division of
property. Accordingly, the court entered an order adjudging that wife is
entitled to one-third of husband's monthly retirement pay. Husband appeals from
the order.

     Husband's major contention is that the court abused its discretion in
making the order without an adequate showing of changed circumstances.  The
contention is premised on the theory that the 1974 order reducing spousal
support from $ 80 per month to $ 1 per year was res judicata on the question
whether or not the property settlement agreement was of the integrated variety.
It is urged that the earlier order impliedly determined that the agreement was
severable and that, therefore, the spousal support order was subject to
modification only on proof of changed circumstances.

      Preliminarily we review the law governing modifiability of a spousal
support provision in a property settlement agreement executed, as this one was,
before the effective date of the 1967 amendment to former Civil Code section 139
. 1 Where an interlocutory decree of divorce orders spousal support in
accordance with the terms of a property settlement agreement, the modifiability
of the support order depends on the nature of the agreement.  ( Plumer v. Plumer
, 48 Cal.2d 820, 823 [313 P.2d 549]; Peirce v. Peirce, 243 Cal.App.2d 330, 334
[52 Cal.Rptr. 259]; Wise v. Wise, 228 Cal.App.2d 322, 325 [39 Cal.Rptr. 448];
Hoerner v. Superior Court, 182 Cal.App.2d 500, 504 [6 Cal.Rptr. 178].) If the
provisions for support and division of marital property are integrally
intertwined ( Plumer v. Plumer, supra, 48 Cal.2d 820, 824; Sprenger v. Superior
Court, 268 Cal.App.2d 857, 860, fn. 1 [74 Cal.Rptr. 638]; Levy v. Levy, 245
Cal.App.2d 341, 350 [53 Cal.Rptr. 790]), a spousal support order in an
interlocutory decree predicated upon such an agreement is not subject to
modification, except where the agreement so stipulates ( Plumer v. Plumer, supra
, 48 Cal.2d 820, 824, 825; Flynn v. Flynn, 42 Cal.2d 55, 61 [265 P.2d 865]; Levy
v. Levy, supra, 245 Cal.App.2d 341, 351;  Sprenger v. Superior Court, supra, 268
Cal.App.2d 857, 864), or the parties consent ( Plumer v. Plumer, supra, 48
Cal.2d 820, 824; Tremayne v. Striepeke, 262 Cal.App.2d 107, 112 [68 Cal.Rptr.
470]). If, on the other hand, the spousal support provisions are severable from
the marital property distribution provisions, and a court approves and
incorporates the agreement into an interlocutory decree of divorce, the support
payments are in the nature of alimony and subject to future modification upon an
adequate showing of changed circumstances.  ( Washburn v. Washburn, 187
Cal.App.2d 617, 620, 622 [9 Cal.Rptr. 859]; Kelley v. Kelley, 151 Cal.App.2d
228, 233 [311 P.2d 90]; Carson v. Carson, 179 Cal.App.2d 665, 668-669 [4
Cal.Rptr. 38]; see In re Marriage of Carletti, 53 Cal.App.3d 989, 995 [126
Cal.Rptr. 1].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   As
amended in 1967 former Civil Code section 139, and as now provided in Civil Code
section 4811, subdivision (b), support provisions of a property settlement
agreement are deemed to be separate and severable from the provisions relating
to property and an order for support based on such agreement is to be deemed law
imposed and subject to modification unless the parties by written agreement, or
oral agreement entered into in open court, specifically provide to the contrary.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -



   The question whether a property settlement agreement is an integrated bargain
may be resolved at the time the interlocutory divorce decree is entered as was
done in Sprenger v. Superior Court, supra, 268 Cal.App.2d 857, 860, 862, and Lee
v. Lee, 249 Cal.App.2d 407, 409 [57 Cal.Rptr. 327]. However, the record shows
that this was not done in the case at bench.  Consequently, the court had
jurisdiction to determine that issue in a subsequent proceeding for modification
of spousal support. ( Tuttle v. Tuttle, 38 Cal.2d 419, 421 [240 P.2d 587];
Codorniz v. Codorniz, 34 Cal.2d 811, 814 [215 P.2d 32]; Hough v. Hough, 26
Cal.2d 605, 615 [160 P.2d 15]; Hoerner v. Superior Court, supra, 182 Cal.App.2d
500, 504; see Henzgen v. Henzgen, 62 Cal.App.2d 214, 221 [144 P.2d 428].) The
issue, however, was not determined in the first modification proceeding; the
1971 order continuing in effect the spousal support payment of $ 80 per month
was consistent with either a severable or an integrated agreement.

     Thus, the question is whether the character of the agreement was determined
by the April 1974 order reducing spousal support to $ 1 per year.  The husband
urges that the court must necessarily have determined that the agreement was
severable and that, therefore, the wife was collaterally estopped from
relitigating that issue in the proceeding leading to the order in question.  We
are unpersuaded.

   The property settlement agreement provides for spousal support in two
separate stages.  One pertains to support during the minority of the children
and the other to support after the children have been emancipated. The agreement
provides that until the children are emancipated, "Husband shall pay to the Wife
as and for her support and maintenance the sum of $ 80.00 per month" but
stipulates that after the  children are emancipated "the support payable to Wife
. . . shall never be less than a sum equal to 33 1/3% of Husband's United States
Marine Corps retirement pay, if, at that time Major Matthews has so retired or
in any event a sum not less than 33 1/3% of the amount of retirement pay Husband
would have received had he so retired from the United States Marine Corps."
Since the parties used the words "shall never be less than" only as to the
support payable after the children's emancipation, the agreement may reasonably
be interpreted to indicate an intention of the parties to permit modification of
the $ 80 per month payable during the period husband was obligated to pay child
support.   Spousal support based on an integrated agreement may be modified if
the parties have so agreed.  ( Plumer v. Plumer, supra, 48 Cal.2d 820, 824.)
It would not have been  unreasonable for the court in the 1974 modification
proceeding to have determined that the parties intended the $ 80 per month
support provision of the property settlement agreement to be modifiable and to
have so construed the agreement.  Thus, unlike the prior modification proceeding
in Hough v. Hough, supra, 26 Cal.2d 605, an implied determination that the
support provision was severable was not necessary to the rendition of the 1974
modification order.

     The collateral estoppel aspect of res judicata precludes the parties from
relitigating in a subsequent proceeding on a different cause of action any issue
actually litigated and determined in a former proceeding.  ( In re Russell, 12
Cal.3d 229, 233 [115 Cal.Rptr. 511, 524 P.2d 1295]; Ellena v. State of
California, 69 Cal.App.3d 245, 253 [138 Cal.Rptr. 110].) The prior adjudication
operates as a conclusive adjudication as to any issue "which appears on its face
to have been so adjudged, or which was actually and necessarily included therein
or necessary thereto." (Code Civ. Proc., § 1911; In re Lisa R., 13 Cal.3d 636,
646 [119 Cal.Rptr. 475, 532 P.2d 123].) Findings which might have been made but
were not necessary to the judgment are not conclusive. ( In re Lisa R., supra,
13 Cal.3d 636, 646.)   In the case at bench, there is nothing on the face of the
record of the 1974 modification proceeding to indicate that the character of the
agreement was determined by the order of modification nor was it necessary
thereto.

   Therefore, the court below had jurisdiction to determine that issue on the
wife's motion to compel payment of support in accordance with the terms of the
property settlement agreement. On the basis of the language of the agreement and
extrinsic evidence consisting of testimony of the parties concerning their
intention in entering into the agreement, the court determined that the property
settlement agreement was an  integrated bargain. There is substantial evidence
to support that determination and we uphold it.

     "An agreement between husband and wife providing that the purpose of the
parties is to reach a final settlement of their rights and duties with respect
to both property and support, that they intend each provision to be in
consideration for each of the other provisions, and that they waive all rights
arising out of the marital relationship except those expressly set out in the
agreement will be deemed conclusive evidence that an integrated agreement was
intended." ( DiMarco v. DiMarco, 60 Cal.2d 387, 391 [33 Cal.Rptr. 610, 385 P.2d
2]; accord Plumer v. Plumer, supra, 48 Cal.2d 820, 825.)

   The present agreement contains all the earmarks of an integrated agreement:
It expressly provides that it is intended to be a full and final settlement of
all property rights, claims, and liabilities; the mutual promises, covenants,
and agreements are made in consideration for the settlement; except as provided
in the agreement, the parties relieved each other from all liabilities and
obligations of any kind or character incurred after the date of the settlement.

   By agreeing that on emancipation of the children the spousal support "shall
never be less" than one-third of the husband's retirement pay and that payment
in that amount shall be made whether or not the husband is then retired, the
parties virtually agreed to a division of the husband's pension rights. 2 That
this was the intention of the parties is supported by the wife's testimony.  She
testified that it was her understanding that as part of the settlement she would
receive at least one-third of the husband's monthly military pension when the
children were grown and that this was one of the factors that caused her to
agree to the property division in the agreement.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Husband
was fortunate that at the time the instant property settlement agreement was
executed and the divorce decree was entered, French v. French, 17 Cal.2d 775
[112 P.2d 235], was the governing law concerning the wife's community interest
in the husband's nonvested pension rights.  Had In re Marriage of Brown, 15
Cal.3d 838 [126 Cal.Rptr. 633, 544 P.2d 561], been the law, the wife might have
been entitled to one-half of the husband's pension rights, not merely one-third.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      The fact that the agreement provided for modifiable support provisions
neither destroyed its integrated character nor permitted the support provisions
to be modified contrary to the terms of the agreement.  ( Flynn v. Flynn, supra,
42 Cal.2d 55, 60-61.)

    The trial court having correctly determined that the property settlement
agreement constituted an integrated bargain, it was empowered to order husband
to pay to the wife one-third of his monthly military pension without a showing
of changed circumstances.

   The order is affirmed.


                              54 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            In re the Marriage of WILLIAM D. and PATRICIA C. SMITH.
          WILLIAM D. SMITH, Appellant, v. PATRICIA C. SMITH, Appellant

                                  No. A042136

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                 Division Five

            225 Cal. App. 3d 469; 274 Cal. Rptr. 911; 1990 Cal. App.
                   LEXIS 1398; 90 Cal. Daily Op. Service 8492


                               November 20, 1990

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     A petition for a rehearing was denied December 19, 1990,
and the opinion was modified to read as printed above.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Alameda County, No. 484940-9, Demetrios P.
Agretelis, Judge.

COUNSEL: Leland, Parachini, Steinberg, Flinn, Matzger & Melnick, Merrill E.
Steinberg and Richard Sherman for Appellant Wife.

Richmond & Chamberlin, Diana Richmond, Hardin, Cook, Loper, Engel & Bergez and
Ronald A. Wagner for Appellant Husband.

JUDGES: Opinion by King, J., with Low, P. J., concurring.  Haning, J., concurred
in the result.

OPINION BY: KING

OPINION

     In this case we hold that before a motion for upward modification of
spousal support can be considered the moving party must prove that the prior
order, when made, was insufficient to meet his or her reasonable needs as
measured by the applicable guidelines set forth in Civil Code section 4801,
subdivision (a), or that the reasonable cost of satisfying those needs has
increased.  If this is shown, the moving party must then prove the obligor's
ability to pay increased spousal support.

   We also hold that the marital standard of living is to be weighed under the
circumstances of the case along with all other applicable factors contained in
Civil Code section 4801, subdivision (a), in reaching a fair and reasonable
result on the issue of spousal support. We hold that the marital standard of
living is intended by the Legislature to mean the general station in life
enjoyed by the parties during their marriage. The Legislature did not intend it
to be a precise mathematical calculation, but rather a general reference point
for the trial court in deciding this issue.

   The trial court possesses broad discretion in determining the issue of
spousal support but must exercise discretion weighing all of the applicable
guidelines of section 4801, subdivision (a).  Having done so, the trial court
may fix spousal support at an amount greater than, equal to or less than what
the supported spouse may require to maintain the marital standard of living, in
order to achieve a just and reasonable result under the facts and circumstances
of the case.

I. Introduction

   Patricia C. Smith (Pat) appeals, and William D. Smith (Bill) 1 cross-appeals,
from an order modifying monthly spousal support by almost  doubling it from $
1,700 to $ 3,300.  Pat contends the court was mandated to increase monthly
support to $ 7,317 to enable her to live at the standard of living established
during the marriage. Bill contends support should not have been increased at all
because (1) there was no showing of a material change of circumstances since the
prior order and (2) there was no showing that the prior order when made did not
meet Pat's needs consistent with the marital standard of living. We affirm.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   We use
the parties' first names to assist the reader in following the opinion.  In
Pat's briefs, she refers to the parties as Pat and Bill.  In Bill's briefs, "for
convenience," he refers to the parties as husband and wife.  Since they have now
been divorced for over 14 years, it seems inappropriate to call them husband and
wife, especially since Bill has a present wife.  Referring to them as appellant
and respondent, or even worse appellant and cross-respondent and respondent and
cross-appellant, would be impersonal to the parties and unduly confusing to the
reader.  Referring to the parties by their first names personalizes the opinion
for the parties and, for other readers, makes the opinion easier to understand.
As distinguished from other civil cases where parties may be partnerships,
corporations, associations or governmental entities, the parties in marital
dissolution actions are human beings and we use their first names, in part, to
humanize a decision resolving personal legal issues which seriously affect their
lives.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

 II. Facts and Proceedings

   A. Dissolution and Initial Support Orders in 1977.

   Bill and Pat married in 1961 and had three children, all of whom are now
adults.  They separated in March 1976, and the marriage was dissolved with a
marital settlement agreement in March 1977.

   Bill is an actuary by profession and is a partner in a major actuarial firm.
He earned a healthy income before separation.  In 1974, he earned a salary of $
63,333 plus a bonus of $ 38,000; in 1975 a salary of $ 78,000 plus a $ 30,350
bonus; in 1976 a salary of $ 78,000 plus a $ 10,500 bonus.

   To earn this income, however, Bill worked excessive hours.  In 1974, he
worked 2,000 billable hours, in 1975 he logged 1,831 billable hours, and in 1976
he put in 1,635 billable hours.  In addition to billable hours, he had to spend
at least 800 hours each year on administrative matters.  Thus, for example, in
1974 Bill worked 2,800 hours, or (excluding a modest amount of vacation and
holidays) nearly 60 hours a week.

   In addition, it is undisputed that the family was living beyond its
reasonable means.  Bill's salary was the sole source of family income.  In 1971,
the parties sold their home in Berkeley for $ 28,000 and bought a very large
home in Piedmont for $ 112,000.  Bill testified that the new home "was vastly
more than a wage earner in my position should have tackled." At one point they
incurred some $ 50,000 in extraordinary home maintenance expenses.   The house
"remained in a fairly constant state of dilapidation as we couldn't afford to
restore it."

   Bill further testified that in addition to the excessive housing expense,
family expenditures "were out of control." Pat's spending habits in 1975 and
1976 were such that "money was just flowing through the family coffers." For
example, during an 11-month period in 1975, Pat spent some $ 10,000 on her own
clothing.

   The 1977 marital settlement agreement provided Bill would pay monthly family
support of $ 1,200 plus the mortgage on the Piedmont home until it was sold.
The home was sold later that year for $ 325,000, from which Pat received $
113,000.  Pat and the two remaining minor children moved to Hawaii, where she
bought a house for $ 135,000.  In 1978, by stipulation, monthly family support
was increased to $ 2,300.

   B. Stipulated Modification in 1982.

   Support was modified once more in June 1982, again by stipulation.  By this
time all three children were adults and attending college for which Bill was
expending considerable sums.  Bill was working fewer hours.  In 1981, he billed
1,493 hours, earning a salary of $ 90,000 with no bonus. At the time of the
stipulation he had a monthly income of $ 8,120.  (Ultimately, for the full year
1982 he billed 1,350 hours, earning a salary of $ 110,000 with a bonus of $
46,525.) Pat, in contrast, had no earned income.  She obtained a real estate
license in 1980 and tried for two years to sell real estate, but earned no money
whatsoever.  Pursuant to the stipulation the court ordered Bill to pay monthly
spousal support of $ 1,700, plus monthly payments of $ 560 to Pat's creditors
for 21 months.

   C. 1987 Modification From Which This Appeal Is Taken.

   The present dispute arose in 1987, when Pat again requested modification of
monthly spousal support. By this time Bill's income had increased substantially,
and since his children had completed college he no longer had that expense.  In
1986, he billed 1,256 hours, earning a salary of $ 156,000 with a bonus of $
36,775.  In 1987, his salary was $ 155,000 with a bonus of approximately $
47,000.  His 1988 income was expected to be comparable. He had remarried in
1984, and his wife earned a yearly income of approximately $ 55,000.

   Pat, in contrast, was unemployable.  She was 59 years old, with back problems
and an apparent reading disability.  She had sold her house in Hawaii in 1986
and returned to California, where she wanted to buy another  house.  From the
sale of the Hawaii house she had received $ 165,000, of which she had $ 120,000
left.  At the time of the 1982 modification, when she had been living in Hawaii,
her monthly housing expense was $ 1,079, and she had no medical or dental
expenses other than monthly health insurance payments of $ 45.  In a November
1987 income and expense declaration, in which she "projected" the expenses she
contended she required to live in a manner comparable to her marital standard of
living, she estimated a monthly housing expense of $ 1,930 and, since she no
longer had health insurance, monthly medical and dental expenses of $ 500.  She
also estimated increases from 1982 in her monthly clothing, entertainment and
vacation expenses totalling $ 1,250.

   Pat initially sought an increase in monthly spousal support to $ 9,918.  She
later asserted she would require monthly support of $ 7,317 in order to produce
an after-tax income equivalent to the total monthly expenses of $ 5,510 she
projected in her November 1987 income and expense declaration.

   At the hearing on Pat's motion, she argued that to the extent Bill's income
permitted, she was entitled to an amount of spousal support that would enable
her to live at the actual standard of living established before separation;
because Bill had substantially greater income than in 1982 and could now afford
to support her at the precise marital standard of living, the court as a matter
of law was mandated to order the increase she sought.  Her appeal is primarily
based upon the contention that the trial court failed to apply the correct legal
principle, with a fallback position that the court also abused its discretion in
fixing the amount it ordered for spousal support. Stated another way, Pat's
primary contention on appeal is that Bill's income level left the court without
any discretion; it had to award her the amount she projected she needed to
achieve the same standard of living she believed she enjoyed during the
marriage.

   The court rejected this argument, concluding in a statement of decision that
the marital standard "must be reasonable, and the court accepts [Bill's]
contention that he was overworked and the family was spending beyond its
reasonable means in the years prior to separation." The court further concluded
there was insufficient evidence to establish what would have been a reasonable
standard of living for the parties in 1975 and hence what would be a comparable
standard in 1987-1988.

   The court did, however, grant an increase in monthly spousal support from $
1,700 to $ 3,300.  The court explained in its statement of decision that the
1982 modification "appears to acknowledge that $ 1,700 per month was not
sufficient spousal support," since Pat had incurred additional expenses  which
Bill had agreed to pay at the rate of $ 560 per month for 21 months.  Bill's
income had increased substantially since 1982, "and now he has the ability to
satisfy [Pat's] reasonable needs." The court concluded that an increase to $
3,300 was justified in light of Pat's "1982 financial circumstances, the 1982
court proceedings and some adjustments that should be made to account for
clothes, entertainment and medical care."

   Pat appeals from the order modifying spousal support, and Bill cross-appeals.


III. Discussion

   A. Background and Legal Overview of Spousal Support.

   The appeal in the instant case requires an examination of the considerations
to be taken into account in deciding one of the most important yet most
difficult issues in a family law case: spousal support. Guidelines to be applied
by trial courts are supplied by the Legislature in Civil Code section 4801,
subdivision (a), 2 and by appellate court decisions.  ( In re Marriage of Davis
(1983) 141 Cal.App.3d 71 [190 Cal.Rptr. 104].) Our recently retired colleague
Justice Betty Barry-Deal, a knowledgable authority on family law, in her last
published opinion has carefully traced the evolution of section 4801,
subdivision (a), since its adoption as part of the Family Law Act in 1970.  ( In
re Marriage of Smith & Ostler (1990) 223 Cal.App.3d 33 [272 Cal.Rptr. 560].)
Because Justice Barry-Deal has provided us with the complete history of the
changes in legislative guidelines to be considered by trial courts in
determining the issue of spousal support, there is no need to repeat that
history here.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   All
further statutory references are to the Civil Code.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -





    "[Section] 4801(a), while giving the court broad discretion over spousal
support . . . imposes a set of mandatory guidelines that the court 'shall'
consider in making its determination.  As indicated, spousal support orders that
do not reflect a weighing of these statutory factors are subject to reversal for
abuse of discretion. [Marriage of Fransen (1983) 142 C.A.3d 419, 190 C.R. 885 --
abuse of discretion to base support award strictly on difference between
expenses and income without considering statutory standards]." (Hogoboom & King,
Cal. Prac. Guide: Fam. Law (Rutter 1989) § 6:86, p. 6-96.16, italics in
original; see also, In re Marriage of Prietsch & Calhoun (1987) 190 Cal.App.3d
645 [235 Cal.Rptr. 587].)



    The trial court is bound to consider the guidelines contained in section
4801, subdivision (a), "but the ultimate decision rests within the  court's
'broad discretion.' A trial court's exercise of discretion will not be disturbed
on appeal unless, as a matter of law, an abuse of discretion is shown -- i.e.,
-- where, considering all the relevant circumstances, the court has 'exceeded
the bounds of reason' or it can 'fairly be said' that no judge would reasonably
make the same order under the same circumstances.  [Marriage of Morrison (1978)
20 C.3d 437, 143 C.R. 139; Marriage of Epstein (1979) 24 C.3d 76, 154 C.R. 413;
Marriage of Sinks (1988) 204 C.A.3d 586, 251 C.R. 379; Marriage of Laube (1988)
204 C.A.3d 1222, 251 C.R. 745.]" (Hogoboom & King, supra, at § 6:79, p. 6-96.14,
italics in original; see also In re Marriage of Bukaty (1986) 180 Cal.App.3d 143
[225 Cal.Rptr. 492].)



    The propriety of an order modifying spousal support "rests within the trial
court's sound discretion.  So long as the court exercised its discretion along
legal lines, its decision will not be reversed on appeal if there is substantial
evidence to support it.  [Marriage of Wilson (1988) 201 C.A.3d 913, 247 C.R. 522
; Marriage of Crobarger (1986) 178 C.A.3d 56, 223 C.R. 480.]" (Hogoboom & King,
supra, at § 17:39, p. 17-23.) Reversal requires a clear showing of abuse of
discretion. ( In re Marriage of Hopwood (1989) 214 Cal.App.3d 1604, 1607 [263
Cal.Rptr. 401]; In re Marriage of Aninger (1990) 220 Cal.App.3d 230 [269
Cal.Rptr. 388].)

 A motion for modification of spousal support may only be granted if there has
been a material change of circumstances since the last order.  ( In re Marriage
of Kuppinger (1975) 48 Cal.App.3d 628 [120 Cal.Rptr. 654].) Otherwise,
dissolution cases would have no finality and unhappy former spouses could bring
repeated actions for modification with no burden of showing a justification to
change the order.  Litigants "'are entitled to attempt, with some degree of
certainty, to reorder their finances and life style [sic] in reliance upon the
finality of the decree.'" ( In re Marriage of Farrell (1985) 171 Cal.App.3d 695,
703 [217 Cal.Rptr. 397], citing In re Marriage of Mulhern (1973) 29 Cal.App.3d
988, 992 [106 Cal.Rptr. 78].) Absent a change of circumstances, a motion for
modification is nothing more than an impermissible collateral attack on a prior
final order.  (Ibid.)

   Some members of the bench and bar have been critical of the Legislature,
contending it has failed to specify the purpose of spousal support. This
criticism is unjustified and demonstrates a lack of understanding about why the
Legislature and appellate decisions have vested trial courts with such broad
discretion to decide this issue, whether at trial or upon a later request for
modification or termination.  The purposes of spousal support inevitably vary
from case to case, depending upon the parties and the facts and circumstances of
the case.  The facts and the equities in one case may call for no spousal
support, or for very short-term support for the purpose of financially assisting
one spouse in the transition to single status or until the  proceeds from an
ordered property division or sale can be received.  (See In re Marriage of
Hebbring (1989) 207 Cal.App.3d 1260 [255 Cal.Rptr. 488].) At the other end of
the spectrum are cases where the purpose of spousal support is to provide
financial assistance to the supported spouse until the death of one of the
spouses because, as is the case here, the supported spouse is not able to
generate income from employment or assets, or, in any event, an amount of income
sufficient to provide for his or her own reasonable living expenses.  (See In re
Marriage of Morrison (1978) 20 Cal.3d 437 [143 Cal.Rptr. 139, 573 P.2d 41]; In
re Marriage of Brantner (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 416 [136 Cal.Rptr. 635].) In
between are the myriad of factual circumstances which the trial court must
consider in making its order for purposes which vary from case to case.  For
example, it may be appropriate to order support for a specific period of time
for the purpose of enabling the supported spouse to obtain or complete an
education (§ 4801, subd. (a)(1)(A)), to refrain from employment in order to
remain home to care for young children until they reach an age at which a return
to employment would be appropriate (§ 4801, subd. (a)(7)), or to become
self-supporting within a reasonable time.  ( In re Marriage of Berland (1989)
215 Cal.App.3d 1257 [264 Cal.Rptr. 210]; In re Marriage of Richmond (1980) 105
Cal.App.3d 352 [164 Cal.Rptr. 381].) The examples are virtually as endless as
the number of cases in which this issue is tried.

    In other words, the purpose of spousal support cannot be defined by the
Legislature; it is a determination to be made by the trial court in each case
before it, based upon the facts and equities of that case, weighing each of the
circumstances or guidelines specified by the Legislature in section 4801,
subdivision (a), which are applicable to that case, as well as those specified
by appropriate appellate case law.  In making its order on the issue of spousal
support, it is essential that the trial court possess broad discretion in order
to fairly exercise the weighing process contemplated by section 4801, subdivsion
(a), with the goal of accomplishing substantial justice for the parties in the
case before the court.  The issue of spousal support, including its purpose, is
one which is truly personal to the parties.

   Equitable considerations are the most significant factor in these cases.  The
Legislature and the appellate courts specify guidelines which must be considered
by trial courts in deciding spousal support issues, but in the final analysis
trial courts must possess broad discretion to decide the applicability and
weight of these guidelines as they apply to the facts and equities of each case.
"Although patterns in marital breakups emerge, each couple has such a diverse
mix of circumstances that trial courts must have broad discretion in weighing
and balancing the various factors in each particular marriage before making a
suitable support award." ( In re Marriage of Smith & Ostler, supra, 223
Cal.App.3d at p. 50.) After all, the primary direction  from the Legislature in
section 4801, subdivision (a), is that "the court may order a party to pay for
the support of the other party any amount, and for any period of time, as the
court may deem just and reasonable," and, "Any order for support may be modified
or revoked as the court may deem necessary." Weighing the factors specified in
section 4801, subdivision (a), and by appellate case law, the trial court, in
exercising its discretion on the issue of spousal support, must endeavor to make
an order which will achieve a "just and reasonable" result in each case.

   B. The Appeal.

   1. The Applicable Guidelines for Modification of Pat's Spousal Support.

   This case presents an unusual twist to a common byproduct of marital
dissolution.

 Separation is usually accompanied by a decrease in the standard of living
enjoyed by both spouses, due to the additional expenses incurred by the party
who leaves the family home.  (See In re Marriage of Burlini (1983) 143
Cal.App.3d 65, 69 [191 Cal.Rptr. 541].) Under normal circumstances, if spousal
support is still continuing, and if there is subsequently an increase in the
supporting spouse's income sufficient to return both parties to the marital
standard of living, support will be increased to an amount that will permit the
supported spouse to live at that standard.  ( In re Marriage of Hoffmeister
(1987) 191 Cal.App.3d 351 [236 Cal.Rptr. 543].)

    In the present case, however, the trial court found, and Pat concedes, that
Bill worked excessive hours during the marriage and the parties established a
standard of living that was beyond their means.  Pat contends it makes no
difference whether the established marital standard of living was unreasonable;
she is entitled as a matter of law to an upward modification of spousal support
to enable her to live at that precise standard based upon Bill's present
financial circumstances.



    Our analysis begins with the general rule that for a court to consider a
motion for modification of spousal support there must first be a showing of a
material change of circumstances since the last prior support order, taking into
consideration both the needs of the supported spouse and the ability of the
supporting spouse to meet those needs.  ( In re Marriage of Kuppinger, supra, 48
Cal.App.3d at p. 633.) A material change of circumstances may consist solely of
an increase in the supporting spouse's ability to pay, but if that is the only
change, then to obtain an increase in support there must also be a showing that
the amount of support previously ordered  had not been adequate to meet the
supported spouse's reasonable needs at that time.  ( In re Marriage of Hopwood,
supra, 214 Cal.App.3d at pp. 1607-1608; In re Marriage of Hoffmeister, supra,
191 Cal.App.3d at pp. 363-364.) As Pat points out, this rule logically permits
incremental increases through multiple modifications if there are gradual
increases in the supporting spouse's ability to pay. 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Support
may also be increased if there is a dual change of circumstances consisting of
both an increase in the supporting spouse's ability to pay and an increase in
the supported spouse's postseparation needs since the last prior support order,
such as a change in health which precludes employment.  ( In re Marriage of
Hoffmeister, supra, 191 Cal.App.3d at p. 364; see discussion, post, p. 495.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    In her brief, Pat succinctly contends, "The only sensible and equitable rule
is as follows: there must be a material change in circumstances since the last
order, before a court can increase support.  Once that threshold is reached, the
circumstances which existed at the time of that order are not controlling.  The
trial court must consider a myriad of other factors, in order to determine what
level of support is appropriate under the circumstances which exist at the time
of the current hearing.  One important factor which it must consider is what the
parties' standard of living was during their marriage."

    However, Pat would also add the following principle to that rule: "If the
supporting spouse has returned to the pre-dissolution standard of living, and
can also afford to pay support at that level, that is the order which must be
made." (Italics added.) We reject this use of only one factor in section 4801,
subdivision (a), to the exclusion of all others.

   Here, there was indisputably a material change of circumstances after the
1982 order, consisting of Bill's substantially increased income and the
elimination of his substantial expense for his children's college education.
The pivotal question is whether the standard of living actually established by
Bill and Pat during marriage is the sole factor to consider in determining
whether Pat's "reasonable" needs have or have not been met.  Pat would have us
so conclude.  But that is not and never has been the law.

   In 1987, at the time of the present modification, the general standard for
assessing spousal support, set forth in section 4801, subdivision (a), was that
the trial court could order payment of support in an amount "as the court may
deem just and reasonable." (Former § 4801, subd. (a), as amended by Stats. 1986,
ch. 1096, § 1, p. 3838.) The statute enumerated various circumstances to be
considered in making the order, one of which was the "standard of living of the
parties." (Former § 4801, subd. (a)(7), as amended by Stats. 1986, ch. 1096, §
1, p. 3838.) Judicial decisions have invariably characterized the supported
spouse's "accustomed station in life" during marriage as one of the various
factors to be considered in determining reasonable  support.  (E.g., In re
Marriage of Lopez (1974) 38 Cal.App.3d 93, 115-116 [113 Cal.Rptr. 58]; In re
Marriage of Siegel (1972) 26 Cal.App.3d 88, 92 [102 Cal.Rptr. 613]; In re
Marriage of Rosan (1972) 24 Cal.App.3d 885, 897 [101 Cal.Rptr. 295].) The actual
marital standard has never been viewed as the sole point of reference for
determining a supported spouse's reasonable needs.

   In 1988, after the hearing resulting in this appeal, the Legislature added a
phrase to the general support standard prescribed by subdivision (a) of section
4801.  The statute now authorizes support that is just and reasonable "based on
the standard of living established during the marriage."  (§ 4801, subd. (a).)
The enumeration of the "standard of living" factor as among the various
circumstances to be considered is changed to specify the "needs of each party
based on the standard of living established during the marriage." (§ 4801, subd.
(a)(4).) The trial court is required to "make specific factual findings with
respect to the standard of living during the marriage," apparently sua sponte.
(§ 4801, subd. (a).) We discuss the 1988 amendments for guidance in future cases
and because both parties argue that these amendments, although not controlling
here, bolster their respective positions on appeal.

    Like the pre-1988 judicial decisions,  and contrary to Pat's contention on
appeal, the amended statute does not make the actual marital standard of living
an absolute measure of reasonable need, but merely a "basis" or reference point
for determining need and support.  In effect, the amended statute incorporates
the "prior case law consensus that the marital standard of living should be used
as a point of reference in the court's weighing process." (Hogoboom & King,
supra, at § 6:111, p. 6-105, italics in original.) The statute "does not, by
requiring courts to consider the standard of living, set dollar boundaries on
the amount of support but, again, simply furnishes a point of reference to be
used in weighing all of the parties' circumstances." (Id., at § 6.111.1, p.
6-105, italics in original.) True, the reference point is usually the actual
marital standard of living, that is, actual expenditures during the marriage (id
., at § 6:113.2, p. 6-107), but all of the other applicable circumstances
enumerated in section 4801 must also be considered. 4 As we shall discuss later,
the real question is what the Legislature meant by marital "standard of living."


- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   Pat
contends the trial court erroneously used her 1981-1982 standard of living as
the reference point.  The court, however, merely compared the parties' financial
circumstances in 1981-1982 and 1987-1988 to determine that there had been
increases in Pat's actual needs and Bill's ability to pay support.  (See
discussion, post, pp. 496-497.) The court did not use Pat's 1981-1982 standard
of living to determine her general level of reasonable need.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Although not binding on the issue of legislative intent, of considerable
interest is a letter by the author of Senate Bill No. 1296.  ( In re Marriage of
Bouquet (1976) 16 Cal.3d 583, 589-590 [128 Cal.Rptr. 427, 546 P.2d 1371].) This
bill amended section 4801 in 1988, adding the requirement of a sua sponte
factual finding as to the parties' marital standard of living and changing the
factor of needs to "needs according to the marital standard of living." The bill
resulted in the current language of section 4801.  The author of that
legislation, Senator Gary Hart, moved (and his motion was unanimously carried)
that the following letter of intent be printed in the Senate Journal:

   "This letter is to clarify the intent of SB 1296, Chapter 407, Statutes of
1988.  SB 1296 establishes the marital standard of living as the starting point
for spousal support determinations pursuant to Civil Code Section 4801.  The
marital standard of living is intended to provide a threshold or starting point
from which courts are to begin consideration of the factors enumerated in Civil
Code Sections 4801(a) (1)-(10).  SB 1296 does not, and is not, intended to
establish the marital standard of living as a mandatory 'floor' or 'ceiling' for
a spousal support award.  It does not eliminate judicial discretion to award
spousal support in amounts greater or less than the marital standard of living
based on the factors in Civil Code Sections 4801(a)(1)-(10)."

   Thus the author of the most recent legislative change to section 4801,
subdivision (a), states that the intent of the Legislature was not to eliminate
judicial discretion to award spousal support in an amount greater or less than
the marital standard of living based upon all of the factors in section 4801,
subdivision (a).

   Among the circumstances enumerated in section 4801 since its original
enactment is the catchall category of "[a]ny other factors which [the trial
court] deems just and equitable." (§ 4801, subd. (a)(10).) (See In re Marriage
of Smith & Ostler,  supra, 233 Cal.App.3d at pp. 48, 55.) This category
encompasses the unusual twist in the present case, the fact that Bill worked
excessive hours during the marriage and the parties lived beyond their means.
As the trial court concluded, the actual marital standard of living was
unreasonable for Bill and Pat.  ( In re Marriage of Watt (1989) 214 Cal.App.3d
340 [262 Cal.Rptr. 783].)

    For purposes of determining Pat's reasonable needs and what would be just
and reasonable support, this factor counterbalances the actual marital standard
in the weighing process.  In other words, because the actual marital standard
was beyond the parties' means, it has reduced significance as a point of
reference in determining Pat's reasonable needs and support.  Stated simply, Pat
cannot reasonably demand support at the actual marital standard of living if
that standard had  itself been unreasonably high under the circumstances. 5
Thus, given the peculiar facts presented here, what would have been a reasonable
standard of living eclipses the actual marital standard, under subdivision
(a)(10) of section 4801, as the ultimate measure of Pat's reasonable needs.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5
Similarly, in an appropriate case the actual marital standard of living might
have reduced significance as a point of reference if the parties lived at a
standard substantially below their means, justifying support at a level above
the actual marital standard.  (See discussion, post, pp. 488-489.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    We reject Pat's contention that if Bill can afford it the law mandates that
the trial court must make an order for spousal support in exactly the amount she
claims she now needs to live in the marital lifestyle as she remembers it from
12 years before, and may not consider any of the other factors contained in
section 4801, subdivision (a).  Even Pat's trial attorney, in answer to a
question from the trial judge during argument, acknowledged that the law
requires the trial court to consider all of the section 4801, subdivision (a),
factors in acting on a motion for modification. As previously discussed, case
law and the statute itself require that the court consider the applicable
circumstances of the parties and make an order that is just and reasonable.

   The trial court concluded there was insufficient evidence to establish what
would have been a reasonable standard of living for the parties in 1975 and
hence what would be a comparable standard in 1987-1988.  Pat does not dispute
this conclusion.  Indeed, she concedes that "[n]either side offered evidence of
what would have been a 'reasonable' standard of living prior to separation."
This is because Pat sought support at the actual marital standard, not at what
would have been a reasonable marital standard.  Undoubtedly, this approach was a
sound trial tactic for purposes of seeking to obtain the greatest increase in
support, but it now precludes any claim by Pat for a greater increase based on
what would have been a reasonable marital standard.  There is substantial
evidence to support the trial court's finding that the modified support is
sufficient to meet her reasonable needs, considering the guidelines of section
4801, subdivision (a).

   As previously noted, Pat contends the trial court was required to award
spousal support in the amount of $ 7,317 in order to produce after-tax income of
$ 5,510, the amount she believes she now needs to maintain the marital standard
of living of more than 12 years before.  This is based on her claim that Bill
now lives at that standard of living and can afford to pay this amount.  She
acknowledges that her expenses of $ 5,510 are "projected," not actual expenses.
Indeed, she selected the figure of $ 5,510 because this is one-half of Bill's
living expenses (which include his spousal support payment under the former
order of $ 1,700), and she contends Bill testified that this  level of living
expense allowed him and his present wife to live at the same standard of living
which he enjoyed during his first marriage.

   The trial court was not required to accept Pat's list of "projected"
expenses.  (Bill refers to it as her "1987 wish list.") First of all, this is
bootstrapping, especially considering Pat's claims at oral argument which we
will discuss shortly.

   In making a motion for an upward modification of spousal support the moving
party seeks more money because he or she contends that the present order, when
made, was insufficient to meet his or her needs according to the marital
standard of living, or that the reasonable cost of satisfying those needs has
increased since the order was made.  In either case, unless the supported spouse
has gone deeply into debt by attempting to live at the marital standard of
living without sufficient income to do so (and can therefore prove expenses
actually incurred in excess of income), he or she will normally have to estimate
or project what amounts he or she would likely have to spend in order to be able
to live at the station in life achieved during the marriage. Thus it is Pat's
needs which must be examined and proven, not Bill's standard of living due to
post-separation separate property earnings.  ( In re Marriage of Hoffmeister,
supra, 191 Cal.App.3d 351.) Secondly, Bill's testimony on this issue does not
really support Pat's argument.  When asked if his present living expenses
enabled him to enjoy a standard of living about the same as he enjoyed before
separating from Pat he replied, "Well, I'm not sure what that means."

   The trial judge in this case is one of the most knowledgeable, experienced
and competent family law judges in California. 6 Although he may not have agreed
with Bill's characterization of Pat's testimony as "evidence of 1975 memories
and 1987 wishes," he was not required to accept in full Pat's claimed
"projected" expenses.  This is especially true where they were based on Bill's
expenses, not on her own needs.  Under these circumstances, it was not
unreasonable for the trial court to reject as speculative and unpersuasive Pat's
claims as to the amount of money she projected she needed to achieve the
standard of living she alleges she enjoyed 12 years before.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   Judge
Demetrios P. Agretelis, the judge who presided over this motion for
modification, served with distinction as a full-time family law judge for the
Alameda County Superior Court for over six years.  Unfortunately, few judges
remain in this important and sensitive assignment for that length of time.
Judge Agretelis was one of the orginators of the innovative concept of direct
calendaring for family law cases, i.e., assignment of cases to one judge for all
purposes, a concept which is now also used by the Contra Costa and Los Angeles
County Superior Courts.  Thus, Judge Agretelis had extensive experience with the
issue of "permanent" spousal support, both at settlement conferences and at
trial.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Pat argues, as her fallback position, that the increase to $ 3,300 is not
even adequate to sustain her at a level comparable to what would have been a
reasonable marital standard, which she claims we can estimate based on a minimum
yearly salary of $ 78,000, the amount Bill earned working fewer hours in 1977
and 1978.  But it is too speculative to guess 7 at a likely reasonable marital
income based on Bill's 1977 and 1978 income; the latter might have been
favorably affected by postseparation factors such as an increase in Bill's
hourly billing rate or the overall lucrativeness of his business.

    (See fn. 9.) Also, even if we assume Bill would have earned a yearly gross
marital income of $ 78,000 had he worked reasonable hours, there is no evidence
of what would have been his net income after taxes, 8 knowledge of which is
crucial to a determination of what would have been a reasonable marital standard
of living. 9 In short, there is simply no evidentiary basis for anything but
speculation as to what would have been a reasonable marital standard.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7
Undoubtedly preceded by lengthy discovery, much of the four days of trial on
Pat's modification motion was taken up with her testimony as to how the parties
had lived 11 to 15 years before, e.g., how often they went to dinner and where.
With such a passage of time anyone's memory is likely to be dimmed or distorted,
recalling the good times and forgetting the bad.  Indeed, in the final analysis
much of such testimony is simply admissible opinion testimony by a lay witness,
which the court may accept or reject in whole or in part, in order to achieve a
fair result.  If, as Pat contends, the rule were that she should receive,
exactly to the dollar, what she now claims she needs to live in exactly the way
the family of five lived many years before, the parties and the court would be
faced with a near impossible task of assessing the standard of living 12 years
before, given inflation, significant changes in tax laws, escalation of real
property values and memories dimmed or distorted by time.  Neither the parties
nor overburdened trial courts can afford to devote trial and discovery
proceedings to this elusive issue.  A just and reasonable result can be more
easily and less expensively achieved by presenting evidence of the general
life-style the parties enjoyed during the marriage.
8   For example, the Tax Reform Act of 1984 (Pub. Law 98-369) significantly
reduced federal income tax rates.
9   Pat also contends, alternatively, that her marital standard of living should
not set an absolute ceiling for support because the postseparation increase in
Bill's income is attributable to the "many industrious years" he invested in his
work during the marriage, so that he is "actually reaping benefits which flow
partly from his endeavors during the marriage." Again, there is no evidentiary
support for this argument.  Much of Bill's increase in income might have been
attributable to factors other than the industry he brought to his job during the
marriage, and the evidence does not permit us to speculate as to how much of the
increase was not so attributable.  The evidence is simply inadequate to justify
a departure from the well-established rule with regard to postseparation
separate property income that "the payor spouse should not be required to
underwrite the other spouse for purposes of providing him or her a better
lifestyle than established during the marriage . . . ." (Hogoboom & King, supra,
at § 6:111, p. 6-105, italics in original.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     2. The Marital Standard of Living Factor.

   The Legislature has never specified that spousal support must always meet the
needs of the supported spouse as measured by the marital standard of living.
Indeed, it would be unwise to do so.  In most instances, it is impossible at
separation for either party to have sufficient funds to continue to live in the
same life-style enjoyed during the marriage. After separation  the parties have
two households rather than one, and with California's high housing costs this
represents a significant increase in living expenses.  In addition, even if
there were sufficient funds to allow both parties to live at the marital
standard of living, such a rule would be inequitable under many circumstances.
For example, under such an inflexible rule a spouse with substantial separate
property income who reinvested most of it, using very little for living expenses
during the marriage, could not, upon dissolution of the marriage, be required to
pay a reasonable spousal support based upon his or her ability to pay.
Additionally, if the parties lived at an artificially depressed marital standard
of living because they lived on the salary of one in order for the other to go
through a professional school, the working spouse, upon separation after
attainment by the other spouse of a professional degree and the prospect of the
high income which it would bring, would be unable to get any spousal support
because of the marital standard of living of the parties.  Such a result would
be neither fair nor just.  (See In re Marriage of Watt, supra, 214 Cal.App.3d
340.) Likewise, if the family income was high, but the parties lived at a
depressed standard of living because one spouse was a compulsive gambler or a
substance abuser, using substantial community income for this purpose, it would
be unfair to require spousal support to be determined by the depressed marital
standard of living if the obligor spouse had now recovered from his or her
addiction and was enjoying an income which provided the ability to pay for a
reasonable standard of living.

   Bill has expressed confusion as to the meaning of the marital standard of
living. In doing so, he joins distinguished company.  California's family law
bench and bar have also been unable to determine what the Legislature intended
to be contained in "specific factual findings" on the marital standard of
living, that is, what is to be the mode of measuring or describing that
standard. 10 The Legislature has provided no guidance.  Is this term limited to
broad categories, such as lower income, middle income or upper income?  Is it
more narrowly defined so that a description of the marital standard of living as
lower middle income would be appropriate?  Is it intended to be even more
specific, so that, for example, a finding of the gross annual family income
before separation would be necessary? One highly respected family law authority
has posed the question of whether the required factual finding of the marital
standard of living would be satisfied by  the trial court's recitation of the
zip code number within which the parties resided at separation. 11

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -10   At the
1988 State Bar Convention, the Family Law Section of the State Bar presented a
program on what the Legislature intended by the marital standard of living as
reflected in the 1988 amendments to section 4801, subdivision (a), featuring a
panel of a dozen distinguished certified family law specialists and family law
judges.  It is telling that after a two-hour panel discussion not one of these
highly experienced family law experts could provide any guidance for what
constitutes the required "specific factual finding with respect to the standard
of living during the marriage."
11   The current provisions of section 4801 "impose a sua sponte duty on the
court to make specific findings regarding the parties' marital standard of
living, but the [statute] gives no guidance on how to measure or describe that
standard.  It will be interesting to see how trial judges handle this
requirement.  Will a recitation of the parties' zip code alone suffice?  How
about the square-footage of the marital abode, or the number of bathrooms, or
the presence or absence of a satellite dish?  Will terms such as 'upper-lower
middle class' pass appellate muster?  After all, in In re Marriage of Andreen
(1978) 76 CA3d 667, 143 CR 94, 1978 CFLR 1046, the court held, as a matter of
law, that a superior court judge is a member of the upper middle class." (1988
Cal.Fam.L.Rep. 3864.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    At oral argument, Pat contended that since Bill could afford it, she was
entitled to the amount of spousal support that would enable her to live exactly
as they had lived before separation.  For example, she contends she is entitled
to whatever support is necessary to enable her to live in the same house the
family occupied at separation. 12 The fact that she may have had this lifestyle
in Hawaii and had unilaterally given it up, according to Pat is irrelevant. 13
She contends she should be able to live wherever she wishes and be paid whatever
amount of spousal support is necessary to allow her to live in exactly the same
life circumstances she enjoyed during the marriage, as long as Bill's income is
sufficient to pay the amount necessary to achieve this.  In answer to our
question whether this included a decision by her to move to a locale where costs
for housing similar to what she enjoyed during the marriage might be extremely
high, such as Park Avenue in New York City, she answered affirmatively, as long
as Bill could afford it.  This is not reasonable.  We do not believe this is
what the Legislature intended in its direction that needs according to the
marital standard of living be considered by the court in setting spousal support
. The marital standard is just one factor to be weighed with all other
applicable factors to reach a "just and reasonable" result.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -12   The
absurdity of this position becomes apparent by an example: if during a marriage
two spouses and their seven children lived in a six-bedroom home, it would not
be reasonable, upon a dissolution long after the children were grown and on
their own, and the house sold, for the supported spouse to contend he or she was
entitled to sufficient support to purchase a six-bedroom home in which he or she
would live alone.
13   See discussion, post, page 496.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    "The apparent legislative intent in mandating standard of living findings is
to provide a record from which appellate courts can test 'abuse of trial court
discretion' in failing to properly consider the standard of living support
guidelines . . . .  However, the statutory language ('specific factual findings
with respect to the standard of living during the marriage') is unfortunately
lacking in clarity as to exactly what the court's findings must cover and in how
much depth.  Must the findings track detailed marital income and expense
records?  What about less tangible lifestyle factors (e.g., the spouses'
preference for living a 'city' or 'urban' life; or a marital pattern of  living
below or above their means)?  This ambiguity arguably might overburden trial
courts in an effort to 'overcomply' with the spirit of the statute for fear of
risking reversal on appeal." (Hogoboom & King, supra, at § 6:144.1, pp.
6-125.11-6-125.12, italics in original.)

   But what is meant by a marital standard of living? Without specific
legislative guidance, we must make a determination for the family law bench and
bar. 14

 We believe that the Legislature intended the marital standard of living to be
what case law has described it to be, that is, reasonable needs commensurate
with the parties' general station in life.  ( In re Marriage of Siegel, supra,
26 Cal.App.3d at p. 92.) It is a general description, not intended to
specifically spell out or narrowly define a mathematical standard.  If the
Legislature had intended something more specific, it could have prescribed a
more specific measurement, such as the marital standard of living as measured by
the gross annual family income.  The Legislature has wisely chosen not to do so.
As in this case, that figure is of little value to the judge hearing a motion
for modification many years later.  It appears to us that the Legislature
intended "marital standard of living" to be a general description of the station
in life the parties had achieved by the date of separation and this is satisfied
by the everyday understanding of the term in its ordinary sense, i.e., upper,
middle or lower income.  Findings should be "specific" enough to be helpful in
subsequent appellate or modification proceedings; the more specific the better.
Trial courts, in cases where the parties are represented by counsel, are
encouraged, with the assistance of counsel, to make more specific findings.  In
the very large number of cases in which parties represent themselves, especially
where the judgment is obtained by a declaration rather than a court appearance,
it is too much to expect lay parties to use anything other than the ordinary
understanding of standard of living, and this will pass statutory muster.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -14   Even
authoritative family law experts have been left to speculate what was intended
by the reference to standard of living during the marriage. (See fn. 10, ante.)
In this opinion we seek to provide the guidance the Legislature did not give.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    However, the finding as to what was the parties' marital standard of living
is not the most critical issue upon a later motion for upward modification. What
is more important is whether the trial court in initially ordering "permanent"
spousal support, or upon prior modification, made a finding that the amount
ordered was or was not sufficient to meet the reasonable needs of the supported
spouse, considering the marital standard of living of the parties and the other
factors contained in section 4801, subdivision (a).  In the present case, for
the first time, the trial court has made that finding by stating that "spousal
support in the amount of $ 3,300 per month should be sufficient to satisfy
[Pat's] reasonable needs."

   In merely requiring a sua sponte finding of the marital standard of living,
the Legislature has not provided much assistance to the parties or to judges
hearing later motions for modification. It is possible that an award of spousal
support at trial could be found on appeal to be so overtly disproportionate to
the finding of the marital standard of living, when considered within the
totality of circumstances under section 4801, subdivision (a), as to require
reversal for abuse of discretion. But it seems unlikely.  If that is true, the
primary reason for a finding as to marital standard of living is for use in
later modification proceedings.  At that time it is critical for the parties,
counsel and the judge hearing the motion for modification to know whether the
judge who issued the prior order found the support ordered was sufficient to
meet the supported spouse's reasonable needs considering all applicable factors
under section 4801, subdivision (a), including the marital standard of living.

   Here, for example, the 1982 stipulated order contained no statement whether
the support, as modified by stipulation at that time, was considered adequate to
sustain Pat at the marital standard of living (reasonable or otherwise).  Such a
statement would certainly have aided the trial court in deciding the 1987
modification request, since a crucial issue in the 1987 inquiry, as is very
often the case, was whether Pat's reasonable needs had been satisfied by the
1982 order.  (See In re Marriage of Hoffmeister, supra, 191 Cal.App.3d at pp.
363-364.)

   If the judge making the prior order has made an appropriate finding, as has
now occurred here, or the parties in stipulating to spousal support also
stipulate that the amount is sufficient to satisfy the supported spouse's
reasonable needs, that finding or stipulation will be very helpful upon a later
motion for modification. Under those circumstances, the moving party may not
obtain an increase in spousal support solely by proving an increase in the
obligor spouse's ability to pay, but would be required to prove an increased
need.  For example, the supported spouse may have suffered a disability
precluding continued employment or, as here, may now be incurring increased
expenses to maintain a reasonable standard of living consistent with section
4801, subdivision (a).

   If the judge making the prior order finds, as would usually be the case,
that, because the family now lives in two households or for any other reason, it
is not possible to make a spousal support order which will provide sufficient
funds for the supported spouse to live in a manner consistent with the marital
standard of living, such a finding will be very helpful to the parties and a
judge on a later motion for modification of spousal support. With such a
finding, the only showing that would be necessary upon a later motion for
modification is that the obligor spouse has an increased ability to pay spousal
support considering all of the factors in 4801, subdivision (a).

   For these reasons the Legislature may not have gone far enough in merely
requiring a sua sponte finding of the parties' standard of living during the
marriage. Perhaps the Legislature should also have required a finding, when
permanent spousal support is awarded, as to whether the amount of support
awarded is sufficient to satisfy the reasonable needs of the supported spouse
under all applicable circumstances of section 4801, subdivision (a).

    Since the Legislature has not done this, we suggest that counsel consider
asking for such a finding from the trial court.  It would seem that counsel for
a supported spouse who is not going to receive sufficient support to enjoy a
standard of living consistent with that enjoyed during the marriage will want to
ask for such a finding.  On the other hand, counsel for the obligor spouse will
want a finding that the amount ordered for support is sufficient to allow the
supported spouse to enjoy a standard of living consistent with that enjoyed
during the marriage. Since most spousal support orders result from stipulations,
counsel may want to consider including a provision on this issue in marital
settlement agreements.

   3. Conclusion.

    In summary, under the peculiar facts of this case, the parties' actual
marital standard of living has reduced significance as a point of reference for
determining Pat's reasonable needs and support, due to the fact that during the
marriage Bill worked excessive hours and the parties lived beyond their means.
A more appropriate measure of Pat's post-separation needs is what would have
been a reasonable standard of living for the parties given what Bill would have
earned had he worked at a reasonably human pace.

    15 (See fn. 15.)

    Because Pat did not present evidence that the amount of support, as
modified, is insufficient to permit her to live at a standard comparable to what
would have been a reasonable marital standard, she has not demonstrated an abuse
of discretion justifying reversal.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -15   We do
not mean to suggest that income from overtime work, or from a second job, should
be disregarded in determining spousal support, either initially or upon
modification. Such income must be considered by the trial court.  However, how
it is to be considered in a particular case is within the discretion of the
trial court.  In today's economy, it is not uncommon for a spouse to work
overtime or at a second job in order for the family to survive.  Upon the
breakup of the marriage, the trial court, in its discretion, may find it
necessary to make an order which gives the supported spouse a smaller percentage
of the supporting spouse's overtime or second job pay than is ordered from the
other's base pay, in order to provide the supporting spouse with the incentive
to continue to work more than the law would require.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Here a highly competent family law trial judge, knowledgeable about all of
the applicable factors set forth in section 4801, subdivision (a), issued an
order granting Pat's motion for an upward modification, almost doubling the
amount of spousal support to be paid, and finding that the amount ordered is
sufficient to satisfy her current reasonable needs.  The test is not what order
we would have made if one of us had been the trial judge.

 "Our role as an appellate court is not that of factfinder; that is the  role of
the trial court." ( In re Marriage of Prietsch & Calhoun, supra, 190 Cal.App.3d
at p. 656.) The role of the appellate court is not to second-guess the trial
judge.  Reading a typed reporter's transcript does not enable us to view the
witnesses, determine credibility or determine which conflicting evidence is to
be given greater weight.

   "We therefore heed 'the well admonished rule of appellate review which finds
a presumption that the court performed its duties in a regular and correct
manner absent a clear showing to the contrary.  [Citation.] '[T]he fact that a
more liberal award might have been supported is not a proper test.
[Citation.]'" ( In re Marriage of Bukaty, supra, 180 Cal.App.3d at p. 150,
citation omitted.)

   Determining the issue of spousal support, including its amount and duration,
is one of the most difficult and challenging tasks a judge faces.  Invariably
parties seeking support ask for amounts which they honestly believe to be the
minimum necessary for them to survive, and adverse parties propose amounts which
they honestly believe to be the most they can pay and have sufficient funds left
for them to survive.  Our experience is that both parties often are right, and
that is why this issue brings so many cases to trial.  In exercising the
discretion vested under section 4801, subdivision (a), to reach a fair and just
result, the trial court considers the circumstances listed therein that are
applicable to the case, according each its appropriate weight under the facts of
the case, and issues what the judge believes to be the proper decision.  It is
usually a decision which satisfies neither party, and perhaps that is one
measure of a fair decision.

   The factual and equitable circumstances of each case are unique.  Although
the factors listed in section 4801,  subdivision (a), are comprehensive, their
application in the particular case before the court for trial or modification is
rarely easy.  Determining the weight to be given to each in a particular case,
in order to achieve the statutory goal of an order for support in an amount and
for a period of time "as the court may deem just and reasonable," is
extraordinarily difficult.  The myriad fact situations, the credibility and
believability of the parties, an understanding of human nature, and a sense of
what amounts are reasonable for various items of claimed expenses are all
factors not set forth in the statute, but, in the exercise of discretion, they
inevitably influence the decision ultimately made.  Indeed, one of the most
difficult aspects of the decision the court must make is how much weight should
be given to one of the factors versus one or more of the others applicable to
the case.

    (See fn. 16.) All judges may not possess the wisdom of Solomon, but
determining spousal  support requires judges to exercise their discretion with
all the wisdom they possess. 16

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -16   Our
discussion of spousal support makes clear why trial courts cannot simply use
guidelines for temporary spousal support to make a "permanent" order for spousal
support. The purpose of temporary spousal support is simply to maintain the
status quo until the issue is tried or settled.  The determination of
"permanent" spousal support, in contrast, involves an exercise of discretion by
the court, weighing the applicable factors in section 4801, subdivision (a).  (
In re Marriage of Burlini, supra, 143 Cal.App.3d 65; In re Marriage of
McNaughton (1983) 145 Cal.App.3d 845 [194 Cal.Rptr. 176].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    C. The Cross-appeal.

    (See fn. 17.)

    On the cross-appeal, Bill contends the court erred in granting any increase
in spousal support because there was no showing either that Pat's needs had been
unmet by the 1982 stipulated order or that her needs have reasonably increased
since then. 17

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -17   As to
the 1982 stipulation to modify spousal support, the law presumes "that the
parties arrived at a fair support award, after arm's-length negotiations, that
took into consideration all of the circumstances as they then existed.  The
court thereafter should not permit a party to change this contractual
arrangement, absent changed circumstances, as it would allow a party to
repudiate and change a legal contract for no reason at all." ( In re Marriage of
Hentz (1976) 57 Cal.App.3d 899, 901 [129 Cal.Rptr. 678].) Of course, here the
court found changes in circumstances since the 1982 stipulation.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -



    Again, the applicable principles are as follows: If the only material change
of circumstances since the last prior support order is an increase in the
supporting spouse's ability to pay, support may be increased upon a showing that
the amount of support previously ordered was not adequate to meet the supported
spouse's reasonable needs at that time.  ( In re Marriage of Hopwood, supra, 214
Cal.App.3d at pp. 1607-1608; In re Marriage of Hoffmeister, supra, 191
Cal.App.3d at pp. 363-364.) Support may also be increased upon a showing of a
dual change of circumstances since the last prior support order, consisting of
(1) an increase in the supporting spouse's ability to pay, and (2) an increase
in the supported spouse's post-separation needs (e.g., because of inflation) in
order to maintain a standard of living comparable to the actual (or, as in this
case, reasonable) marital standard of living. ( In re Marriage of Hoffmeister,
supra, 191 Cal.App.3d at p. 364.)

   The court's statement of decision cited two reasons why there was a need for
an increase.  First, the court said the 1982 stipulated order "appears to
acknowledge that $ 1,700 per month was not sufficient spousal support,"  since
Pat had incurred additional debts which Bill had agreed to pay at the rate of $
560 per month for 21 months.  This amounted to a finding that Pat's reasonable
needs had not been satisfied by the 1982 order.  Second, there were "some
adjustments that should be made to account for clothes, entertainment and
medical care." This was a finding of increased needs since the 1982 order.

     The court's first reason -- its interpretation of the 1982 stipulated order
-- is debatable.  Although the 1982 order required additional payments of $ 560
for 21 months, this was for preexisting charge account debts.  The order also
provided that Pat was solely responsible for any subsequent charges on those
accounts.  Thus, the order is equally susceptible to the inference the parties
believed that once the preexisting debts were paid, there would be no further
need for monthly support payments in excess of $ 1,700.  But absent any
significant evidentiary record from 1982 or explanatory recitations in the
stipulated order as to the amount satisfying Pat's reasonable needs, the trial
court could conclude that $ 1,700 per month would not be adequate to meet Pat's
reasonable needs after payment of the preexisting debts, probably recognizing
that Bill, at that time, was expending substantial sums for the college
educations of the parties' adult children.

   In any event, the court's finding of increased needs since the 1982 order is
clearly supported by the record.  A comparison of the income and expense
declarations filed by Pat in 1982 and in November 1987 reveals significant
increases in each of the three categories cited by the trial court.

   First, monthly clothing expenses were asserted to be $ 100 in 1982 and were
estimated at $ 1,000 in 1987, an increase of $ 900.  Obviously the $ 1,000
figure is quite high, but it is comparable to Pat's dollar-equivalent but
preinflation clothing expenses in 1975.  The trial court could properly have
found the increase, or some of it, was reasonable based on Pat's testimony that
she was still wearing the same clothes she had bought during the marriage, had
worn those clothes in 1982, and now had to replace most of her clothing.

   Second, monthly entertainment expenses were estimated at $ 150 in 1982, with
no estimated vacation expenses.  In 1987, Pat's entertainment and vacation
expenses were projected to be $ 500, an increase of $ 350.

   Third, Pat had no medical and dental expenses in 1982 other than her monthly
payments of $ 45 for health insurance upon her move to California, but in 1987,
after the loss of her health insurance, she projected monthly medical and dental
expenses of $ 500, an increase of $ 455.  Bill contends the loss of health
insurance was attributable to Pat's move from Hawaii and was thus her own
decision which should not affect his support responsibility.  However, Pat
testified she moved because she wanted to live closer to her children.

    (See fn. 18.)

    It was purely a trial court function to determine the factual question of
whether this was adequate justification for Pat's unilateral decision to move
and for incurring increased expenses, and  the extent to which the burden for
assisting Pat in sharing these increased expenses should fall on Bill. 18

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -18   Bill
contends that all of Pat's increased expenses since 1982 are a result of her
unilateral decision to sell her Hawaii home, cancel her full health insurance
protection and move back to the San Francisco Bay Area.  It appears from the
evidence that he is correct, but this is another area where the trial court has
broad discretion. When, as the result of a unilateral decision by the supported
spouse, additional expenses are incurred or the supported spouse fails to become
fully self-supporting by the time a prior support order is set to expire,
whether this need for more money should result in an additional burden upon the
supporting spouse is a judgment call to be made by the trial court in the
exercise of its broad discretion. ( In re Marriage of Berland, supra, 215
Cal.App.3d 1257.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The total estimated monthly increase in these three categories was $ 1,705,
19 and was thus more than sufficient to demonstrate increased needs after the
1982 order and was substantial evidence to support the $ 1,600 increase in
spousal support. 20 If the court's analysis of the 1982 stipulated order was
flawed, any flaw is inconsequential.  The statement of decision did not make the
court's determinations of inadequacy of the 1982 order and increased needs after
1982 interdependent for purposes of justifying an increase in support.  We must
therefore assume the court would have ordered the increase even absent its
analysis of the 1982 order, based on the projected increased expenses after
1982.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -19   Bill
also contends Pat's increase in monthly housing expense from $ 1,079 in 1982 to
$ 1,930 in 1987 was attributable to her move and was thus her own fault.  The
trial court did not, however, cite the increase in housing expense as a reason
for increasing spousal support.
20   We assume, because neither party discusses it, that in increasing spousal
support to $ 3,300 per month the court considered the tax consequences to each
party as required by section 4801, subdivision (a)(9).
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

 IV.

   The order is affirmed.  The parties shall bear their own appellate costs.

CONCUR BY: HANING

CONCUR


HANING, J.

   I concur in the result.


                              55 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            MARTIN F. BAIN, Petitioner, v. THE SUPERIOR COURT OF LOS
          ANGELES COUNTY, Respondent; ELIZABETH D. BAIN, Real Party in
                                    Interest

                                 Civ. No. 43308

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Five

            36 Cal. App. 3d 804; 111 Cal. Rptr. 848; 1974 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 720


                                January 21, 1974

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Petitioner's application for a hearing by the Supreme
Court was denied March 20, 1974.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to McKinney's Digest

(1a) (1b) Divorce and Separation § 179(1)--Temporary Alimony--Pending Appeal.
--In a marriage dissolution proceeding, the trial court properly awarded the
wife temporary spousal support pending the husband's appeal from the property
division portions of the interlocutory decree, even though the court had awarded
the wife only three months' permanent support and did not retain jurisdiction to
modify that award, and the wife had not appealed from any portions of the
decree. During the pendency of any proceeding for dissolution, the trial court
may, under Civ. Code, § 4357, order the husband to pay any amount that is
necessary for the support and maintenance of the wife, and the power of the
court to make such an award continues during the pendency of any appeal.  While
Civ. Code, § 4801, subd. (d), proscribing extension of a period of spousal
support unless jurisdiction has been retained, restricts the trial court's power
with respect to permanent support, there is nothing in that provision affecting
the power to award temporary spousal support pending appeal.

(2) Divorce and Separation § 179(1)--Temporary Alimony--Time of Award--Pending
Appeal.  --In a marriage dissolution proceeding, the wife may be awarded spousal
support pending an appeal whether the appeal is taken by the wife or by the
husband or by both parties.

COUNSEL: Stanley O. Epstein and James A. Watkins for Petitioner.

No appearance for Respondent.

Mitchell J. Gratz and Sanford M. Ehrmann for Real Party in Interest.

JUDGES: Opinion by Kaus, P. J., with Stephens and Hastings, JJ., concurring.

OPINION BY: KAUS

OPINION

     This prohibition proceeding grows out of an ongoing property settlement
dispute between Martin F. Bain ("husband"), petitioner in a marriage dissolution
action and Elizabeth D. Bain ("wife").  We issued  the alternative writ on the
husband's application.

   The trial court awarded the wife temporary spousal support, pending the
husband's partial appeal from an interlocutory judgment of dissolution.  The
husband asserts that the trial court had no jurisdiction to award such temporary
support pending appeal, because (1) he has appealed only  from the property
division portions of the decree; (2) the wife has not appealed from any other
portions of the decree; (3) in the decree the trial court awarded the wife only
three months' permanent support and did not retain jurisdiction to modify that
award.

   Facts

   The parties separated in April 1972.  In July 1972 the court ordered the
husband to pay the wife temporary spousal support of $ 1,500 a month.  This
level of support continued until the interlocutory decree, entered June 25,
1973.  The decree provided in relevant part: (1) The husband was ordered to
execute "forthwith" a promissory note for $ 42,843 payable to the wife, which
note represented the wife's share of the community property; he was ordered to
pay the note in installments of "not less than" $ 750 a month.  (2) The husband
was ordered to pay the wife spousal support in the amount of $ 750 a month for
three months, starting May 20, 1973.  The court did not retain jurisdiction to
modify the spousal support provision.

   On July 5, the husband promptly filed a notice of appeal from that portion of
the decree dealing with "the settlement of the property rights." On July 9, the
wife noticed a motion in the trial court, requesting attorney's fees, costs,
spousal support pending the appeal, and modification of the spousal support
provision in the decree to provide for continued jurisdiction.  She stated in
her supporting declaration that she had counted on supporting herself with the $
750 a month payments from the property settlement, that without spousal support
pending the husband's appeal she would be at the "mercy" of the husband, and
that she would be left with no alternative other than to file a cross-appeal,
thereby incurring additional costs.

   On August 2, the trial court modified the interlocutory decree to provide
that the $ 750 a month property settlement payments "will be payable unless [the
husband] posts adequate bond on appeal." The order also stated: "Since [the
wife] has appealed only from that portion of the Interlocutory Judgment which
settles the property rights of the parties, the provisions of the Interlocutory
Judgment pertaining to spousal support will become final."

   On September 28, 1 the wife again noticed a motion for spousal support
pending the husband's appeal.  She declared that the husband had posted bond in
lieu of making payments, she had been unable to get a job and was in debt, and,
unless the court awarded spousal support pending appeal,   the "only other
alternative is the obvious one of disposing of my community property rights by
an unfair and unjust settlement."

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   The time
to appeal the interlocutory decree ended about August 25, 1973.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   On October 16, 1973, the trial court ordered the husband to pay the wife
temporary spousal support of $ 750 a month "until final disposition of [the
husband's] appeal . . . or further order of the Court, . . ."

   This petition followed.

   Discussion

    The issue is straightforward: Does jurisdiction to award temporary support
to the wife, pending the husband's appeal, depend on whether the trial court, in
its interlocutory decree retains jurisdiction to modify an order for permanent
support, or, alternatively, on whether finality of the permanent support order
has been postponed by an appeal therefrom?

   Adverting first to the latter alternative: the husband stresses over and over
that no appeal from the order for permanent  spousal support was taken.  The
implication is that the wife could have preserved the trial court's jurisdiction
by appealing.  The July 9, 1973, motion showed that her failure to do so was not
an oversight.  Presumably she did not file an appeal because she and her counsel
felt that there would have been no merit to it.  The statutory scheme for
temporary and permanent spousal support would certainly be subject to criticism
if it put a premium on the filing of a frivolous appeal.  Luckily it does not.

   As far as permanent spousal support is concerned, the court's power is
legislatively defined as follows: "An order for payment of . . . support . . .
shall terminate at the end of the period specified in the order and shall not be
extended unless the court in its original order retains jurisdiction." ( Civ.
Code, § 4801, subd. (d) [formerly Civ. Code, § 139.7]; Faught v. Faught, 30
Cal.App.3d 875, 877-878 [106 Cal.Rptr. 751]; Maben v. Superior Court, 255
Cal.App.2d 708, 711, 714 [63 Cal.Rptr. 439].)

   However, with respect to temporary support, California law provides without
any stated relevant restrictions: "During the pendency of any proceeding under
Title 3 [dissolutions]  . . . the superior court may order the husband . . . to
pay any amount that is necessary for the support and maintenance of the wife . .
. ." ( Civ. Code, § 4357.) 2 An order  for temporary support pending litigation
is independent of any alimony award in the main action, and the power of the
court to make such an award continues during the pendency of any appeal.  (E.g.,
Bruce v. Bruce, 160 Cal. 28, 29-30 [116 P. 66]; Bohnert v. Bohnert, 91 Cal. 428,
431 [27 P. 732].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   This
provision has lived under other numbers: Civil Code, section 4516, repealed
Statutes 1970, chapter 311, section 6; Civil Code, section 137.2, repealed
Statutes 1969, chapter 1608, section 3; Civil Code, section 137, amended
Statutes 1951, chapter 1700, sections 1, 3.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The wife may be awarded spousal support pending an appeal whether the
appellant is the wife ( Gay v. Gay, 146 Cal. 237, 238-239 [79 P. 885]  [no
permanent alimony awarded]; Bohnert v. Bohnert, supra, 91 Cal. 428, 430-431
[same]) or the husband ( Sheppard v. Sheppard, 161 Cal. 348, 350-351 [119 P.
492] [permanent alimony awarded]) or both parties ( Falk v. Falk, 48 Cal.App.2d
780, 782 [120 P.2d 724] [property division]).

    None of the rules stated above is disputed.  What is disputed is whether the
enactment of section 139.7, now section 4801, subdivision (d), changed
California law with respect to awarding temporary spousal support pending
appeal, where, as here, a time-limited permanent award of spousal support was
not appealed and the decree did not retain jurisdiction to modify that award.

   Some additional statutory background will be helpful: The original alimony
and child support section was enacted in 1872 as Civil Code section 139.
Continuing jurisdiction was conferred by the statute: ". . . and the Court may,
from time to time, modify its [alimony and child support] orders in these
respects." The jurisdiction language remained substantially unchanged until
1965, when section 139.7, now section 4801, subdivision (d) was added. 3 Thus,
from 1872 until 1965, jurisdiction was preserved by statute; from 1965 on,
jurisdiction was not preserved unless expressly reserved.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Civil
Code section 139.7 was repealed in 1969 (Stats. 1969, ch. 1608, § 3) and
replaced by section 4801, which contains the same jurisdiction provision.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   However, even before the enactment of section 139.7, now section 4801,
subdivision (d), the reserved jurisdiction of the court was limited: "Prior to
the enactment of section 139.7, a decree awarding alimony carried within it,
without the necessity of language to that effect, a reservation of jurisdiction
to modify it at any time prior to the expiration of the term for which alimony
was awarded.  . . ." ( Dahlstet v. Dahlstet,  272 Cal.App.2d 174, 178 [77
Cal.Rptr. 45] [italics added].) If the spouse applied for a modification after
the period of the award had expired, the court had no jurisdiction to extend or
modify the award.  ( Tolle v.  Superior Court, 10 Cal.2d 95, 97-98 [73 P.2d 607]
.)  Similarly, if the original decree awarded no alimony, the court had no
jurisdiction to award alimony later.  ( Howell v. Howell, 104 Cal. 45, 47 [37 P.
770].)

   Despite these restrictions on the power of the trial court with respect to
permanent support, there never has been any question about the trial court's
power to award temporary spousal support pending appeal. We perceive nothing in
the enactment of section 139.7, now section 4801, subdivision (d), to change
that result.  The only apparent effect on the law of spousal support made by
section 4801, subdivision (d), is that the court cannot modify an order for a
"period specified," unless jurisdiction is retained in the "original order . . .
." 4 (Italics added.) (See Dahlstet v. Dahlstet, supra, 272 Cal.App.2d 174, 178,
180.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   Maben v.
Superior Court, supra, 255 Cal.App.2d 708, 712, suggests that a timelimited
order subject to section 139.7 could have been modified if the wife had sought
modification during the period covered by the order.  Dahlstet v. Dahlstet,
supra, questions Maben on this point.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Thus, the husband's reliance on Faught v. Faught, supra, 30 Cal.App.3d 875,
is misplaced.  Faught held that where a trial court did not retain continuing
jurisdiction to extend spousal support in a separate maintenance order, the
court had no jurisdiction to do so in a subsequent dissolution action.  (30
Cal.App.3d at pp. 877-878.) But the determination of permanent spousal support
is, as the court noted, an adjudication on the merits of the parties' financial
relationships.  ( Id. at p. 878.) Temporary support orders pending litigation
are quite another matter: "While a pendente lite order has many features of a
judgment in other contexts, it does not finally determine the rights of the
parties in the sense of a judgment, has no tendency to bring the litigation to
conclusion, . . ." ( Moore v. Superior Court, 8 Cal.App.3d 804, 810 [87
Cal.Rptr. 620].)

   Given the limited impact of section 139.7--now section 4801, subdivision (d)
--on a trial court's continuing jurisdiction, we can find no reason for holding
that the mere enactment of that section worked, in effect, a repeal of the
temporary spousal support law in existence for some 100 years, and as we have
noted, applied without regard to which spouse appealed or the subject matter of
the appeal.

   We therefore reject the husband's contention that the right to temporary
spousal support pending an appeal depends upon the issues being appealed.  Thus,
we need not discuss whether, in fact, the provisions in the decree for spousal
support and for property division are severable, so that the spousal support
provision is not really final.  (See People ex rel. Dept. Pub. Wks. v. Lagiss,
223 Cal.App.2d 23, 45-46 [35 Cal.Rptr. 554].)

    The point is, simply, that regardless of the issues being appealed, the wife
is entitled to temporary support pending that appeal so that she is not, through
economic duress, deprived of the benefits of the trial court's judgment.

   To conclude, we find Falk v. Falk, supra, 48 Cal.App.2d 780, 786, which
upheld a trial court order for temporary alimony pending appeal by both parties
on the community property division most instructive: "The application in the
complaint for divorce for an allowance of $ 500 per month as permanent alimony
was not granted.  All the relief the [wife] secured under the complaint was an
award for one-half of the community property, the whole of which is retained by
the [husband] pending the appeals.  In lieu of an allowance for permanent
alimony, on motion therefor, under section 137 [now 4357] of the Civil Code, she
was allowed $ 200 a month  pending the determination of the appealed cases.
That is a proper emergency provision to enable the plaintiff to continue to live
in substantially the same manner she has been accustomed to live, pending the
determination of the appealed cases.  The statutory right to necessary alimony
pendente lite is separate and distinct from an award of permanent alimony or
maintenance which may be awarded under proper circumstances.  The fact that the
wife was awarded one-half of the community property furnishes no reason why she
may not also be entitled to alimony pendente lite, particularly when the custody
and control of the entire community property is retained by the husband."

   We agree with the reasoning and the result in Falk.  The alternative writ of
prohibition heretofore issued is discharged.  The peremptory writ is denied.


                              56 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             In re the Marriage of WALTER and BEVERLY BEUST. WALTER
                BEUST, Respondent, v. BEVERLY BEUST, Appellant.

                                  No. B072474.

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SECOND APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION SIX.

           23 Cal. App. 4th 24; 28 Cal. Rptr. 2d 201; 1994 Cal. App.
          LEXIS 203; 94 Cal. Daily Op. Service 1758; 94 Daily Journal
                                    DAR 3093


                             March 8, 1994, Decided

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     As Modified on Denial of Rehearing April 1, 1994,
Reported at: 1994 Cal. App. LEXIS 291.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Santa Barbara County, No. 159681, Thomas R.
Adams, Jr., Judge.

COUNSEL: George L. Wittenburg for Appellant.

Thomas P. Anderle for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Stone S. J., P. J., with Gilbert and Yegan, JJ., concurring.

OPINION BY: STONE (S. J.), P. J.

OPINION

     Beverly Beust (Beverly) appeals the trial court's denial of her motion for
modification of spousal support from her former husband Walter Beust (Walter).
We reverse.

   Facts

   The parties' marriage was dissolved in 1986 pursuant to a stipulated
judgment. They had been married for 32 years. Beverly did not work outside of
the home during the marriage. She is now 60 years old.

   Walter is employed as an executive with Raytheon Company, and was so employed
during his marriage to Beverly. His annual income is in the $100,000 range.  He
has remarried and his current wife is a real estate agent.

   Following the dissolution of her marriage to Walter, Beverly moved to
Massachusetts. The parties had purchased a condominium there during their
marriage, which was awarded to Beverly and in which she currently resides.
Beverly obtained full-time employment in Massachusetts as a bookkeeper until
November 1991 when she was laid off. Thereafter, she received unemployment
benefits. Just prior to filing her motion for modification of support in June
1992, she found another full-time job at an automobile dealership, and presently
continues in that employment.

   The pertinent portion of the parties' stipulated judgment reads: "1. [Walter]
shall pay to [Beverly] as and for spousal support the sum of $2,500 per month
commencing August 1, 1986, and payable on the first of each and every month
thereafter for a period of six (6) years, through July 31, 1992, at which time
spousal support shall be reduced to One Dollar ($1.00) per year payable on
August 1 of each year commencing August 1, 1992, unless sooner terminated upon
the remarriage or death of [Beverly] or death of [Walter] or further order of
Court. [P] [Beverly] shall be entitled to earn up to $10,000 per year and such
earnings shall not be the basis for a reduction in spousal support. Spousal
support shall be reduced One Dollar ($1.00) for each One Dollar ($1.00) which
[Beverly] earns in excess of $10,000 per year, gross earnings. [P] [Walter] and
[Beverly] acknowledge their understanding that the spousal support ordered
herein is modifiable and may be increased or decreased upon proper application
to a Court of competent jurisdiction. The parties further understand that the
reduction of spousal support to One Dollar ($1.00) per year (which is a commonly
used vehicle for 'jurisdictional support') preserves [Beverly's] right to seek
an extension of the period of time during which spousal  support shall be paid,
provided that  all other factors upon which the payment of spousal support is
based are present (that [Beverly] has not remarried, for example). It is not the
intention of the parties, by insertion of the foregoing language in this
stipulation, to in any way alter or amend the existing rules and authorities
with respect to modification of spousal support as ordered herein, but only to
clarify the fact that spousal support is modifiable and that the Court does have
the right to modify the duration of the spousal support obligation by extending
or reducing it and to modify the amount of spousal support either upward or
downward, upon proper showing to the Court." (Italics added.)

   No modification of the stipulated judgment pertaining to spousal support was
sought by either party until Beverly filed her modification motion in June 1992.
This was two months prior to the automatic stepdown provision reducing support
payments to $1 per year effective August 1, 1992. Beverly's motion requested an
extension of the period of the prejurisdictional support payments.

   Beverly's declaration attached to her modification motion stated that from
1989 to 1991 the amount of her spousal support from Walter had been adjusted for
the amount of earnings she received in excess of $10,000 per year. She said she
was still dependent on continued support from Walter in order to meet her living
expenses. She did not want to invade her investment money from the marriage
which was for her retirement, and she did not have any additional retirement or
pension plan.  1 She further stated that Walter had the means to continue paying
her spousal support and that his income had increased due to his remarriage.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Beverly's
income and expense declaration showed a total of $191,000 in property including
money in checking and savings accounts, certificates of deposit and money market
accounts, stocks and bonds, and real property (the condo valued at $58,000). In
responding to Beverly's motion for modification in the trial court, Walter
stated that the parties' settlement was intended to "provide [Beverly] with
assets and income and an opportunity to add to her income so that I could have a
definite time when I would no longer pay spousal support . . .." (Italics
added.) On appeal, however, neither party discusses the issue of the value of
Beverly's property in relation to Beverly's request for continuing spousal
support. Walter's silence on this subject is a concession that Beverly need not
invade "retirement assets" for current support.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Beverly submitted an income and expense declaration showing total monthly
expenses of $3,017 and a net monthly disposable income of $1,198. This resulted
in a net monthly deficit in living expenses of $1,819. Walter's income and
expense declaration showed his total monthly expenses were $7,516 and his net
monthly disposable income was $9,344. Walter's declaration clarified that his
wife, although earning $20,652 in 1991 as a real estate agent, had zero income
in 1992. He stated that his income for the last 12 months was $131,274.

    Walter opposed Beverly's motion for modification of support on the grounds
that the settlement agreement provided he "could have a definite time when I
would no longer pay spousal support"; the settlement also was designed to permit
Beverly to be employed without losing her right to spousal support for six
years; although receiving the benefit of that bargain she now does not want its
burden; and Beverly has suffered no change of circumstances since the
dissolution except that now she is working and earns about $19,240 per year.  2


- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   The
record indicates that Beverly's gross earnings are $370 per week ($19,240 gross
annual), and $273 net per week ($14,196 net annual).
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    At the hearing on Beverly's modification motion, her counsel argued that the
settlement agreement allows modification of support subject only to the court's
discretion, that the parties' marriage was long term, and that there is a legal
presumption in favor of continued support after a lengthy marriage. Walter's
counsel argued that Beverly was trying to repudiate the stipulated agreement's
"step-down" provision and that Walter's remarriage was not a material change of
circumstance justifying modification of the agreement. Walter's counsel further
cited the case of In re Marriage of Aninger (1990) 220 Cal. App. 3d 230 [269
Cal.Rptr. 388] as controlling.

    Although stating that Beverly's counsel could argue she had shown her
monthly expenses "far outreach" any income she brings in, the court denied her
modification motion to continue duration of support. It found that 1) In re
Marriage of Aninger, supra, 220 Cal. App. 3d 230, was on point relative to the
facts of this case, 2) no evidence was presented indicating that despite
Beverly's reasonable efforts she was unable to support herself, and 3) it was
inappropriate to discard the parties' negotiated settlement in the absence of a
showing by Beverly of a change of circumstances.

   DISCUSSION

     The issue is whether the trial court abused its discretion by denying
Beverly's motion to extend the duration of spousal support in an amount above
the jurisdictional level. The court concluded in denying the motion that there
was "no" evidence Beverly was unable to support herself. In view of the
uncontradicted evidence that Beverly's income is insufficient to pay all her
living expenses, we conclude the court's decision is erroneous.

   Implicit in Walter's brief is the erroneous theory that the parties'
agreement contemplated an end to his support obligation. This theory is not
supported by any language in the subject agreement. To the contrary, the
language is unambiguous and reserves for future court decision, should the  need
arise, Beverly's entitlement to spousal support beyond July 1992. The agreement
expressly states that the court's power of modification extends both to the
amount and duration of support. (See In re Marriage of Schaffer (1984) 158 Cal.
App. 3d 930, 935 [205 Cal.Rptr. 88].) Beverly is not seeking to repudiate the
stipulated judgment; she is simply asking the trial court to exercise its
discretion under the judgment to continue the period of prejurisdictional
support.

   The parties' marriage was of long duration and when it was over Beverly was
in her 50's and was unemployable. There is no evidence in the re cord that she
had any experience, training or education to qualify her for employment.

   We are not suggesting hereby that it is never appropriate for a court to
order termination of spousal support under similar circumstances. (See In re
Marriage of Prietsch & Calhoun (1987) 190 Cal. App. 3d 645, 661 [235 Cal.Rptr.
587].)  It is a state policy to encourage spouses to become self-supporting. (
In re Marriage of Rosan (1972) 24 Cal. App. 3d 885, 897 [101 Cal.Rptr. 295].) On
the other hand, State policy disfavors termination of spousal support on a
specific future date, even if it is based on the hope that this will induce the
supported spouse to become financially independent. ( In re Marriage of Vomacka
(1984) 36 Cal.3d 459, 467 [204 Cal.Rptr. 568, 683 P.2d 248].)  Where, as here,
the marriage is of long duration and the wife is without employment skills, the
husband's support obligation may be extended. ( In re Marriage of Brantner
(1977) 67 Cal. App. 3d 416, 420 [136 Cal.Rptr. 635].)

   To justify a continuation of support, Beverly has the burden to show a change
of circumstances since the agreement was executed in 1986. So long as the
supported spouse has made reasonable efforts to become self-supporting, a change
of circumstances may be in the form of "unrealized expectations" in the ability
of the supported spouse to become self-supporting within a certain period of
time. (In re Marriage of Aninger,  supra, 220 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 240-241; In re
Marriage of Berland (1989) 215 Cal. App. 3d 1257, 1263-1264 [264 Cal.Rptr. 210];
In re Marriage of Hoffmeister (1987) 191 Cal. App. 3d 351, 365 [236 Cal.Rptr.
543]; In re Marriage of Sheridan (1983) 140 Cal. App. 3d 742, 748 [189 Cal.Rptr.
622].) "[T]he question of reasonable expectations is material and a failure to
realize them may constitute a change of circumstances justifying modification of
the order." ( Bratnober v. Bratnober (1957) 48 Cal.2d 259, 263 [309 P.2d 441].)

   Here, Walter admits that the parties' agreement indicated they "expected" her
to be self-supporting by 1992. Beverly presented evidence that she has  made
reasonable efforts to become self-supporting, but has failed to do so as
"expected." The trial judge made no inquiry into this change of circumstance,
and even declared there was no evidence  of Beverly's inability to be
self-supporting. This defies the factual record.

     A supported spouse's need is an essential element in determining
entitlement to support independent of the other spouse's ability to pay. ( In re
Marriage of Hoffmeister (1984) 161 Cal. App. 3d 1163, 1175 [208 Cal.Rptr. 345].)
Here, the court's failure to give any weight to Beverly's evidence of continuing
need is more egregious in light of Walter's continuing ability to pay spousal
support. Thus, this situation is not one where the financial needs of both
parties cannot be satisfied. ( In re Marriage of Morrison (1978) 20 Cal.3d 437,
455 [143 Cal.Rptr. 139, 573 P.2d 41].) As such, the court's denial of Beverly's
motion for modification is an abuse of its discretion.

   We are not suggesting that Beverly is entitled to the same amount of support
she was previously receiving. However, the previous support order of $2,500 per
month ($30,000 per year) plus the $10,000 allowed for annual earnings gave
Beverly a potential net income of approximately $40,000 per year or about $3,300
per month. The result of the trial court's denial of her modification motion is
that her net monthly income is reduced to about $1,500, while Walter continues
to enjoy a net monthly income of about $7,000. It is inequitable after a long
marriage to supply the husband with a continued standard of living much higher
than the wife's. ( In re Marriage of Andreen (1978) 76 Cal. App. 3d 667, 671
[208 Cal.Rptr. 345].)

   The facts of Aninger, the case adopted by the trial court as on point, are
dissimilar and Aninger is not controlling here. There, the wife was unable to
meet an $800 increase in her monthly housing cost due to her unwise purchase of
a residence beyond her financial means. The appellate court ruled that this was
insufficient to show a failure of the expectation of the wife's
self-sufficiency, since the parties could not have reasonably intended the wife
to undertake such a debt. (In re Marriage of Aninger, supra, 220 Cal. App. 3d at
p. 238.) Here, in contrast, an order granting Beverly's request for modification
would not violate the parties' expectations pursuant to their written agreement.

   Nor does our ruling in this case conflict with our decision in In re Marriage
of Biderman (1992) 5 Cal.App.4th 409 [6 Cal.Rptr.2d 791]. There, we concluded no
material change of circumstances was shown since the parties had made no
assumption or expectation that, as the supported spouse, the husband's mental
condition would improve in the future enabling him to  resume employment.
Instead, under the parties' agreement it was their intent that his disability
would continue. (Id. at pp. 413-414.) Here, the parties did expect Beverly to
become self-supporting.

   The record provides substantial evidence of a change in circumstances, as
well as an overwhelming basis for modification including a showing of Beverly's
need, Walter's ability to pay, and authorization to modify pursuant to the
parties' marital settlement agreement. Under these circumstances, the trial
court's order constitutes an abuse of its discretion as either one without a
reasonable factual basis or a ruling amounting to a manifest miscarriage of
justice. ( Baggett v. Gates (1982) 32 Cal.3d 128, 142-143 [185 Cal.Rptr. 232,
649 P.2d 874].)

   The order denying Beverly's motion for modification of spousal support is
reversed. This case is remanded to the superior court for rehearing on the
amount and duration of spousal support.

   Beverly is awarded her reasonable attorney fees and costs on appeal, to be
determined by the trial court.

   Gilbert, J., and Yegan, J., concurred.


                              57 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            In re the Marriage of SARA JOYCE and RICHARD L. JOHNSON.
             SARA JOYCE JOHNSON, Appellant, v. RICHARD L. JOHNSON,
                                   Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 50188

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                 Division Five

            143 Cal. App. 3d 57; 191 Cal. Rptr. 545; 1983 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1734


                                  May 18, 1983

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     On June 9, 1983, the opinion was modified to read as
printed above.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Humboldt County, No. 60789, Lawrence A.
Truitt, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1) Husband and Wife § 30--Determination of Character--Evidence--To Overcome
Presumptions--Joint Tenancy.  --The statutory presumption of community property
that arises when an asset is held in joint tenancy ( Civ. Code, § 5110) can be
overcome only by proof of an agreement or an understanding that a separate
property interest was to be retained. Thus, the trial court's determination in a
dissolution of marriage proceeding that the parties' residence and fishing boat
held in joint tenancy were the husband's separate property based on direct
tracing, was error. The issue required retrial, since there was disputed
evidence whether the parties had an agreement or understanding that a separate
property interest was to be retained by the husband.

(2) Husband and Wife § 11--Community and Separate Property Distinguished--
Commingling of Property--Tracing.  --A finding of a separate property interest
based on tracing requires proof that separate property funds were actually used
to purchase the property at issue; the mere availability of separate property
funds is insufficient to prove tracing.

(3) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 52--Division of Community and
Quasi-community Property--Valuation.  --In a dissolution of marriage proceeding,
the trial court erred in ruling that it lacked jurisdiction to assign a value to
a fishing boat other than the value assigned at the time of trial, and in
denying the wife's motion for reconsideration of its value, where the motion was
filed before the interlocutory judgment was rendered, and where the wife
asserted that after the boat had been valued at $ 90,000 the husband had sold it
for $ 140,000.

(4) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 64--Support of Other Party--Adequacy
or Excessiveness.  --In a dissolution of marriage proceeding the trial court
erred in ordering a reduction of the wife's spousal support to $ 750 per month
from $ 1,000 per month during the second year, and to $ 500 a month for the
third year, where there was insufficient evidence that the wife's earning
capacity would increase or her needs decrease or that the husband's ability to
pay would decrease during the three-year period.

(5) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 50--Division of Community and
Quasi-community Property--Property Subject to Division--Property Acquired During
Cohabitation.  --The provisions of the Family Law Act do not govern the
distribution of property acquired by a couple during a period of cohabitation
preceding their marriage, and the trial court in a dissolution of marriage
proceeding lacks jurisdiction over a claim based on a cohabitation agreement.
However, a party may file a separate action as to such property and move to
consolidate it with a dissolution of marriage proceeding.

(6) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 40--Pendente Lite Orders--Support,
Maintenance, and Child Custody During Proceedings--Determination of Amount--
Support.  --Where a temporary spousal support order was based on the wife's
income and expense declaration showing that she was receiving $ 100 per month in
rental income from community property, the husband would not be entitled to any
credit for the rental income the wife received if the amount of temporary
support was increased.

(7) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 43--Pendente Lite Orders--Support,
Maintenance, and Child Custody During Proceedings--Order and Appeal--Support--
Failure to Act on Motion.  --The trial court's failure in a dissolution of
marriage proceeding to act on a wife's repeated request for an upward
modification of temporary spousal support based on a clear change of the
husband's financial circumstances was error and the motions were deemed
erroneously denied on appeal even though the trial court never issued a formal
order acting on it.

COUNSEL: John W. Cooper, Jr., Stephen Adams, De Goff & Sherman and Richard
Sherman for Appellant Wife.

Larry B. Nord and Dalton, Nord & Bicknell for Appellant Husband.

JUDGES: Opinion by King, J., with Low, P. J., and Haning, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: KING

OPINION

     Sara Joyce Johnson appeals from an interlocutory judgment of dissolution as
to property interests, spousal support, and disposition of property acquired
while the parties were living together prior to their marriage. Her husband,
Richard L. Johnson, cross-appeals contending the trial court erred in not
awarding his fishing boat to him as his separate property. For the reasons
hereafter set forth, the interlocutory judgment of dissolution is affirmed as to
termination of marital status, disposition of household furniture, furnishings
and appliances, the 1973 Toyota automobile, the 1975 GMC Blazer, the Luv pickup
truck, and the Falcon trailer, as well as the order for attorneys' fees and
costs and the spousal support payable by Richard to Sara (excluding substantive
step down provisions of the spousal support order).  In all other respects it is
reversed.  The trial court is deemed to have denied Sara's motions for upward
modification of temporary spousal support and that order is reversed.

   Sara and Richard began living together in November 1967, but were not married
until September 25, 1970.  On November 24, 1976, Sara filed a petition for
dissolution of the marriage. The court rendered its interlocutory judgment of
dissolution on October 4, 1979.  Additionalfacts will be stated as each issue is
discussed.

   Sara's first contention on appeal is that the trial court erred in finding
that Richard had a separate property interest in the family residence the
parties purchased after the date of marriage and which they held as joint
tenants.  This determination was based upon Richard's proof of his separate
property funds being used for half of the down payment.  Sara raises a similar
objection with regard to the fishing boat, the Cindy J.  Richard held the boat
in his name alone but transferred title to both parties as joint tenants during
the marriage. Richard's cross-appeal is based on the contention that the trial
court erred in not finding that the Cindy J. was entirely his separate property.

   While this appeal was pending, the law applicable to these contentions was
clarified by the California Supreme Court in In re Marriage of Lucas (1980) 27
Cal.3d 808 [166 Cal.Rptr. 853, 614 P.2d 285] and its progeny In re Marriage of
Miller (1982) 133 Cal.App.3d 988 [184 Cal.Rptr. 408]; In re Marriage of Priddis
(1982) 132 Cal.App.3d 349 [183 Cal.Rptr. 37]; In re Marriage of Hayden (1981)
124 Cal.App.3d 72 [177 Cal.Rptr. 183]; and In re Marriage of Cademartori (1981)
119 Cal.App.3d 970 [174 Cal.Rptr. 292].  The rule in California now is that the
statutory presumptions of community property where an asset is held in joint
tenancy  ( Civ. Code, § 5110) can be overcome only by proof of an agreement or
an understanding that a separate property interest was to be retained.  (See In
re Marriage of Lucas, supra, 27 Cal.3d at pp.  814-815.)

   At trial, the court based its determination of the interests in both the
family residence and the Cindy J. upon direct tracing. This is error under Lucas
.  The issues must be retried since there was disputed evidence whether the
parties had an agreement or understanding that a separate property interest was
to be retained by Richard.

    On remand, if the court finds an agreement or understanding, Richard's
theory of tracing based on purported availability of separate property funds in
the Cindy J. bank account must still be rejected.   Tracing requires proof that
separate property funds were actually used to purchase the property at issue;
the mere availability of separate property funds is insufficient.  ( In re
Marriage of Marsden(1982) 130 Cal.App.3d 426, 440-446 [181 Cal.Rptr. 910]; see
Estate of Murphy (1976) 15 Cal.3d 907, 909 [126 Cal.Rptr. 820, 544 P.2d 956].)

     The trial court, in its memorandum of intended decision of December 5,
1978, found the fair market value of the Cindy J. to be $ 90,000.  On March 9,
1979, before judgment was rendered, Sara filed a motion for "reconsideration of
boat value" asserting that Richard had sold the Cindy J. for $ 140,000.  The
court denied the motion stating it could "find nothing in the authority
submitted by petitioner that would justify an evaluation date other than the
date of trial." Sara contends that the court erred when it determined that it
lacked jurisdiction to assign a value to the Cindy J. as of any date other than
the date of trial. She correctly relies on In re Marriage of Olson (1980) 27
Cal.3d 414, 422 [165 Cal.Rptr. 820, 612 P.2d 910], decided after the trial
herein, which held that it was an abuse of discretion for the trial court to
deny a motion to reopen for a more current determination of a house's value
following a foreclosure sale between the date of tentative decision and the
final judgment.  (See also In re Marriage  of Rives (1982) 130 Cal.App.3d 138,
152-153 [181 Cal.Rptr. 572].) The proper remedy for this error is to remand the
cause for revaluation, including the determination of any postseparation
interests of husband in the vessel and consideration of any tax consequences of
the sale.

   Sara also contends that she was entitled to a portion of the postseparation
gross receipts of $ 117,000 from Richard's use of the Cindy J. as a commercial
fishing vessel. The court's memorandum of intended decision and subsequent
findings and judgment made no reference to this income, even though Sara
proposed a finding on this point.  This issue must also be addressed on remand.
Its resolution depends upon the court's determination of what community property
interest, if any, the parties had in the Cindy J.

   In February 1977, subsequent to the separation of the parties, Richard
purchased a residence on Lee Ann Drive, making a down payment of $ 16,000 and
taking title as an unmarried man, even though there had not yet been either an
interlocutory or final judgment of dissolution of the marriage. Sara contends
the trial court erred in failing to order any disposition of this property.
Since the property was acquired subsequent to the filing of the dissolution
action, her petition did not mention this property and she never moved to amend
to include it for disposition by the court.  At trial, Sara's counsel did
cross-examine Richard concerning the property but still neglected to amend the
pleadings.   (Compare In re Marriage of Denney (1981) 115 Cal.App.3d 543,
556-557 [171 Cal.Rptr. 440] [request for payment of attorneys' fees in trial
brief constituted amendment to pleadings].) Since the cause must be remanded for
further proceeding on other issues, Sara may now move to amend the pleadings to
seek disposition of the Lee Ann Drive property.

   The trial court ordered in its interlocutory judgment of dissolution that
Richard should pay Sara the sum of $ 1,000 per month for spousal support for one
year, $ 750 per month for an additional year, and $ 500 a month for a third
year.  No reservation of jurisdiction was thereafter retained.  Sara contends
that the court erred both in   ordering substantive stepdowns and in failing to
retain jurisdiction beyond a 12-month period after the last stepdown. The
parties agree that due to an apparent clerical error, the court failed to
include in its judgment an additional 12-month retention of jurisdiction over
spousal support as it had provided in its memorandum of intended decision, and
agree that the judgment should be modified accordingly.

     As to the stepdowns, there was insufficient evidence that Sara's earning
capacity would increase or her needs decrease or that Richard's ability to pay
would decrease during the three-year period.  ( In re Marriage of Smith (1978)
79 Cal.App.3d 725, 739-740 [145 Cal.Rptr. 205].) The only such evidence was
Sara's testimony that it would take at least one year for her to be retrained as
a secretary.  But she did not, as implied by Richard, testify that such
retraining would increase her earning capacity; she testified only that she
planned to retrain for office work because the poor condition of her feet and
legs prevented her from continuing to work as a waitress.

   There was some evidence that Sara's needs would decrease after the first
year:  she testified that retraining would take "at least a year" and that "with
my schooling" she would require $ 1,000 per month in support.  However, there
was no evidence as to how much her needs would decrease after schooling was no
longer required.  Thus the $ 250 per month second year stepdown (implying
schooling costs of $ 3,000) was unsupported by any evidence of a specific
decrease in need.  The third year stepdown lacked any supporting evidence at
all.

   Since we have determined there must be a retrial on every other significant
issue in the case, we deem it appropriate for the trial judge upon retrial to
redetermine what spousal support order should be made.  On remand, spousal
support for the three-year period shall be fixed at $ 1,000 per month unless
Richard establishes what changes, if any, should have been made in the
circumstances of the parties as they existed during the three years encompassing
the substantive stepdown. Since Richard did not appeal from the spousal support
order, in no event shall Sara receive less than the monthly amounts accrued
under the original order.  The order for spousal support contained in  the
interlocutory judgment has not been stayed during the appeal and will remain in
effect, except the court shall retain jurisdiction over the issue of spousal
support until the entry of judgment on that issue following its retrial. This is
without prejudice to either party making motions with regard to spousal support
pending retrial.

   Sara also challenges the court's determination that there was insufficient
evidence of a Marvin agreement during the parties' period of cohabitation before
marriage. As Richard correctly points out, however, this claim is to be
rejected, because Sara did not file an independent civil action on the basis of
an alleged Marvin agreement.   The provisions of the Family Law Act do not
govern the distribution of such property and the trial court thus lacked
jurisdiction over her Marvin claim.  ( Cal. Rules of Court, rules 1211- 1212;
Marvin v. Marvin (1976) 18 Cal.3d 660, 665, 681 [134 Cal.Rptr. 815, 557 P.2d
106].) Sara is not precluded from filing a Marvin action and moving to
consolidate it with this action.

   When she filed her petition for dissolution Sara also filed an order to show
cause seeking temporary spousal support which was heard December 20, 1976.
Sara's income and expense declaration disclosed net monthly income of $ 400 per
month and $ 670 of expenses, while Richard's showed expenses of $ 1,352 and
stated the following as to income: "Unknown -- Note: Husband's income varies so
widely from month to month, that we cannot give an accurate amount.  Some months
there is no income, some months there is as much as $ 1,000 gross." Based upon
this evidence, the trial court awarded Sara temporary spousal support of $ 100
per month beginning with the month of December 1976.

   As a result of subsequent pretrial discovery, Sara learned that Richard had
deposited $ 23,000 more into his bank account than his business records
disclosed and, additionally, that he had gross receipts of  $ 117,000 from
January 1, 1977, through March 1977.  (The trial court's memorandum of intended
decision filed Dec. 5, 1978, noted that Richard's adjusted gross income for the
year 1977 was $ 76,181.) Contending that Richard had not fully disclosed his
income or assets at the time of the initial order to show cause, Sara brought a
motion in March 1977, for an upward modification of temporary spousal support to
the amount of $ 500 per month.  For reasons we cannot ascertain from the record,
the matter was repeatedly continued and not ruled upon by the court.  Sara
therefore filed an additional motion for an increase in spousal support on May
2, 1977, requesting $ 1,000per month for temporary spousal support. Trial was
set at that time for May 24, 1977, and the motion was continued by the court to
the time of trial.  However, trial did not actually commence until April 12,
1978, almost one year later.  In September 1977, Sara filed yet another motion
to increase temporary spousal support which, again for  reasons the record fails
to disclose, was continued five times.  The matter was finally heard, with other
motions, on November 21, 1977, but the court did not rule on Sara's motion for
upward modification of temporary spousal support. Trial finally commenced on
April 12, 1978, but the court had still not decided the case by November 1978,
so Sara again renewed her motion for an increase in temporary support.  The
motion was continued two additional times and finally heard on November 20,
1978.  As part of this hearing, Richard claimed an offset of $ 1,800 for rental
income from community property received by Sara between the date of separation
and the date of trial.

   Even if Richard were entitled to such a credit, it would only be $ 900, as
the income would be community property.  But it appears from the record that the
original temporary spousal support order of $ 100 a month was based on Sara's
income and expense declaration showing she was receiving $ 100 per month in
rental income. Since the court considered this in making its original temporary
spousal support order, Richard was not entitled to any credit for the rental
income she received.

     In any event, the conduct of the trial court in failing to hear and act
upon Sara's repeated requests for an upward modification based upon a clear
change of Richard's financial circumstances was not only error, but grievous
error.  To this day, the court still has never issued a formal order acting on
these motions, but we deem them to have been erroneously denied.  On remand the
court is directed to conduct forthwith a hearing of Sara's motions for upward
modification of temporary spousal support.

   The interlocutory judgment of dissolution is affirmed as to its termination
of marital status, the valuation and award of household furniture, furnishings
and appliances, vehicles and trailers, and the award of spousal support
(excluding its substantive stepdown provisions), attorneys' fees and costs
ordered at trial, but is reversed in all other respects.  The memorandum of
intended decision and the interlocutory judgment of dissolution are treated as
an order denying petitioner's motion for an upward modification of temporary
spousal support and that order is also reversed.  The cause is remanded for
further proceedings in accordance with the views expressed in this opinion.


                              58 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In re the Marriage of STEVE D. and CAROL LAUTSBAUGH. STEVE
           D. LAUTSBAUGH, Appellant, v. CAROL LAUTSBAUGH, Respondent.

                                  No. B120546.

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SECOND APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION FIVE

          72 Cal. App. 4th 1131; 85 Cal. Rptr. 2d 688; 1999 Cal. App.
          LEXIS 567; 99 Cal. Daily Op. Service 4588; 99 Daily Journal
                                    DAR 5841


                             June 10, 1999, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County. Super. Ct. No. KD005152. Douglas Haigh, Temporary Judge. *

*   Pursuant to California Constitution, article VI, section 21.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports

(1a) (1b) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69--Spousal Support--
Modification of Order--Change of Conditions--Termination of Child Support.
--Modification of spousal support requires a material change of circumstances
since the last order. A material change of circumstances may be in the form of
unrealized expectations. A family law court may not find a change of
circumstances, however, in the reconsideration of a circumstance that has not
changed since the previous order. Circumstances accounted for in the previous
order cannot constitute a change of circumstances. Accordingly, in a
postdissolution proceeding, the trial court abused its discretion when it found
that the termination of child support constituted a material change of
circumstances justifying an increase in the wife's spousal support. The husband
had been ordered to pay child support until the children graduated from high
school and was also ordered to pay spousal support to a date certain. When the
children graduated from high school, the husband's child support obligations
terminated. The termination of child support was within the expectations of the
original order, and the fact that the termination of child support occurred as
expected could not reasonably constitute a change of circumstances justifying an
increase in spousal support.

   [See 11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (9th ed. 1990) Husband and Wife, § 257.]

(2) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 74--Spousal Support--Appeal--Abuse of
Discretion.  --Appellate review of orders modifying spousal support is governed
by an abuse of discretion standard, and such an abuse occurs when a court
modifies a support order without substantial evidence of a material change of
circumstances.

COUNSEL: Law Offices of Jan Mark Dudman and Jan Mark Dudman for Appellant.

Sydney K. Ericson and Marc Edward Mitzner for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Grignon, J., with Turner, P. J., and Armstrong, J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: GRIGNON

OPINION

     GRIGNON, J.

   Appellant Steve D. Lautsbaugh (husband) appeals from a postjudgment order of
the family law court modifying a spousal support award in favor of respondent
Carol Lautsbaugh (wife). Husband contends the family law court erred when it
found the expected termination of child support upon graduation of the children
from high school constituted a material change of circumstances justifying an
increase in spousal support. We agree and reverse.

   FACTS AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

   The parties were married for 20 years and were divorced in uncontested
proceedings in 1992. There are two children of the marriage:  Shelley, born
November 21, 1976, and Kevin, born February 23, 1979. Husband was ordered to pay
child support to wife in the amount of $ 325 per child per month until the child
graduated from high school. Husband was also ordered to pay wife spousal support
in the amount of $ 489 per month until November 30, 1997. The family law court
retained jurisdiction to extend the period  of spousal support. Kevin, the
youngest child, graduated from high school in June 1997.

   On June 3, 1997, wife filed an order to show cause requesting an increase in
spousal support, based on the change of circumstances of Kevin's graduation from
high school and the concomitant termination of husband's child support
obligations. Wife's income and expense declaration stated: she incurred no
expenses for her children's college education; Shelley and Kevin still lived
with her rent free; Shelley earned $ 704 per month; and Kevin earned $ 236 per
month. Husband's responsive declaration and income and expense declaration
stated he was contributing to the children's education. Both children attended
community college. Wife's income had increased over the six-year period;
husband's income had stayed the same.

   At the hearing on the order to show cause, the family law court found the
termination of child support to be a material change of circumstances and
ordered husband to pay wife $ 739 per month spousal support commencing December
1, 1997. No termination date was set.

   DISCUSSION

     Modification of spousal support requires a material change of circumstances
since the last order. (In re Marriage of  McCann (1996) 41 Cal. App. 4th 978,
982 [48 Cal. Rptr. 2d 864].) A material change of circumstances may be in the
form of unrealized expectations. (In re Marriage of Beust (1994) 23 Cal. App.
4th 24, 29 [28 Cal. Rptr. 2d 201].) A family law court may not find a change of
circumstances, however, in the reconsideration of a circumstance which has not
changed since the previous order. (In re Marriage Farrell (1985) 171 Cal. App.
3d 695, 703 [217 Cal. Rptr. 397].) Circumstances accounted for in the previous
order cannot constitute a change of circumstances. (Hogoboom & King, Cal.
Practice Guide: Family Law (The Rutter Group 1999) P 17:147, p. 17-33 .)
"Appellate review of orders modifying spousal support is governed by an abuse of
discretion standard, and such an abuse occurs when a court modifies a support
order without substantial evidence of a material change of circumstances." (In
re Marriage of McCann, supra, 41 Cal. App. 4th. at pp. 982-983.)

     Here, the facts are not in dispute and the question on appeal may be
addressed as a matter of law. In 1992, husband was ordered to pay child support
until the children graduated from high school. He was also ordered to pay
spousal support to a date certain. When the children graduated from high school,
husband's child support obligations terminated. This termination of child
support was within the expectations of the original order. That  the termination
of child support occurred as expected cannot reasonably constitute a change of
circumstances justifying an increase in spousal support. 1 Since no other
circumstances support the modification, the order must be reversed.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Our case
is to be distinguished from In re Marriage of Catalano (1988) 204 Cal. App. 3d
543, 551-552 [251 Cal. Rptr. 370], where the Court of Appeal held that an
expected termination of spousal support might nevertheless constitute a change
of circumstances justifying an increase in child support. The interests of the
child were deemed paramount.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The case of McCann does not require a different result. In McCann, the
husband and wife agreed to a certain aggregate support level, based on the wife
and children's support needs. That amount was arbitrarily allocated 50 percent
to spousal support and 50 percent to child support. Subsequently, the state
child support guidelines were amended and the wife sought additional child
support. The husband requested a decrease in his spousal support obligation if
child support were increased. The family law court increased child support as
required by the guidelines and decreased spousal support. The combined support
levels increased. The Court of Appeal affirmed, holding that the mandatory
increase in child support constituted a change of circumstances, justifying a
decrease in spousal support to conform the support obligations to the intent of
the parties. The statutory change was unexpected and not within the expectations
of the parties at the time of the original orders. The McCann situation is
unlike the instant case where the circumstance that the children's graduation
from high school would occasion the termination of child support was clearly
within the contemplation of the original order.

   DISPOSITION

   The postjudgment order modifying spousal support is reversed. The parties are
to bear their own costs on appeal.

   Turner, P. J., and Armstrong, J., concurred.


                              59 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            In re the Marriage of SUZANNE M. and JOSEPH F. KENNEDY.
              SUZANNE M. KENNEDY, Appellant, v. JOSEPH F. KENNEDY,
                                   Respondent

                                  No. D004665

           Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District,
                                  Division One

           193 Cal. App. 3d 1633; 239 Cal. Rptr. 151; 1987 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2007


                                 July 15, 1987

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     As Modified August 12, 1987.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of San Diego County, No. D164427, Artemis G.
Henderson, Judge.

COUNSEL: Sharron Voorhees for Appellant.

Mitchell, Keeney, Barry & Pike and Gerald L. Barry, Jr., for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Todd, J., with Wiener, Acting P. J., concurring.  Concurring
and dissenting opinion by Work, J.

OPINION BY: TODD

OPINION

     Suzanne Kennedy appeals the trial court's modification of a spousal support
order. The modification was based in large part on Suzanne's failure to invest
capital assets awarded in the division of community property in
income-generating investments.  We reverse.

   Facts

   Suzanne and Joseph Kennedy separated in February 1981 after nearly 20 years
of marriage. There are three children of this marriage, one of whom was an adult
at the time of separation.  Suzanne was a homemaker; Joseph, a physician.  At
the time of the trial in November 1982, Suzanne was unemployed, but she
subsequently completed training as a paralegal.  Following the trial, Joseph was
ordered to pay $ 2,500 per month in spousal support. Final judgment of
dissolution of marriage was entered on July 12, 1984.  The judgment included a
written stipulation by the parties that contained (1) a division of the
community property assets and debts and (2) a provision concerning the sale of
the family residence at 2660 St. Tropez Place, La Jolla, and a condominium, also
located in La Jolla.  The stipulation provided the St. Tropez Place residence
and the condominium would be sold forthwith and the proceeds used to equalize
the division of community assets and debts.  Suzanne was to have sole use of the
St. Tropez Place residence until it was sold and Joseph was to have sole use of
the condominium. The stipulation also provided Suzanne would have the
opportunity to purchase the condominium. The parties were unable to agree on
certain issues, including spousal support. The final judgment of dissolution
provided: "13. It Is Ordered that Respondent pay to Petitioner as and for
spousal support the  sum of two thousand five hundred ($ 2,500.00) dollars per
month beginning December 1, 1982, (with the November 1982 payment being prorated
from November 15, 1982 and paid December 1, 1982, along with the $ 2,500.00
payment) payable on the first day of each and every month thereafter until the
first occurrence of the following: [para. ] a. The community residences are sold
and the income from Petitioner's investment(s) equals $ 2,500.00, at which time
the spousal support shall be reduced to zero; or, [para. ] b. Further order of
this Court."

   On December 6, 1985, the trial court conducted a hearing after Suzanne sought
a wage assignment, modification of spousal support and attorney fees and Joseph
sought modification or termination of spousal support. At that time, the St.
Tropez Place residence had been sold, but the condominium had not been sold.
Joseph had purchased Suzanne's interest in the condominium for approximately $
4,000.  After the St. Tropez Place residence was sold, Suzanne, with her $
250,000 in sale proceeds, bought a new home in La Jolla for $ 225,000, with a $
117,000 down payment and monthly payments of $ 1,250.  She purchased $ 10,000
worth of furnishings for the new home. The remainder of her $ 250,000 in
proceeds -- the court calculated it to be $ 123,000 -- was invested in a stock
portfolio with the firm of Shearson Lehman Brothers.  The investment was
intended to maximize growth, with any money realized being reinvested in the
account and no dividends or monthly income being paid out.

   In July 1985, Joseph stopped making spousal support payments based on his
interpretation of paragraph 13 of the final judgment that spousal support was to
be reduced to zero.

   Suzanne filed an order to show cause and declaration for contempt and a
companion order to show cause for a wage assignment for spousal support and
attorney fees.  Joseph  filed an order to show cause requesting (1) an
interpretation of the judgment of dissolution and (2) a modification or
termination in spousal support. Suzanne filed an additional order to show cause
requesting spousal support be increased to $ 3,500 per month.  The trial court
at the December 6, 1985, hearing made the following findings: (1) Suzanne's
needs have increased because of inflation to $ 3,000 per month.  She generates a
$ 900 monthly income as a paralegal, which leaves her needs at $ 2,100 per
month; (2) If Suzanne had invested the money she received from the dissolution
to generate income, she would be receiving $ 2,080 a month income; (3) Suzanne
is entitled to set aside one-half of the $ 2,080 for her own retirement; (4)
Spousal support is in arrears $ 2,500 per month for July, August and September
1985; and (5) The court lost jurisdiction over Suzanne's motion for contempt
when the warrant of attachment  ordered September 17, 1985, and held until
October 9, 1985, was not reissued on October 9, 1985.

   The court made the following orders: (1) spousal support is reduced to $
1,000 per month effective October 9, 1985; (2) each party shall pay his own
attorney fees; and (3) the request for wage assignment for spousal support and
arrears is denied.

   Discussion

   Suzanne contends the trial court erred in: (1) considering income which she
could have earned from capital assets awarded her in the dissolution proceeding;
(2) failing to apply the criteria of Civil Code section 4801, subdivision (a); 1
(3) refusing to issue a wage assignment, and (4) failing to award her attorney
fees and costs.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   All
statutory references are to the Civil Code unless otherwise noted.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   I

     As a preliminary matter, we restate well-settled general rules regarding
modification of spousal support: "In exercising its discretion the trial court
must take into consideration both the needs of the wife and the ability of the
husband to meet those needs.  [Citations.] The '[reasonable] needs of a wife
commensurate with her station in life are a circumstance the court should
consider in determining a just and reasonable amount of her support [citations];
and embrace more than bare necessities.  [Citations.]' Although a trial court
has broad discretion in awarding or modifying an award of spousal support, it is
without authority to modify an order for spousal support unless there has been a
material change of circumstances subsequent to the last prior order." ( In re
Marriage of Kuppinger (1975) 48 Cal.App.3d 628, 633 [120 Cal.Rptr. 654].)

   Furthermore, the Legislature has established certain factors to be considered
by the court in determining reasonable spousal support. At the time of the
December 6, 1985, hearing, these were: ". . . (1) The earning capacity of each
spouse . . . .  [para. ] (2) The needs of each party.  [para. ] (3) The
obligations and assets, including the separate property, of each.  [para. ] (4)
The duration of the marriage. [para. ] (5) The ability of the supported spouse
to engage in gainful employment without interfering with the interests of
dependent children in the custody of the spouse. [para. ] (6) The time required
for the supported spouse to acquire appropriate education, training, and
employment.  [para. ] (7) The age and health of the parties.  [para. ] (8) The
standard of living of the  parties.  [para. ] (9) Any other factors which it
deems just and equitable." (Former § 4801, subd. (a).)

   In ordering spousal support in the final judgment of dissolution, the trial
court obviously anticipated that the proceeds from the sale of the two
residences would be sufficient to generate income of $ 2,500 per month.  It is
also clear it was the trial court's intent that Suzanne invest her proceeds to
generate a monthly income of $ 2,500 so Joseph's spousal support obligation
would be eliminated.  Indeed, at the December 6, 1985, hearing, the trial court
observed:  "Part of my reasoning in making the order I did and, as I indicated
from the beginning, I thought that she needed $ 2,500 a month, that that would
be fair, and I had hoped the amount she generated from her share of the
community assets would eventually generate $ 2,500 a month . . . .  [para. ] I
based part of it on my belief that that money could generate, itself, so that
Dr. Kennedy wouldn't have to have his onus for a long period of time on the
basis that, of course, she had to have a place to live, and she was happy with
the idea of living in the condominium." The trial court then asked why Suzanne
had not bought the condominium rather than purchase the new home. The court also
inquired about the monthly mortgage payment for the condominium and was told by
Joseph it was $ 1,270.  The court observed: "I am of the firm opinion that Mrs.
Kennedy is entitled to live where she wants to live.  If she wants to make house
payments a little higher because this is the type of area she wants to live in,
she's entitled to do that."  We agree with the trial court's statement that
Suzanne's purchase of the house was reasonable.  First, the monthly payment of $
1,250 was comparable to the mortgage payment on the condominium so there was no
added drain on her monthly income. She was entitled to live at the same standard
of living that she had become accustomed to during the marriage. (See In re
Marriage of Rosan (1972) 24 Cal.App.3d 885, 897 [101 Cal.Rptr. 295].) And,
considering the fluctuations in the real estate market in this community,
Suzanne's purchase in effect stabilized her living costs to a large degree.

     However, regardless of how clear the court's intent was, two issues
immediately arise with regard to paragraph 13 of the order: the conditional
nature of the language employed; and its overall validity.

   Paragraph 13 provides the spousal support will terminate when the "income
from Petitioner's investment(s) equals $ 2,500.00 . . . ." This assumes that the
petitioner will make investment(s).  Yet the order does not direct Suzanne to
invest her proceeds.  There is no express language requiring Suzanne to make any
investments, let alone income-generating ones.  A reasonable interpretation of
the language in paragraph 13 is that if petitioner invested the proceeds,
respondent's support obligation would drop to  zero when the investments
produced a $ 2,500-a-month income.  This is the interpretation we adopt. 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2
Otherwise, the order would improperly merge the notion of spousal support -- a
distinct legal obligation -- with a division of community assets.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Since the trial court's December 6, 1985, order reducing spousal support to
$ 1,000 was based on the erroneous assumption that the judgment of dissolution
obligated Suzanne to make investments, we must reverse and remand this case for
a new determination of spousal support based on Suzanne's current needs.
Accordingly, we find it unnecessary and somewhat superfluous to decide the
question of whether the court can order a spouse to invest his or her proceeds
from the division of the community in a particular manner -- to wit, to generate
a specified amount of income upon pain of losing spousal support. 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   This
apparently is an issue of first impression.  The trial court did not cite any
authority -- nor does counsel -- to sustain an order obligating a spouse to
invest his or her share of the community assets in income-producing property.
We note in passing that the cases most clearly analogous are authority for the
clear delineation that exists between property division and spousal support and
would tend to support Suzanne's position that the trial court does not have the
authority to make such an order.  (See In re Marriage of Kuppinger, supra, 48
Cal.App.3d 628; Sammut v. Sammut (1980) 103 Cal.App.3d 557 [163 Cal.Rptr. 193];
In re Marriage of Rabkin (1986) 179 Cal.App.3d 1071 [225 Cal.Rptr. 219]; see
also Overson v. Overson (Wis.App. 1985) 370 N.W.2d 796 [370 N.W.2d. 796].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    II

     Of course, one of the goals of the Family Law Act modifications of 1969 is
to,  where possible, allow the parties to develop their lives free of
obligations to each other.  However, this is overshadowed by the primary goal of
assuring that the supported spouse can provide for his or her reasonable needs.
(See In re Marriage of Morrison (1978) 20 Cal.3d 437, 453 [143 Cal.Rptr. 139,
573 P.2d 41].)

   No one disputes that the community assets that were awarded to Suzanne became
her separate property. 4 Joseph claims Suzanne should generate income from this
separate property sufficient for her expenses.  However, it has not been
established that Suzanne's income met her needs.  At the time of the December 6,
1985, hearing, the court said her reasonable needs had increased from $ 2,500
per month to $ 3,000 per month. 5

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   As such,
they can properly be considered, along with other factors, in determining
spousal support under section 4801, subdivision (a), which is discussed infra.
5   The income and expense declaration, however, shows a figure of more than $
4,000.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      While we conclude Suzanne was not obligated to invest her separate assets
in a certain manner, we are not suggesting a trial court cannot consider
separate assets and the manner in which they are utilized in determining
spousal support. Indeed, under section 4801, subdivision (a)(3), the trial court
must consider, among other things, "[the] obligations and assets, including the
separate property, of each" party.

   What the trial court is left with is a delicate balancing procedure in which
Suzanne's rights to full enjoyment of her separate property must be reconciled
with Joseph's rights not to be burdened by an open-ended obligation.  Having
justified the purchase of the new home and having set aside a certain portion
for retirement, the trial court certainly can consider the manner in which
Suzanne utilized the balance of her property division without requiring her to
invest it at 8 percent or 10 percent.  But this is not what the trial court did
here.  The trial court calculated that Suzanne should have generated $ 2,080 in
monthly income from investing the money she received from the sale of the St.
Tropez Place residence.  In arriving at the $ 2,080 figure, the court used the
full $ 250,000 figure and a 10 percent return.  This calculation is inconsistent
with the court's earlier remarks at the December 6, 1985, hearing in which it
observed that Suzanne's use of $ 127,000 to purchase the new home and furnish it
was reasonable under the circumstances of the case.  While we endorse
consideration of Suzanne's assets under section 4801, subdivision (a)(3), we
also believe the trial court overstepped its bounds by using a 10 percent
return.  We believe it would have been within the court's discretion to consider
the rate of return earned on the balance of the property division after purchase
of the home.  Such a calculation would not unduly hamstring Suzanne and not
overburden Joseph, as well as take into account the mandate of section 4801,
subdivision (a)(3).  As the Court of Appeal observed in In re Marriage of
Fransen (1983) 142 Cal.App.3d 419, 425 [190 Cal.Rptr. 885], "The court must not
simply recognize the criteria set forth in section 4801, subdivision (a), it
must apply them." 6

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   Suzanne
contends on appeal the trial court ignored various criteria of section 4801,
subdivision (a), in considering modification of support.  We find it unnecessary
to discuss these contentions since we are remanding the case and the trial court
will review the entire financial situation of the parties as well as other
factors in its consideration of the request for modification of spousal support.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    III

     We find it was error not to order the wage assignment.

   Section 4801.6, in effect at the time of the December 6, 1985, hearing
provides in pertinent part: "[In] any proceeding where the court has ordered a
party to pay spousal support to the other party upon both a petition by the
person to whom support has been ordered to have been paid and a finding by the
court that the party so ordered to pay spousal support is in  arrears in
payment in a sum equal to the amount of two months of such payments within the
24-month period immediately preceding submission of such petition, the court
shall order the defaulting party to assign either to the person to whom support
has been ordered to have been paid or to a county officer designated by the
court to receive such payment, that portion of the salary or wages of the party
required to make such payment of spousal support as will be sufficient to pay
the amount ordered by the court for spousal support." (Stats. 1982, ch. 497, §
19.)

   The record clearly reflects Joseph in arrears for three months: July, August,
and September, 1985. 7 Yet, when Suzanne's counsel asked for a wage assignment,
the trial court refused,  saying: "There has to be a finding he hasn't paid
support as ordered, and I don't make that finding."

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   The
record indicates the following discussion occurred between the trial court and
counsel at the December 6, 1985, hearing: "The Court: When did the $
2,500-a-month payments cease?

   "[Joseph's Counsel]: The last payment he made was for the month of June, your
Honor, a month after she received the money.

   "The Court: You stopped July and August before you filed your motion?

   "[Joseph's Counsel]: That's correct.

   "The Court: . . . It's my belief what would be fair and equitable in this
matter is all payments ordered by this Court prior to any request by respondent
to have the Court make a determination should be paid at $ 2,500 a month, and
the first hearing date would have been in this matter --

   "[Suzanne's Counsel]: 9 October.

   "The Court: 9 October, so as of that date, so for October, November and et
cetera, the payments will be $ 1,000 a month.

   "[Joseph's Counsel]: So for July, August and September it would be
twenty-five?

   "The Court: As ordered by the Court.

   "[Joseph's Counsel]: And from October forward it would be 1,000?

   "The Court: Right . . . ."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The trial court erroneously implied a "willful failure to make ordered
payments" in section 4801.6.  The statute, however, has no such provision.
Whether Joseph acted in good faith in accumulating three months of arrearages is
immaterial in applying section 4801.6.

   The trial court has failed to perform its mandated judicial duty under
section 4801.6.  Upon remand, the trial court must make the wage assignment
order unless the parties have resolved this issue otherwise between themselves.

   IV

     Suzanne was entitled to reasonable attorney fees.

    Section 4370, subdivision (d) provides: "Notwithstanding any other provision
of law, absent good cause to the contrary, the court, upon determining an
ability to pay, shall award reasonable attorneys' fees to a supported spouse in
any action to enforce an existing order for spousal support."

   Suzanne initiated the proceedings after Joseph stopped paying spousal support
. It is clear these proceedings fit under section 4370, which is couched in
mandatory language. Also, the phrase "ability to pay" in the statute most
logically refers to Joseph's ability to pay. If the trial court finds on remand
Joseph is able to pay for Suzanne's attorney fees, it must make the appropriate
order.

   The judgment is reversed and the case is remanded to the trial court for
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.

CONCUR BY: WORK (In Part)

DISSENT BY: WORK (In Part)

DISSENT


WORK, J.

   I concur except for section III.  The court specifically refused to make a
finding Joseph failed to make payments as ordered.  That is not an unreasonable
position on the peculiar facts of this case where the interpretation of the
court's prior order was in doubt because, as formalized, it appears inconsistent
with earlier discussions where the court and counsel apparently believed Suzanne
was to invest the bulk of $ 250,000 to produce income and purchase the small
equity in the community condominium. Where the failure to pay is neither willful
nor negligent but results from confusing orders of the court, there is no
mandate to impose a wage assignment where it is clearly unnecessary to insure
compliance and Suzanne's real concern was Joseph's propensity to insert the word
"dole" on personal checks.


                              60 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             GERALD D. LUNDAHL, Plaintiff and Appellant, v. RUTH M.
          TELFORD, Defendant and Respondent; ORANGE COUNTY DEPARTMENT
             OF CHILD SUPPORT SERVICES, Intervener and Respondent.

                                    G030846

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FOURTH APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION THREE

           116 Cal. App. 4th 305; 9 Cal. Rptr. 3d 902; 2004 Cal. App.
            LEXIS 238; 2004 Cal. Daily Op. Service 1789; 2004 Daily
                                Journal DAR 2599


                            February 27, 2004, Filed

NOTICE:

   As modified Mar. 29, 2004.      CERTIFIED FOR PARTIAL PUBLICATION*

*   Pursuant to California Rules of Court, rule 976(b) and 976.1, this opinion
is certified for publication with the exception of parts II A., II B., and II D.

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY: Rehearing denied by Lundahl v. Telford, 2004 Cal. App. LEXIS
404 (Cal. App. 4th Dist., Mar. 29, 2004)
Related proceeding at Lundahl v. Lundahl, 2005 UT App 55, 2005 Utah App. LEXIS
60 (2005)

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Orange County, No. 01FL007984, Julee
Robinson, Temporary Judge. (Pursuant to Cal. Const., art. VI, § 21.)

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports

(3) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 109--Enforcement of Orders--Revised
Uniform Reciprocal Enforcement of Support Act--Multiple Orders.--Both Utah and
California expressly recognize that the Revised Uniform Reciprocal Enforcement
of Support Act (RURESA) sister states may issue independent support orders for
differing amounts without modifying, superseding, or nullifying each other's
orders.

   [2 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (4th ed. 1996) Jurisdiction, § 273; 8 Witkin, Cal.
Procedure (4th ed. 1997) Enforcement of Judgment, § 398L; 11 Witkin, Summary of
Cal. Law (9th ed. 1990) Husband and Wife, §§ 252, 322.]

COUNSEL: Family Law Appellate Associates and Jeffrey W. Doeringer for Plaintiff
and Appellant.

Ruth M. Lundahl, in pro. per., for Defendant and Respondent.

 Bill Lockyer, Attorney General, James M. Humes, Assistant Attorney General,
Frank S. Furtek and Mary Dahlberg, Deputy Attorneys General, for Intervener and
Respondent.

Barry J. Brooks as Amicus Curiae, upon the request of the Court of Appeal on
behalf of Repondent.

JUDGES: ARONSON, J.; Bedsworth, Acting P. J., and Fybel, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: ARONSON

OPINION

    ARONSON, J.--Gerald Lundahl contends the trial court erred in denying his
petition to vacate registration of several Utah spousal support orders in favor
of his former wife, Ruth Telford. Lundahl argues the five Utah orders, issued
between 1991 and 1999, are void for lack of subject matter jurisdiction because
the parties' 1977 dissolution of marriage in California invested California with
exclusive jurisdiction over spousal support. We disagree and affirm. In doing
so, we revisit well-established provisions of the Revised Uniform Reciprocal
Enforcement of Support Act (RURESA) permitting concurrent support orders in
different jurisdictions for differing amounts. We consider whether RURESA's
replacement, the Uniform Interstate Family Support Act (UIFSA), codified at
Family Code section 4900 et seq., 1 establishes a mechanism for settling upon a
single order as controlling among multiple spousal support orders, as opposed to
child support orders. Under UIFSA's express terms, we conclude there is no
provision for a single controlling spousal support order.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1    All
further statutory references are to this code, unless otherwise specified.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

I

FACTS AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

   Lundahl and Telford were married in Utah in 1952. They later moved to Los
Angeles. After 25 years of marriage and 12 children, Lundahl and Telford
dissolved their marriage in 1977. The judgment of dissolution, issued by the Los
Angeles family court, set child support at $ 1,600 per month and spousal support
at $ 600 per month. A paragraph in the decree labeled "Reservation of
Jurisdiction" stated: "The court reserves jurisdiction of the above-entitled
matter and as to all such issues as may be necessary to effect the purposes and
intent of this order." The decree awarded Telford custody of the minor children
and she returned to Utah. The next year, Lundahl alleged problems had developed
with his visitation rights. He filed an action in the Utah courts, and the
visitation issue was apparently resolved. 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2
Throughout the ensuing years, it seems numerous proceedings took place in Utah,
resulting in stipulations by the parties and court orders. The parties allude to
these proceedings but, except for the orders we discuss below that are the
subject of this appeal, it appears no other Utah proceedings were before the
trial court or figured in its registration decision. Lundahl elected to bring up
the trial court record by way of appendices instead of clerk's transcripts (Cal.
Rules of Court, rule 5.1.), so he has only himself to blame for any record
omissions.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     In 1987, Lundahl renewed litigation in Los Angeles. The matter was
transferred to Orange County. On August 24, 1987, the Orange County court set
child support at $ 1,800 per month for four children until the eldest
emancipated, then $ 1,500 for three children until the next eldest emancipated,
then $ 1,200 per month for two children until one emancipated, and finally $ 600
per month until the youngest emancipated. The court set spousal support at $
1,000 per month until the eldest child emancipated, whereupon it would increase
to $ 1,050 until the youngest child emancipated, and then continue at $ 1,250
until the death of either party or remarriage of Telford.

   In 1989, on Lundahl's motion, the Orange County court modified custody by
awarding him physical custody of one of the parties' minor children. Telford did
not appear.

   In 1991, seeking enforcement of child and spousal support, Telford filed in
Utah the first of several petitions that are the subject of this appeal. Lundahl
did not appear at a hearing on the court's order to show cause on April 24,
1991. The court found Lundahl had ceased paying $ 3,000 a month in "family"
support and ordered him to resume paying that amount.  Lundahl appeared at the
next hearing on August 29, 1991, and the court set arrears at $ 3,500. Neither
the $ 3,000 monthly "family" support amount, nor the $ 3,500 arrears amount were
broken down into separate amounts for child and spousal support.

   Lundahl again visited the Orange County courthouse in 1993, seeking custody
of the parties' only remaining minor child. The court granted Lundahl's custody
request and terminated his child support obligation. Telford did not appear.

   The same year, a judgment in the Utah court established arrears at $ 29,200
through February 1993. Lundahl appeared at this hearing. In his written brief,
he argued the court had no jurisdiction over "support arrearages and in fact
California has jurisdiction over this matter." But the court expressly concluded
it had jurisdiction. The $ 29,200 in arrears ordered by the court was a lump
sum; it did not distinguish between child and spousal support.

   In November 1994, Lundahl sought a reduction of spousal support in Orange
County. Telford testified and the matter was continued. She failed to appear at
the next hearing, and spousal support was reduced to $ 500 per month, beginning
July 1994. Lundahl asserts this is the controlling amount.

    In January 1995, Lundahl entered into a stipulation with the Riverside
County District Attorney's Office. He agreed his "child support and/or arrears"
from August 1991 through December 1994 were $ 31,498.18, and consented to pay $
1,852.83 per month towards these arrears. The stipulation, filed in the
Riverside County Superior Court, expressly included the $ 500 per month due
under the 1994 Orange County spousal support order, but did not specify whether
any other portion of the "arrears" was for accrued spousal support or only for
delinquent child support. 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3    Telford
did not sign the stipulation and she insists the district attorney's office
could not waive her right to arrears, a point we need not reach on this appeal
since the trial court deferred calculation of arrears, as we discuss below.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In April 1995, on Telford's petition, the Utah court set spousal support at $
2,235 per month and arrears at $ 62,100,  plus attorney fees of $ 5,200. Lundahl
did not appear at the hearing on the petition. The court's order noted the $
62,100 arrearage was "based upon the temporary alimony and child support award
of $ 3,000.00 per month, adjusted by deducting the sum of $ 300.00 of said
amount representing the amount of child support and multiplying the remainder of
$ 2,700.00 by the months which have passed since the last judgment, the
plaintiff having paid nothing since that time."

   Telford then attempted to set aside the Orange County court's 1994 spousal
support order. In a motion to vacate the order, she claimed misinformation from
Lundahl's counsel caused her to skip the hearing at which spousal support was
reduced to $ 500. The court rejected her claim of extrinsic fraud or mistake,
concluding she "was in court on the 18th, she knew of the continued date, she
may have misunderstood, I'll give her the benefit, [but] I don't think there is
any ... extrinsic fraud, or any showing here that she was denied her right to
appear ... ." (In re Marriage of Lundahl (Aug. 26, 1997, G019679) [nonpub. opn.]
p. 4.) On appeal, Telford changed tactics and asserted for the first time the
trial court "was without in personam or in rem jurisdiction ... because she made
a special appearance ... and there was no other basis on which the court could
assume jurisdiction." (Ibid.) We concluded Telford waived the argument, and
further noted the record did not establish a special appearance and that, even
if it had, "the court, pursuant to the dissolution judgment, maintained
jurisdiction over the parties and spousal support." (Id. at p. 5.)

   In February 1999, after a hearing in Utah at which Lundahl again failed to
appear, the Utah court entered an order establishing "back alimony" at $
62,991.72, plus interest, as well as $ 500 in attorney fees. The court's order
did not specify the period covered by the $ 62,991.72 figure.

   On October 24, 2001, the Family Support Division of the Orange County
District Attorney's Office registered the two 1991 Utah orders and the 1993,
1995, and 1999 Utah orders for enforcement in California. Lundahl subsequently
moved to vacate registration on five grounds: (1) the Utah court lacked personal
jurisdiction over him; (2) the Utah support orders had been vacated, suspended,
or modified by a later order; (3) the amount of arrears was incorrect;  (4) some
or all of the arrears were not enforceable; and (5) laches. In an amended order
entered on September 27, 2002, the trial court concluded Lundahl presented
insufficient evidence to vacate registration on any of these grounds. On
Lundahl's claim that the Utah orders were void for lack of subject matter
jurisdiction, the court specifically found: "The Utah Court had jurisdiction to
make the orders because there was concurrent jurisdiction in both Utah and
California." The court confirmed registration of each of the Utah orders and
ordered "all stays on enforcement lifted."

   The court "reserve[d] on the issue of the amount of arrears owed" and a
hearing was eventually scheduled for several months later. In an abundance of
caution, Lundahl appealed the trial court's denial of his petition to vacate
registration of the Utah orders, and also sought a writ of supercedeas to stay
enforcement of the registered orders. We denied the petition seeking writ
relief. Meanwhile, in its ruling denying Lundahl's petition to vacate
registration, the trial court had ordered "the District Attorney's Office to use
its best efforts to prepare an accounting of arrears" and mail it to the
parties.  On being apprised of Lundahl's appeal, the trial court deferred the
accounting pending our decision in this matter.

II

DISCUSSION

A.-B.* [NOT CERTIFIED FOR PUBLICATION]

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*   See
footnote, ante, page 305.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

C. Jurisdictional Claims

   Lundahl's sole contention on appeal is that the Utah orders were void for
lack of subject matter jurisdiction because the parties' 1977 dissolution in
California invested California with exclusive jurisdiction over spousal support.
He argues the Utah orders were thus unenforceable and the court erred by not
vacating registration. Section 4956, subdivision (a)(5), requires registration
of a support order to be vacated where a defense to enforcement exists under
state law. " ' "A void judgment or order is, in legal effect, no judgment," ' "
and cannot be enforced. (Rochin v. Pat Johnson Manufacturing Co. (1998) 67
Cal.App.4th 1228, 1240 [79 Cal. Rptr. 2d 719]; cf. Cal. Law Revision Com. com.,
19A West's Ann. Code Civ. Proc. (1982 ed.) foll. § 1710.40, p. 694 ["Common
defenses to enforcement of a sister state judgment include ... [that] the
judgment was rendered in excess of jurisdiction"].) Whether California had sole
subject matter jurisdiction over spousal support is a question of law that we
review de novo. (See Robbins v. Foothill Nissan (1994) 22 Cal.App.4th 1769, 1774
[28 Cal. Rptr. 2d 190] [subject matter jurisdiction is a matter of law].)

1. No Reservation of Exclusive Jurisdiction

   The terms of the 1977 California judgment of dissolution do not support
Lundahl's claim it vested the state with exclusive jurisdiction over spousal
support. Lundahl seizes upon the final paragraph of the judgment of dissolution,
labeled "Reservation of Jurisdiction" which states: "The court reserves
jurisdiction of the above-entitled matter and as to all such issues as may be
necessary to effect the purposes and intent of this order." The word "exclusive"
is simply not present in this language. We may not insert terms into a document
that are not there (Code Civ. Proc., § 1858), and a fortiori, nor may a party.
Lundahl also relies on our 1997 opinion in the prior appeal between the parties
in which we concluded "the [trial] court, pursuant to the dissolution judgment,
maintained jurisdiction over the parties and spousal support." But the issue
there was whether the trial court had jurisdiction, not whether its jurisdiction
was exclusive. Because the issue was not raised, our opinion did not decide that
jurisdiction in California precluded jurisdiction in Utah. (San Diego Gas &
Electric Co. v. Superior Court (1996) 13 Cal.4th 893, 943 [55 Cal. Rptr. 2d 724,
920 P.2d 669] ["[c]ases are not authority, of course, for issues not raised or
resolved"].)

2. No Exclusive Jurisdiction Under RURESA

   Lundahl's argument under RURESA is similarly without merit. He contends:
"Under RURESA, the Utah orders are surplusage and do not and cannot create
greater liabilities than that imposed by the California dissolution court."
RURESA was in effect in California at the time of the 1977 dissolution through
the 1994 order reducing spousal support to $ 500 a month. 5 It also covered the
1991, 1993, and 1995 Utah orders, but not the 1999 Utah arreages order, which we
discuss separately below. 6 Contrary to Lundahl's assertion, both Utah and
California expressly recognize that RURESA sister states may issue independent
support orders for differing amounts without having modified, superceded, or
nullified each other's orders. (See, e.g., Kammersell v. Kammersell (Utah 1990)
792 P.2d 496, 498; In re Marriage of Popenhager (1979) 99 Cal. App. 3d 514, 521
[160 Cal. Rptr. 379].) Thus, an obligor spouse was confronted with the very real
possibility of "multiple and perhaps inconsistent orders enforceable against
him." (In re Marriage of Straeck (1984) 156 Cal. App. 3d 617, 624 [203 Cal.
Rptr. 69].) The court in Straeck concluded, "While sympathetic to an obligor
placed in this dilemma, our reply is that RURESA contemplates and allows this
result." (Ibid.; accord, Kammersell v. Kammersell, supra, 792 P.2d at p. 498
["This is currently the view of a majority of jurisdictions that have adopted
URESA or RURESA"].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5
California adopted RURESA in 1968 (see Scott v. Superior Court (1984) 156 Cal.
App. 3d 577, 584 [202 Cal. Rptr. 920]), and in 1994 recodified it under the
Family Code without substantive change. (See In re Marriage of Chester (1995) 37
Cal.App.4th 1624, 1630 & fn. 4 [44 Cal. Rptr. 2d 717].) In 1998, California
repealed RURESA and UIFSA became effective. (Stats. 1997, ch. 194, § 2, codified
at Fam. Code, §§ 4900 to 4976.)
6    Utah adopted RURESA in 1980. (Utah Laws 1980, ch. 15, § 2.)§§ 77-31-1 to
77-31-39.) RURESA remained in effect until UIFSA was substituted in 1997. (Utah
Laws 1996, ch. 149, § 2; see also Utah Laws 1997, ch. 232, renumbering UIFSA
codification at Utah Code from § 78-45f-100 to § 78-45f-901.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   This view was grounded in section 31 of RURESA and section 30 of the former
uniform act, URESA. As described in detail by an annotation, "Section 30 of
[URESA] provided that 'no order of support issued by a court of this state when
acting as a responding state shall supersede any other order of support but the
amounts for a particular period paid pursuant to either order shall be credited
against amounts accruing or accrued for the same period under both.' In
[RURESA], the substance of § 30 of [URESA] was transferred, with slight
modification, to § 31, which states that 'a support order made by a court of
this state pursuant to this Act does not nullify and is not nullified by a
support order made by a court of this state pursuant to any other law or by a
support order made by a court of any other state pursuant to a substantially
similar Act or any other law, regardless of priority of issuance, unless
otherwise specifically provided by the court. Amounts paid for a particular
period pursuant to any support order made by the court of another state shall be
credited against the amounts accruing or accrued for the same period under any
support order made by the court of this state.' " (Annot., Construction and
Effect of Provision of Uniform Reciprocal Enforcement of Support Act That No
Support Order Shall Supersede or Nullify Any Other Order (1984) 31 A.L.R.4th
347, 351-352 (Annotation).)

   Notably, RURESA did not distinguish between child support orders and spousal
support orders. (See UIFSA Com., 29D West's Ann. Fam. Code (2004 supp.) foll. §
4914, pp. 307-308 [under UIFSA, "[a]n order for spousal support is treated
differently than an order for child support. ... This marks a radical departure
from RURESA, which treated spousal and child support orders identically"].)
Hence, the principles articulated for RURESA child support orders apply equally
to spousal support orders. In particular, a court "is not prevented from
entering a child support order different from that previously ordered, on the
basis that such an award is effective prospectively only, and thus the court is
not nullifying or superseding the prior order within the meaning of the
provision ... . In such cases, the courts have reasoned that proceedings under
the Act are de novo, in that the responding court has the authority to make an
independent determination regarding the duty of support based on presently
existing conditions, that the remedies under the Act are in addition to and not
in substitution for any other remedies, and that the Act contemplates that more
than one order of support may be outstanding at any given time for the same
obligation." (Annotation, supra, 31 A.L.R.4th at p. 352, fns. deleted.)

   Concisely stated, under RURESA: "[N]ew support orders do not nullify, modify,
or supersede the original support decree, but instead provide an additional,
supplementary or cumulative remedy. [Citations.] Amounts paid under one support
order are credited against amounts accruing or accrued for the same period under
another support order. This latter language necessarily contemplates that two or
more support orders may be outstanding and valid at the same time. [Citations.]
Thus, 'the authority of the court originally ordering payment is not affected
nor is its order modified by an order of the court of the responding state
fixing another or different sum.' [Citation.]" (Thompson v. Thompson (S.D. 1985)
366 N.W.2d 845, 847-848.)

   This result "oftentimes works to the detriment of the obligor, usually the
husband, since even if the responding court in a URESA [or RURESA] proceeding
prospectively reduces the amount of support owed, he may still be obligated for
the full amount of support as determined by the original child support order ...
, although under the antinullification provision of the Act, he will get credit
for any amounts paid pursuant to an order made under the Act." (Annotation,
supra, 31 A.L.R.4th at p. 354; accord, Oglesby v. Oglesby (1973) 29 Utah 2d 419
[510 P.2d 1106, 1107-1108] [reduction of support by Washington court did not
relieve husband of higher obligation owed under earlier Utah divorce decree].)
Because RURESA contemplates that "more than one order of support may be
outstanding at any given time for the same obligation" (Annotation, supra, 31
A.L.R.4th at p. 352), Lundahl's argument that the California judgment of
dissolution was controlling, and that the subsequent Utah support orders were
void under RURESA, is simply wrong.

3. UIFSA Does Not Determine Controlling Order for Spousal Support

   Switching tacks, Lundahl next argues that under new provisions in UIFSA,
which superceded RURESA in Utah in 1997 and in California in 1998, California
family courts retained "continuing, exclusive jurisdiction" over spousal support
. Lundahl misreads UIFSA. True, UIFSA "was developed to improve the two prior
uniform laws concerning enforcement of family support orders, URESA and the
Revised Uniform Reciprocal Enforcement of Support Act (RURESA). [Citation.]" (
Child Support Enforcement Div. of Alaska v. Brenckle (1997) 424 Mass. 214 [675
N.E.2d 390, 392].) And "UIFSA aims to cure the problem of conflicting support
orders entered by multiple courts, and provides for the exercise of continuing,
exclusive jurisdiction by one tribunal over support orders. [Citation.]" (Ibid.
[construing UIFSA in context of child support enforcement action].) But as we
discuss below, UIFSA's mechanism for establishing a "controlling order" applies
only to multiple child support orders. (See Sampson, Uniform Interstate Family
Support Act (With Unofficial Annotations) (1993) 27 Fam. L.Q. 93, 121 n. 69
[UIFSA's "avoidance of interstate modification of alimony decrees reflects, at
least in part, the disinterest in the topic of the Drafting Committee and its
co-reporters, advisors and observers. Throughout the revision process the focus
of all concerned was almost entirely on child support"]; cf. Hatamyar, Critical
Applications and Proposals for Improvement of the Uniform Interstate Family
Support Act and the Full Faith and Credit for Child Support Orders Act (1997)
71 St. John's L.Rev. 1, 22 ["The drafters apparently crafted UIFSA's rules
concerning simultaneous proceedings in two states with child support, not
spousal support, in mind"].)

   Lundahl seizes on the fact that, for both child support orders and spousal
support orders, UIFSA provides for "continuing, exclusive jurisdiction" in the
court issuing the order. (§ 4909, subd. (a) [regarding child support orders]; §
4909, subd. (f) [regarding spousal support orders].) Section 4909, subdivision
(f), states in relevant part, "A tribunal of this state issuing a support order
consistent with the law of this state has continuing, exclusive jurisdiction
over a spousal support order throughout the existence of the support
obligation." But as courts have recognized, there can be under UIFSA--however
paradoxical--multiple sister state tribunals having "continuing, exclusive
jurisdiction." (See, e.g., In re Parenzan (2001) 285 A.D.2d 59 [727 N.Y.S.2d
163, 168] [when more than one state has issued a support order, "UIFSA
acknowledges that more than one tribunal could have continuing, exclusive
jurisdiction under UIFSA"]; see also § 4911, subd. (b)(2) [describing procedure
for settling on a "controlling" child support order when "more than one of the
tribunals would have continuing, exclusive jurisdiction under this chapter"].)

   The official comment to the definition section of UIFSA, codified at section
4901, is instructive: "Until valid orders issued under [URESA and RURESA] expire
of their own terms or are replaced by new UIFSA orders, the support orders
themselves will continue to have vitality ... In short, UIFSA is specifically
designed to function with the earlier acts without conflict. Support orders
issued under one of the earlier acts should be honored and enforced in every
State. ... States are directed to accord full enforcement remedies to support
orders issued under the prior acts, but they must apply UIFSA restraint
regarding modification. In situations involving multiple orders created under
the former system, UIFSA mandates the application of its one-order rules to
determine the single order that is entitled to prospective enforcement, see
Section 207 [Fam. Code, § 4911], infra." (UIFSA Com., 29D West's Ann. Fam. Code
(2004 supp.) foll. § 4901, p. 285; see generally Smith v. Superior Court (1977)
68 Cal. App. 3d 457, 463 [137 Cal. Rptr. 348] [commissioners' comments entitled
to " ' "substantial weight in construing the statutes" ' "].)

   Section 207 of UIFSA, entitled "Recognition of controlling child-support
order," as codified in section 4911, describes the procedure for settling on a
"controlling" order when two or more child support orders exist.  Subdivision
(b) of section 4911 provides: "If a proceeding is brought under this chapter,
and two or more child support orders have been issued by tribunals of this state
or another state with regard to the same obligor and child, a tribunal of this
state shall apply the following rules in determining which order to recognize
for purposes of continuing, exclusive jurisdiction: [¶] (1) If only one of the
tribunals would have continuing, exclusive jurisdiction under this chapter, the
order of that tribunal controls and shall be so recognized. [¶] (2) If more than
one of the tribunals would have continuing, exclusive jurisdiction under this
chapter, an order issued by a tribunal in the current home state of the child
controls and shall be so recognized, but if an order has not been issued in the
current home state of the child, the order most recently issued controls and
shall be so recognized. [¶] (3) If none of the tribunals would have continuing,
exclusive jurisdiction under this chapter, the tribunal of this state having
jurisdiction over the parties shall issue a child support order, which controls
and shall be so recognized." (Italics added.) The controlling order is
prospective only (§ 4909, subd. (c)), so  sections 4913 and 4913.5 provide for
credit of payments on one or more past support orders against obligations owed
on other orders.

   The drafters explained the intended effect of sections 4911, 4913, and 4913.5
as follows: "Sections 207 [§ 4911] and 209-210 [§§ 4913-4913.5] are designed to
span the gulf between the one-order system created by UIFSA and the
multiple-order system previously in place under RURESA and URESA. UIFSA
necessarily must provide transitional procedures for the eventual elimination of
existing multiple support orders in an expeditious and efficient manner. But,
even though all U.S. jurisdictions enacted UIFSA by 1998, many years will pass
before its one-order system will be completely in place. Multiple orders
covering the same parties and child number in the hundreds of thousands; it can
be reasonably anticipated that some of these orders will continue in effect
until nearly 2020. To begin the journey toward a one-order system, however, this
section provides a relatively simple procedure designed to identify a single
viable order that will be entitled to prospective enforcement in every UIFSA
State." (UIFSA Com., 29D West's Ann. Fam. Code, supra, foll. § 4911, p. 302.) To
be sure, the comment speaks broadly of a "single viable order," but that
language must be read in the context of the section commented upon--section 4911
. By its terms section 4911 resolves the multiple order systems of URESA and
RURESA into a one-order system only for child support, not spousal support.

   The adoption of UIFSA has narrowed the options for obligors like Lundahl.
Under URESA and RURESA, new support orders in a sister state were deemed to be a
cumulative remedy, not a modification of the original order. But these statutes
also provided for modification of a court order from a sister state, if the
modification was litigated and noted explicitly on the new order. (In re
Marriage of Straeck, supra, 156 Cal. App. 3d at p. 625 ["the obligor could
request that the court specifically provide that the new order supersedes or
modifies all other orders"]; accord, In re Marriage of Ward (1994) 29
Cal.App.4th 1452, 1456 [35 Cal. Rptr. 2d 32].) An obligor could thus gain
protection against multiple orders by securing a statement of express
modification in the new order. 7

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7    This
provision in URESA and RURESA for express modification distinguishes the litany
of inapposite Utah cases relied upon by Lundahl. In Bankler v. Bankler (Utah Ct.
App. 1998) 963 P.2d 797, 800, the court stated: "Actions to modify a divorce
decree should 'properly be brought in the forum which issued the decree.'
[Citation.] '[T]he court issuing the original decree retains exclusive
jurisdiction to modify its decrees. Parties wishing to modify a decree must do
so in the original forum.' " But in Bankler, the issue was domestication of a
sister state divorce decree under the Utah Foreign Judgment Act, not express
modification of the decree under RURESA or entry of an independent support order
as permitted by the act. (Cf. Angell v. Sixth Judicial District Court (Utah
1982) 656 P.2d 405, 407 [contemplating an action "brought to modify a foreign
decree" as "an original action in this State"].) Similarly, Rimensburger v.
Rimensburger (Utah Ct. App. 1992) 841 P.2d 709, 711, did not involve
modification of an another state court's judgment under RURESA, but rather
modification by one Utah court of a divorce decree issued by another Utah court,
long prohibited by Utah venue precedent. And Christensen v. Christensen (1925)
65 Utah 597 [239 P. 501, 503], in which the court held, "an application like the
one in question here [intrastate support modification] should be made in the
original divorce action and not by an independent proceeding," predated RURESA
by decades. Again, "[c]ases are not authority, of course, for issues not raised
or resolved." (San Diego Gas & Electric Co. v. Superior Court, supra, 13 Cal.4th
at p. 943; accord, Salt Lake Inv. Co. v. Oregon Short Line R. Co. (1914) 46 Utah
203 [148 P. 439, 444].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     But UIFSA now permits modification of a spousal support order only by the
court issuing the order. Section 4909, subdivision (f), states: "A tribunal of
this state may not modify a spousal support order issued by a tribunal of
another state having continuing, exclusive jurisdiction over that order under
the law of that state." As such, "the CEJ [Continuing, Exclusive Jurisdiction]
of the issuing State over a spousal support order is permanent ... ." (UIFSA
Com., 29D West's Ann. Fam. Code, supra, foll. § 4909,p. 297.) The UIFSA drafters
explain: "Under UIFSA, 'interstate' modification of spousal support is limited
to a procedure whereby a proceeding may be initiated outside of the issuing
State, but only the tribunal in the original issuing State may modify the order
under its law. This approach was expected to have minimal effect on actual
practice, a prediction that appears to have been accurate. Interstate
modification of pure spousal support was relatively rare under RURESA, and plays
almost no part in the activities of support enforcement agencies." (Id., foll. §
4914, p. 308.)

   Of course, "[i]nterstate modification of pure spousal support was relatively
rare under RURESA" (italics added) precisely because additional support amounts
were considered part of the obligee's cumulative remedy, and not a
"modification" unless explicitly so designated. Obligors like Lundahl subject to
multiple spousal support orders no longer are able to request modification of an
out-of-state support order in their home forum. Under UIFSA, Lundahl must appear
in Utah if he desires to modify the Utah court's spousal support orders. He may
not do so in California. (In re Marriage of Rassier (2002) 96 Cal.App.4th 1431
[118 Cal. Rptr. 2d 113] [under UIFSA, California obligor must go to Florida to
modify Florida order]; accord, Dep't of Human Services v. Jacoby (Utah Ct. App.
1999) 975 P.2d 939, 945-946 ["In this case, a Virginia court issued the spousal
support order and therefore, the order could not be modified by the trial court
in Utah"].)

   In sum, obligors who failed to appear in a support action in another state
under URESA or RURESA risked multiple spousal support obligations for which
UIFSA provides no remedy. And while UIFSA worsens Lundahl's dilemma because
in-state modification is no longer available, he has only himself to blame for
not appearing in the Utah actions in which additional support was ordered. (See
In re Marriage of Straeck, supra, 156 Cal. App. 3d at p. 624.) Of course, he is
entitled to credit towards both his Utah and California obligations for payments
made on either. (§ 4913.)

   Before concluding, we return to the 1999 Utah spousal support order, issued
after Utah adopted UIFSA in 1997. The order does not purport to be a
modification of any earlier order, but merely records the sum of arrearages
Lundahl owed as of that date under the support amount fixed by the 1995 Utah
order. The 1999 order in no way contravenes UIFSA. Rather, the order is fully
consistent with UIFSA as an example of the Utah court's "continuing, exclusive
jurisdiction" over its own prior support orders.

D. Pending Utah Court Proceedings* [NOT CERTIFIED FOR PUBLICATION]

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*   See
footnote, ante, page 305.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

III

DISPOSITION

   Because neither the parties' 1977 California judgment of dissolution, nor
RURESA or UIFSA support Lundahl's argument the California courts were vested
with exclusive spousal support jurisdiction, the trial court's order confirming
registration of the Utah support orders is affirmed. Respondents are entitled to
their costs on appeal. (Cal. Rules of Court, rule 27.)

   Bedsworth, Acting P. J., and Fybel, J., concurred.

   A petition for a rehearing was denied March 29, 2004; and the opinion was
modified to read as printed above.


                              61 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of TERESA ANNE and THOMAS ALAN MacMANUS.
           TERESA ANNE MacMANUS, Respondent, v. THOMAS ALAN MacMANUS,
                                   Appellant.

                                    G041248

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FOURTH APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION THREE

          182 Cal. App. 4th 330; 105 Cal. Rptr. 3d 785; 2010 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 240


                            February 25, 2010, Filed

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY: Review denied by MacManus (Teresa Ann & Thomas Alan),
Marraige of, 2010 Cal. LEXIS 4430 (Cal., May 12, 2010)

PRIOR-HISTORY:
   Appeal from a judgment of the Superior Court of Orange County, No. 02D010919,
Clay M. Smith, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(4) Dissolution of Marriage § 40--Pendente Lite Orders--Temporary Spousal
Support--Retroactive Award--Determination of Amount--Domestic Violence.--The
trial court did not abuse its discretion in reallocating back child support to
back spousal support for a wife where the trial court's comments suggested that
it made the past spousal support award on equitable grounds. The lack of support
caused the dissipation of community assets, the wife had suffered from severe
domestic violence, and the husband was incarcerated because of that domestic
violence. While the trial court could not have ordered the husband to make
temporary support payments to the wife while he was in jail, it could order him
to take on more arrearages at the time the property was divided.

   [Kirkland et al., Cal. Family Law Practice and Procedure (2009) ch. 51, §
51.15; Cal. Forms of Pleading and Practice (2009) ch. 225, Dissolution of
Marriage: Spousal Support, § 225.82; 11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (10th ed.
2005) Husband and Wife, § 225.]

COUNSEL: Geoffrey N. Lachner for Appellant.

Jan Mark Dudman for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Sills, P. J., with Fybel and Ikola, JJ., concurring.

OPINION BY: Sills

OPINION

    SILLS, P. J.--Thomas Alan MacManus appeals from the judgment dissolving his
marriage to Teresa Anne MacManus. 1 He contends the trial court abused its
discretion when it reallocated back child support to back spousal support
without considering Teresa's need and his ability to pay. We affirm.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   As in
many family law cases, we will refer to the parties by their first names to
avoid confusion. (See, e.g., In re Marriage of Witherspoon (2007) 155
Cal.App.4th 963, 967, fn. 2 [66 Cal.Rptr.3d 586].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

FACTS

   In November 2002, following an incident of domestic violence, Teresa filed a
petition for dissolution of marriage and applied for a domestic violence
restraining order. The parties stipulated to the terms of the order, which
provided that Thomas would stay away from Teresa and their three daughters and
would attend counseling and a batterer's program. The parties also stipulated
that they owned a community property business, Pacific Drywall Systems, Inc.
(PDS), from which each was to receive $ 3,000 per month, and that they also
owned two rental properties in San Diego, known as Boise Avenue and Thomson
Court. Thomas agreed to pay $ 1,145 per month in child support.

   Criminal charges were filed against Thomas based on the same domestic
violence incident, and the criminal court also issued a protective order
proscribing contact with Teresa and their three daughters. In December 2002,
Thomas violated the protective orders and pleaded guilty to charges of felony
spousal abuse (Pen. Code, § 273.5, subd. (a)); he was incarcerated for five
months. After Thomas was released  from jail, the parties reconciled and lived
together from May 2003 to August 2004.

   Teresa filed an order to show cause in October 2004, seeking spousal and
child support, attorney fees, and the division of their property. Her
declaration stated that Thomas had "gutted the operations of PDS by ...
misappropriation and/or dissipation of corporate assets, gross mismanagement,
and day trading of securities which resulted in huge losses of community
property. As a consequence, IRS tax liens for non-payment of PDS employee
withholding taxes have been recorded against real property owned by the parties,
e.g. Boise Avenue and Thomson Court property; and further, [Teresa's] employer
has received a Notice of Levy from the IRS relating to PDS' tax problem in the
amount of $ 218,764.46." Teresa further stated that the rental income on Boise
Avenue and Thomson Court was sufficient to cover the properties' expenses, but
she claimed Thomas misappropriated two months of rental income to set up a new
drywall company and for his personal expenses, resulting in two months of
mortgage arrearages.

   Teresa explained that PDS settled a lawsuit in 2003, and the settlement
proceeds were being paid in monthly installments of $ 17,437.85. Teresa asked
that she be given control of the settlement proceeds "to apply towards child and
spousal support, chargeable against [Thomas's] community property interest
therein, to the extent [he] fails to pay timely any child and/or spousal support
ordered by the court." After a hearing, the parties stipulated that the November
and December 2004 installments would be deposited directly into the client trust
account of Teresa's attorney, to be held pending further order of the court.
Shortly thereafter, Thomas was arrested on charges related to domestic violence;
he was convicted and incarcerated from October 2004 to February 2007. The
hearing on the remaining issues in the order to show cause was continued until
May 2008.

   At trial, Teresa testified she had made the mortgage payments on Boise Avenue
for about 16 months. Tenants "destroyed" the property, and she had no money to
repair it. The parties' adult daughter, Diana, had been living there since
October 2005. PDS owned a piece of property, known as Poway, which was lost to
foreclosure because there was no money to pay the mortgage or the taxes. The
tenants in Thomson Court refused to pay rent because there were extensive leaks
and mold. The property sat empty for one year before it was lost to foreclosure
because Teresa was unable to pay the mortgage.

   After trial, the court awarded future child support of $ 377 per month, based
on Thomas's average monthly income of $ 1,800. The court found that "both
parties took assets" of PDS and its successor. "On this record I cannot conclude
that one party took more than the other party or that either party is entitled
to any kind of a credit or charge." The court found "it is appropriate to delete
from the total arrearages the child support that otherwise would have been due
during the period of time that they, in fact, lived together and shared all of
the assets, expenses, and income." After the deduction, the total amount of
child support arrearages due was $ 67,414. The court found Teresa "us[ed] her
best efforts, under extraordinarily difficult circumstances, to marshal the
assets of the community and to use those assets to discharge community
obligations and normal living expenses for the family." The court also found
Teresa had not proved that Thomas received more from the settlement on the PDS
lawsuit than she did; consequently, "neither party  is entitled to a credit or a
charge with respect to the settlement of that lawsuit."

   The court stated it considered the factors in Family Code 2 section 4320 in
determining future spousal support, including the "skills, education, and
training of both parties," "periods of unemployment," and "the ability of both
sides to pay spousal support, and the needs of each party." It also considered
the history of domestic violence, which it found was "lengthy, ... pervasive,
extensive, and very severe." It awarded no spousal support to either party,
finding it would be "entirely inappropriate" to order Teresa to pay Thomas
"given the history of domestic violence" and it would be "a severe hardship" to
order Thomas to pay spousal support.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   All
subsequent statutory references are to the Family Code.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The court indicated its intent to divide the balance of the attorney's trust
account equally between the parties, which at that point was $ 130,950. Teresa's
counsel pointed out that a different bench officer had previously ordered $
20,000 released from that account to Teresa "as child support, subject to
reallocation by the court," and $ 1,200 released to Thomas to be used towards
his obligation for attorney fees. Thomas asked for credit for the $ 20,000
against his obligation for child support arrearages. The court stated, "I'm
inclined to reallocate that as spousal support for the past. I've already given
[Thomas] a significant credit against child support arrears for the period of
time that they were reconciled. In light of the entire record and the whole
history of this matter, ... I am reallocating that to past spousal support."

DISCUSSION

   On appeal, Thomas contends the trial court abused its discretion in
reallocating to past spousal support the $ 20,000 previously distributed from
the trust account as child support. He argues there is nothing in the record to
indicate the trial court considered the parties' needs and abilities before
making the award. As we explain, the trial court properly exercised its
discretion.

   When making an award of permanent spousal support, the trial court is
required to consider and weigh all the factors enumerated in section 4320 to the
extent they are relevant to the case. (In re Marriage of Cheriton (2001) 92
Cal.App.4th 269, 302 [111 Cal.Rptr.2d 755].) 3  Temporary spousal support,
however, is subject to the trial court's broad discretion and "may be ordered in
'any amount' based on the party's need and the other party's ability to pay.
[Citations.]" (In re Marriage of Wittgrove (2004) 120 Cal.App.4th 1317, 1327 [16
Cal.Rptr.3d 489]; see § 3600.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Section
4320 reads: "In ordering spousal support under this part, the court shall
consider all of the following circumstances: [¶] (a) The extent to which the
earning capacity of each party is sufficient to maintain the standard of living
established during the marriage, taking into account all of the following: [¶]
(1) The marketable skills of the supported party; the job market for those
skills; the time and expenses required for the supported party to acquire the
appropriate education or training to develop those skills; and the possible need
for retraining or education to acquire other, more marketable skills or
employment. [¶] (2) The extent to which the supported party's present or future
earning capacity is impaired by periods of unemployment that were incurred
during the marriage to permit the supported party to devote time to domestic
duties. [¶] (b) The extent to which the supported party contributed to the
attainment of an education, training, a career position, or a license by the
supporting party. [¶] (c) The ability of the supporting party to pay spousal
support, taking into account the supporting party's earning capacity, earned and
unearned income, assets, and standard of living. [¶] (d) The needs of each party
based on the standard of living established during the marriage. [¶] (e) The
obligations and assets, including the separate property, of each party. [¶] (f)
The duration of the marriage. [¶] (g) The ability of the supported party to
engage in gainful employment without unduly interfering with the interests of
dependent children in the custody of the party. [¶] (h) The age and health of
the parties. [¶] (i) Documented evidence of any history of domestic violence, as
defined in Section 6211, between the parties, including, but not limited to,
consideration of emotional distress resulting from domestic violence perpetrated
against the supported party by the supporting party, and consideration of any
history of violence against the supporting party by the supported party. [¶] (j)
The immediate and specific tax consequences to each party. [¶] (k) The balance
of the hardships to each party. [¶] (l) The goal that the supported party shall
be self-supporting within a reasonable period of time. Except in the case of a
marriage of long duration as described in Section 4336, a 'reasonable period of
time' for purposes of this section generally shall be one-half the length of the
marriage. However, nothing in this section is intended to limit the court's
discretion to order support for a greater or lesser length of time, based on any
of the other factors listed in this section, Section 4336, and the circumstances
of the parties. [¶] (m) The criminal conviction of an abusive spouse shall be
considered in making a reduction or elimination of a spousal support award in
accordance with Section 4325. [¶] (n) Any other factors the court determines are
just and equitable."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In 1999, the Legislature expanded the list of factors to be considered for
permanent spousal support by adding language about domestic violence to section
4320. As a result, former subdivision (h) of section 4320 directed the  trial
court to consider "[t]he age and health of the parties, including, but not
limited to, consideration of emotional distress resulting from domestic violence
perpetrated against the supported party by the supporting party where the court
finds documented evidence of a history of domestic violence ... against the
supported party by the supporting party." (See Historical and Statutory Notes,
29F West's Ann. Fam. Code (2004 ed.) foll. § 4320, p. 223.)

   In 2001, the Legislature passed Senate Bill No. 1221 (2001-2002 Reg. Sess.),
which removed the domestic violence language from former subdivision (h) of
section 4320 and placed it in a separate subdivision for consideration by the
trial court: "(i) Documented evidence of any history of domestic violence ...
between the parties, including, but not limited to, consideration of emotional
distress resulting from domestic violence perpetrated against the supported
party by the supporting party, and consideration of any history of violence
against the supporting party by the supported party." Senate Bill No. 1221 also
added section 4325, which created a rebuttable presumption against awarding
temporary or permanent spousal support to an abusive spouse, 4 and added
subdivision (m) to section 4320: "The criminal conviction of an abusive spouse
shall be considered in making a reduction or elimination of a spousal support
award in accordance with Section 4325."

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   Section
4325: "(a) In any proceeding for dissolution of marriage where there is a
criminal conviction for an act of domestic violence perpetrated by one spouse
against the other spouse entered by the court within five years prior to the
filing of the dissolution proceeding, or at any time thereafter, there shall be
a rebuttable presumption affecting the burden of proof that any award of
temporary or permanent spousal support to the abusive spouse otherwise awardable
pursuant to the standards of this part should not be made. [¶] (b) The court may
consider documented evidence of a convicted spouse's history as a victim of
domestic violence, as defined in Section 6211, perpetrated by the other spouse,
or any other factors the court deems just and equitable, as conditions for
rebutting this presumption. [¶] (c) The rebuttable presumption created in this
section may be rebutted by a preponderance of the evidence."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Senate Bill No. 1221 (2001-2002 Reg. Sess.) also amended section 3600, the
statute authorizing a temporary  spousal support order, to require the trial
court to consider domestic violence when making its award. Section 3600 now
reads: "During the pendency of any proceeding for dissolution of marriage ... ,
the court may order (a) the husband or wife to pay any amount that is necessary
for the support of the wife or husband, consistent with the requirements of
subdivisions (i) and (m) of Section 4320 and Section 4325 ... ." 5

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   The 2001
amendment to section 3600 stated the amount must be "consistent with the
requirements of Sections 4320 and 4325." In 2002, the section was amended to
clarify that the trial court need consider only the history of domestic
violence, not all the factors in section 4320. (See Historical and Statutory
Notes, 29E West's Ann. Fam. Code (2004 ed.) foll. § 3600, p. 461.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   An award of temporary spousal support " 'is utilized to maintain the living
conditions and standards of the parties in as close to the status quo position
as possible pending trial and the division of their assets and obligations.'
[Citation.]" (In re Marriage of Murray (2002) 101 Cal.App.4th 581, 594 [124
Cal.Rptr.2d 342].) Such awards rest within the broad discretion of the trial
court and will not be reversed on appeal absent a showing of a clear abuse of
discretion. (In re Marriage of Wittgrove, supra, 120 Cal.App.4th at p. 1327.)
Also, a temporary spousal support award can be made retroactively, at least to
the date of the order to show cause requesting spousal support. (In re Marriage
of Dick (1993) 15 Cal.App.4th 144, 166 [18 Cal.Rptr.2d 743]; Hogoboom & King,
Cal. Practice Guide: Family Law (The Rutter Group 2009) ¶ 5.171, p. 5-72.)
Before the incorporation of the consideration of domestic violence into the
temporary support statute, one court observed: "[T]here are no explicit
statutory standards governing temporary support. [Citation.] Nor are there
explicit statutory standards controlling decisions about retroactivity. Absent
statutory direction, the trial court's exercise of its discretion regarding
retroactivity of temporary support must be guided by two overriding concerns:
the supported spouse's need and the supporting spouse's ability to pay. In
short, 'the trial court should tailor its award on the basis of the equitable
rights of the parties in light of their economic needs and abilities' during the
period for which a retroactive increase is sought. [Citation.]" (In re Marriage
of Cheriton, supra, 92 Cal.App.4th at pp. 312-313.)

   The question before us is to what extent the trial court's consideration of a
history of domestic violence can influence an award of temporary spousal support
. There are no California cases on this question. The trial court here made no
findings of Teresa's need or Thomas's ability to pay. Thomas was incarcerated
from October 2004 to February 2007; presumably, he had no ability to pay during
that time. Teresa testified she lost PDS, Thomson Court and the Poway property
because she did not have the income to keep them going. From this testimony, we
can infer Teresa had the need for support during the separation.

   The trial court's comments suggest it made the past spousal support award on
equitable grounds. The lack of support caused the dissipation of community
assets, Teresa had suffered from severe domestic violence, and Thomas was
incarcerated because of that domestic violence. While the court could not have
ordered Thomas to make temporary support payments to Teresa while he was in
jail, it could order him to take on more arrearages at the time the property was
divided.

    Commentators have observed that the introduction of domestic violence as a
consideration for a spousal support award "is another area where  fault evidence
is allowed in spousal support litigation." (Hogoboom & King, Cal. Practice
Guide: Family Law (The Rutter Group 2009) ¶¶ 6.824.5, 6.924.1, pp. 6-302.6,
6-338; see Olear, "Fault" is Back (and With a Vengeance) (Nov. 2003) 45 Orange
County Lawyer 46.) Given the trial court's broad discretion to "consider the
'big picture' concerning the parties' assets and income available for support in
light of the marriage standard of living" (In re Marriage of Wittgrove, supra,
120 Cal.App.4th at p. 1327), we cannot say the order was an abuse.

DISPOSITION

   The judgment is affirmed. Respondent is entitled to costs on appeal.

   Fybel, J., and Ikola, J., concurred.

   Appellant's petition for review by the Supreme Court was denied May 12, 2010,
S181693.


                              62 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of ANDREA NICOLE and ANDREW EDWARD LEFT.
             ANDREA NICOLE LEFT, Respondent, v. ANDREW EDWARD LEFT,
                                   Appellant.

                                    B230768

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SECOND APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION TWO

            208 Cal. App. 4th 1137; 146 Cal. Rptr. 3d 181; 2012 Cal.
                                 App. LEXIS 912


                         August 23, 2012, Opinion Filed

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY: Review denied by In re Left, 2012 Cal. LEXIS 10519 (Cal.,
Nov. 14, 2012)

PRIOR-HISTORY:
   APPEAL from an order of the Superior Court of Los Angeles County, No.
BD436243, Mark A. Juhas, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(4) Dissolution of Marriage § 73--Spousal Support--Termination--Remarriage--
Legal Marriage.--Because a woman and her boyfriend did not meet the statutory
requirements for a valid marriage when they held a commitment ceremony, they did
not marry, and the obligation of the woman's ex-husband to pay spousal support
did not terminate under Fam. Code, § 4337.

   [Kirkland et al., Cal. Family Law Practice and Procedure (2012) ch. 52, §
52.44; Cal. Forms of Pleading and Practice (2012) ch. 225, Dissolution of
Marriage: Spousal Support, § 225.274; 11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (10th ed.
2005) Husband and Wife, §§ 225, 365.]

COUNSEL: Gary J. Cohen for Appellant.

Honey Kessler Amado and Erin M. Bogle for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Chavez, J., with Boren, P. J., and Doi Todd, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: Chavez

OPINION

    CHAVEZ, J.--This matter arises out of dissolution of marriage proceedings
between Andrew Edward Left (Andrew) and Andrea Nicole Left (Andrea).1 On
February 7, 2007, the parties entered into a stipulation providing for Andrew to
pay spousal support to Andrea in the amount of $32,547 per month and child
support in the amount of $14,590 per month. A judgment of dissolution, as to
status only, was entered on June 30, 2008. On October 19, 2009, Andrew filed an
order to show cause (OSC) application to terminate spousal support, on the
primary ground that Andrea had remarried. Andrea filed a competing OSC
application for contempt, on the ground that Andrew had failed to pay spousal
support. Andrew appeals from the trial court's order  denying his application to
terminate spousal support and modifying the spousal and child support orders. We
affirm.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   To avoid
confusion and follow the convention in family law appeals, the parties will be
referred to by their first names.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

CONTENTIONS

   Andrew contends that the trial court erred in determining that the ceremony
that Andrea participated in with Dr. Todd Katzman (Todd) did not constitute a
remarriage under Family Code section 4337.2 Further, Andrew contends, even if
the ceremony did not constitute a remarriage under section 4337, Andrea should
be estopped from denying that she has remarried. In addition, Andrew argues, by
giving little or no weight to the short duration of the parties' marriage, the
trial court abused its discretion in declining to terminate spousal support.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   All
further statutory references are to the Family Code unless otherwise indicated.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   As to the modification of the spousal support order, Andrew contends that the
trial court erred by refusing to make the modification retroactive to a date
prior to May 2010, when Andrew filed an updated income and expense declaration.

   As to the modification of the child support order, Andrew argues that the
trial court erroneously reserved jurisdiction to adjust the start date for the
new child support order. Andrew requests that any references to the court's
reservation of jurisdiction on this issue be stricken.

BACKGROUND

1. The marriage and divorce

   Andrea and Andrew were married in June 2001 and separated in February 2006.
Andrew is a stock trader. Andrea was a practicing attorney before the marriage
and early in the marriage, but she stopped working when she became pregnant in
2001. During the marriage, Andrea did not work outside the home. There are two
minor children of the parties' marriage: Jordan, age eight, and Lauren, age
seven.

   On November 18, 2005, Andrea filed a petition for dissolution of marriage.
Andrew filed his response on June 3, 2008.

   In December 2006, Andrea filed an OSC application for relief, including
temporary child support and spousal support. On February 7, 2007, the parties
entered into a stipulation under which Andrew agreed to pay child support of
$14,590 per month and spousal support of $32,547 per month.

   As of mid-2008, there had not yet been an adjudication of contested issues. A
judgment of dissolution, status only, was entered on June 30, 2008. The ruling
dissolved the marriage, but the court reserved jurisdiction over all other
issues.

 2. Andrea's commitment ceremony

   At the end of December 2008, Andrea became engaged to marry Todd. At the time
that she set the date for her wedding, Andrea believed that she and Andrew would
have their issues resolved. Andrea and Todd set their wedding date for May 2,
2009, and sent out wedding invitations in early March 2009. They began living
together in February or March 2009.

   Andrea switched custodial weekends with Andrew so that the children could
attend the ceremony. She also advised her children's school that she was getting
married and would be away on her honeymoon. She and Todd were registered at
Bloomingdale's for gifts.

   According to Andrea, in the weeks before the wedding, it became clear that
she and Andrew would not be able to resolve the remaining issues regarding the
divorce. Neither she nor Todd was comfortable going forward with the wedding
while the litigation with Andrew was unresolved. Andrea stated that she did not
want Todd entangled in her divorce. However, because they had sent out
invitations for a May 2, 2009 ceremony and had spent money on planned
activities, they wanted to proceed with the celebration.

   On May 2, 2009, the celebration took place in Palm Springs. Andrea testified
that she would call the event a "commitment ceremony." She wore her wedding
dress, and she wanted the children to believe that she was getting married. She
and Todd signed a ketubah, which is a Jewish marriage contract. However, Andrea
and Todd did not obtain a marriage license.

   According to Rabbi Haim Asa, who presided over the ceremony, when he arrived
in Palm Springs he believed he was going to preside over a wedding.
Approximately 30 minutes before the ceremony, when Rabbi Asa would normally have
had the parties sign the marriage certificate, he learned that there was a
problem getting the license. Rabbi Asa did not inform the guests that he was not
performing a wedding. Indeed, the guests who testified stated that at the time
of the ceremony they believed Andrea and Todd had actually gotten married. Rabbi
Asa called Andrea and Todd every month following the ceremony to see whether
they had obtained a civil license yet.

   On June 24, 2009, Andrea informed Andrew that she and Todd were not really
married. On July 31, 2009, Andrew confirmed that he knew they were not married.

3. Andrew's OSC to terminate or reduce spousal support

   Andrew filed his OSC to terminate spousal support on October 19, 2009. The
primary ground for the application was Andrea's remarriage to Todd. In the
alternative, Andrew requested termination based on a combination of factors: (1)
the marriage was one of short duration; (2) Andrew had already paid spousal
support to Andrea for over three years, which represented nearly three-fourths
the length of the marriage; (3) Andrea had a law degree, yet had made no effort
to support herself; and (4) Andrea was cohabitating with Todd.

4. Andrea's application for writ of execution and OSC for contempt

   The day after Andrew filed his OSC to terminate spousal support, Andrea filed
an application for writ of execution, claiming that Andrew owed her $247,666.86
in past due support, plus accrued interest and costs. The application for writ
of execution encompassed payments due between December 2008 and October 2009. A
writ was issued the same day.

    On November 5, 2009, Andrea filed an OSC for contempt based on Andrew's
failure to pay the full amount of child and spousal support each month, for a
time period beginning in December 2008.

   The parties appeared in court on December 1, 2009. The court set the contempt
OSC hearing for January 13, 2010. The court ordered Andrew's OSC regarding
termination of spousal support to trail behind the contempt proceeding, and
stayed Andrew's obligation to pay spousal support until his OSC could be heard.
The court made it clear that it needed "a current and updated income and expense
declaration under California Rule[s] of Court[, rule] 5.128" before it could
consider the issues raised in Andrew's OSC. The court specified that Andrew was
not required to respond to any "financial issue OSC until after the resolution
of the contempt."

   On December 28, 2009, $255,000 was garnished from Andrew's E*Trade account
pursuant to the writ of execution issued on October 20, 2009. Andrew filed an ex
parte application to stay disbursement of the funds. The parties thereafter
entered into a stipulation pursuant to which the $255,000 was disbursed to
Andrea's counsel to be held in trust pending further order of the court.

   Trial of the contempt matter commenced on January 28, 2010, and continued on
February 8, February 11, March 29, and April 20, 2011. The court made it clear
that all testimony regarding both the OSC for contempt and Andrew's OSC for
termination of support should be brought forth, so that the witnesses would not
have to testify twice.

   On April 30, 2010, the court found Andrew guilty of nine of the 10 counts of
contempt.

5. Andrea's OSC to amend the 2007 stipulation

   On May 4, 2010, Andrea filed an OSC to amend the 2007 stipulation regarding
child and spousal support nunc pro tunc, or, in the alternative, for an
immediate disbursement of the community property due under paragraph 750.3 of
the stipulation.3 Andrea sought this relief on the ground that Andrew's earnings
were substantially more than he had disclosed at the time of the stipulation and
that support should be modified to be commensurate with his actual earnings.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Paragraph
750.3 of the stipulation provides: "The orders presume that [Andrew] will
generate income from said trading of $1.5 [million] annually. Any income in the
accounts up to $1.5 [million] annually (1/07-2/07) shall be [Andrew's] income
from which he shall pay the support, and [Andrew] shall pay all federal and
state tax liability therein and shall indemnify and hold [Andrea] harmless
therefrom. To the extent that income is realized in excess of $1.5 [million] for
2007, the excess income is comm[unity] prop[erty]. Each party shall be
responsible for and pay the federal and state tax on the income in excess of
$1.5 [million]. The court reserves jurisdiction with regard to the distribution
of any excess income."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Andrew filed a response to Andrea's OSC. Andrew argued that the trial court
did not have jurisdiction to retroactively amend the February 7, 2007
stipulation and order. He also argued that by agreeing that any income over $1.5
million in 2007 would be deemed community property, the parties made this a
property issue for trial. Andrew argued that Andrea was seeking an early
distribution of community property, and that any such payment should only be
considered with a calculation of the community taxes that Andrew has paid on
that money. In addition, Andrew pointed out that he had recently tendered a
check to Andrea in the amount of  $400,000 while the calculation of Andrew's
excess income and the associated tax liability from 2007 was being calculated.
Finally, Andrew argued that Andrea was not entitled to spousal support in an
amount that far exceeds the marital standard of living.

6. Andrew's updated income and expense declaration

   On May 5, 2010, Andrew filed an updated income and expense declaration. The
declaration indicated that for the 12 months ending February 28, 2010, Andrew's
trading activities resulted in a $2,242,576 loss, an average loss of $186,881
per month.

7. Rulings on the requests to modify support

   On June 1, 2010, the parties appeared and presented argument concerning both
Andrew's OSC for termination of spousal support and Andrea's OSC to amend the
February 7, 2007 stipulation and order nunc pro tunc. The matter was submitted.

   On September 14, 2010, the trial court filed a ruling on the submitted
matter. The court held that Andrea was not remarried, therefore the
"non-marriage ceremony several months ago has no real effect on the support
award." Regarding Andrea's cohabitation with Todd, the court found the
cohabitation to be grounds for reducing the support award, and accordingly
reduced Andrea's spousal support from $32,547 per month to $20,000 per month.

   Although Andrew wanted the order to be retroactive to May 2009, the date of
Andrea's commitment ceremony, the court limited the retroactive application of
the order to May 15, 2010. The court noted that Andrew did not file an income
and expense declaration (Judicial Council form FL-150) until May 9, 2010. Based
on the filing date of Andrew's form FL-150, the court stated that it could "only
go back in time to May 15, 2010 in modifying support. [Andrew] cannot fail to
comply with the court's filing requirements and gain the time advantage of a
retroactive modification date."

   The court increased the amount of child support from $14,590 per month to
$19,075 per month. As to the start date for this modification, the court stated:
"[Andrew] requested that the child support reach back to the February 2007
support award. The court will reserve over that start date, but will not reach
back that far. The court is uncertain at this point as to what the actual amount
[Andrew] has now paid [Andrea] for the community portion of 2007, forward to the
extent that there is any community portion after the 2007 calendar year. At the
present time, the court will start the new child support amount on May 15, 2010,
the date appropriate as a result of the filing date."

   The ruling on submitted matter directed Andrea's counsel to draft an order
for the trial court's signature. Andrea's counsel served a proposed order on
October 20, 2010. The trial court revised the order, signed it, and filed it on
December 16, 2010.

   On February 7, 2011, Andrew filed his notice of appeal.

DISCUSSION

I. Remarriage

   Andrew's main argument on appeal involves the ceremony which took place on
May 2, 2009, between Andrea and Todd. Andrew argues that the trial court
misinterpreted section 4337 and decisional law in finding that Andrea had not
remarried as that term is used in section 4337. As  set forth below, we find
that no error occurred.

A. Standard of review

   Normally, an order modifying spousal support is reviewed under the
deferential abuse of discretion standard. (In re Marriage of Kerr (1999) 77
Cal.App.4th 87, 93 [91 Cal. Rptr. 2d 374] (Kerr).) However, where the appeal
raises a question regarding the proper interpretation of a statute, or the
proper application of the law to uncontested facts, the standard of review is de
novo. (In re Marriage of Campbell (2006) 136 Cal.App.4th 502, 506-507 [38 Cal.
Rptr. 3d 908] (Campbell).) We therefore analyze Andrew's question regarding the
proper application of section 4337, and its application to the facts of this
case, de novo.

B. Section 4337 does not apply

   Andrew argues that on May 2, 2009, Andrea remarried, thus terminating
Andrew's support obligations pursuant to section 4337. Section 4337 provides:
"Except as otherwise agreed by the parties in writing, the obligation of a party
under an order for the support of the other party terminates upon the death of
either party or the remarriage of the other party."

   We begin our analysis by examining the statute's words, giving them a plain
and commonsense meaning. (People v. Murphy (2001) 25 Cal.4th 136, 142 [105 Cal.
Rptr. 2d 387, 19 P.3d 1129].) Neither party argues that the word "remarriage,"
as used in the statute, is ambiguous. We find that the word is clear and
unambiguous, and requires entry into a legal marriage.

   In California, there are several requirements for a valid marriage. The
parties must consent to the marriage; consent must be followed by the issuance
of a license; and the marriage must be solemnized by an authorized person. (§§
300, 400.) In addition, the parties must declare, in the presence of the person
solemnizing the marriage, that they take each other as husband and wife. (§ 420
.)

   The record shows that Andrea and Todd did not become legally married at the
commitment ceremony on May 2, 2009. No marriage license was issued.  Rabbi Asa,
who presided over the ceremony, was aware that the parties did not have a
marriage license. Andrea and Todd did not enter into a valid marriage under
California law.

   Andrew concedes that Andrea and Todd did not enter into a legally valid
marriage under California law.4 However, he argues that section 4337 and its
predecessors have been interpreted to include a ceremony that resembles a valid
remarriage--regardless of whether the ceremony resulted in a valid marriage. In
support of his position, Andrew cites three cases: Sefton v. Sefton (1955) 45
Cal.2d 872 [291 P.2d 439] (Sefton); Berkely v. Berkely (1969) 269 Cal.App.2d 872
[75 Cal. Rptr. 294] (Berkely); and Fry v. Fry (1970) 5 Cal.App.3d 169, 170-171
[85 Cal. Rptr. 126] (Fry). Andrew argues that these three cases show that it has
been clear for decades that a ceremonial marriage, whether valid, void, or
voidable, represents a "remarriage" as that term has been used in section 4337
and its predecessors.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   Since it
is undisputed that Andrea and Todd did not enter into a legally valid marriage
due to their failure to obtain a marriage license, we decline to discuss the
elements of consent and solemnization.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In Sefton, the Supreme Court interpreted Civil Code former section 139.5 The
Seftons had obtained a final divorce decree in December 1951, which obligated
Mr. Sefton to pay Mrs. Sefton spousal support until the death or remarriage of
Mrs. Sefton. Mr. Sefton paid the support through June 5, 1953. On June 12, 1953,
Mrs. Sefton entered into a ceremonial marriage with Ross C. Marble. Thereafter
she commenced an action to annul her marriage to Mr. Marble, for a species of
fraud which would make the marriage voidable. On June 19, 1953, Mrs. Sefton's
marriage to Mr. Marble was decreed null and void. (Sefton, supra, 45 Cal.2d at
p. 874.) The issue on appeal was "whether the annulment decree effectively
revived the defendant's obligation to pay alimony, or whether Mrs. Sefton's
voidable marriage to Marble was a 'remarriage' within the meaning of that term
as employed in section 139 ... ." (Ibid.) The court held that when considering
the rights of Mr. Sefton, the annulment decree did not relate back and erase the
marriage. The court reasoned: "By the celebration of marriage [Mrs. Sefton] held
herself out as having remarried. The defendant was entitled to rely upon her
apparent marital status after the ceremony. If Mrs. Sefton's new marriage was
subject to annulment for fraud ... the marriage would be voidable only. ... The
divorced spouse, the defendant here, may never know of the circumstances which
make his former wife's new marriage voidable. ... After the ceremony took place
he could properly assume, in accordance with [Civil Code] section 139 and the
property settlement agreement, that his obligation  to pay alimony had ceased.
He was then entitled to recommit his assets previously chargeable to alimony to
other purposes. Under such circumstances it would be improper to reinstate his
alimony obligation." (Sefton, at pp. 876-877.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   The
statute, which was very similar to the current section 4337, provided: "'Except
as otherwise agreed by the parties in writing, the obligation of any party in
any decree, judgment or order for the support and maintenance of the other party
shall terminate upon the death of the obligor or upon the remarriage of the
other party.'" (Sefton, supra, 45 Cal.2d at p. 874.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The Sefton case discusses reinstatement of alimony payments after the
annulment of a remarriage. In contrast to the present matter, the defendant had
ceased making payments, and his former wife was suing to have the payments
reinstated. There was no question as to whether the legal requirements of
marriage--including a marriage license--had been met. In fact, Mrs. Sefton's
marriage was only considered to be voidable at the election of one of the
parties--not invalid entirely. Here, in contrast, Andrew seeks termination of
payments on the ground of remarriage, where the parties agree that the legal
requirements of marriage have not been met. In sum, Sefton does not support
Andrew's position here.

   Berkely also involved an action to reinstate payment of alimony after an
annulled remarriage. The plaintiff, Norma Berkely, had remarried a few months
after her divorce. About six months later, she received an annulment decree on
the ground that a prior existing marriage of her new husband rendered his
marriage to her bigamous and void. (Berkely, supra, 269 Cal.App.2d at p. 872.)
The court declined to reinstate Mr. Berkely's alimony payments. Citing Sefton,
the court reasoned that the same holding applies with equal force to a void
marriage (Berkely, at p. 874), and found no persuasive reason to distinguish
between "the effects upon alimony of a void and a voidable remarriage." (Id. at
p. 875.) The court noted  that a divorcee should be treated "as a responsible
person who must be held to her decision, presumably relied upon by others, to
terminate her right to support from a former husband." (Ibid.) Here, the parties
agree, Andrea made no decision to legally marry. Her commitment ceremony was not
a void or voidable remarriage--it was not a marriage at all.

   Fry involved facts almost identical to Berkely. The plaintiff, who was
receiving alimony payments from her former husband, entered into a bigamous
remarriage which was later annulled and declared void. The sole question on
appeal was whether the remarriage, later declared void by the court,
extinguished the plaintiff's right to further alimony. Following the authority
of Sefton and Berkely, the Fry court concluded that it did.

   Neither Sefton, Berkely nor Fry involved a situation where, as here, the
parties did not intend to legally marry, did not obtain a marriage license, and
purposely did not carry out the legal requirements of marriage. Contrary to
Andrew's position, these cases do not stand for the proposition that the term
"remarriage," as used in section 4337, applies to a ceremony such as the one
undertaken by Andrea and Todd.

   Andrea points to Campbell which held that the term "remarriage," as set forth
in section 4337, does not include a supported spouse's attempt to remarry prior
to judgment dissolving the marriage. In Campbell, the dissolution action of Eric
and Rebekah Campbell was still pending when Rebekah Campbell was remarried in
Nevada. The remarriage, of course, was void, since Rebekah was still married to
Eric. (Campbell, supra, 136 Cal.App.4th at p. 504.) The trial court denied
Eric's motion to terminate spousal support, and the Court of Appeal agreed,
explaining that "a person may never legally remarry prior to dissolution of his
or her existing marriage." (Id. at p. 508.)6 Thus, the Court of Appeal
concluded, "it is reasonable to conclude that the Legislature never expected nor
intended that 'remarriage,' within the meaning of section 4337, would encompass
an attempted remarriage prior to dissolution of the first marriage." (Campbell,
at p. 508, fn. omitted.) Similarly, here, it is reasonable to conclude that the
Legislature never intended that the term "remarriage," within the meaning of
section 4337, would encompass a commitment ceremony where the couple
intentionally did not meet the legal requirements of marriage.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   In In re
Marriage of Seaton (2011) 200 Cal.App.4th 800 [133 Cal. Rptr. 3d 50] (Seaton),
which was published during the pendency of this appeal, the Court of Appeal
determined that under Nevada law, as under California law, a bigamous marriage
is "'void without any decree of divorce or annulment or other legal proceedings'
... . [Citation.]" (Id. at p. 807.) We agree with Andrea's counsel's statement
at oral argument that Seaton does not provide significant guidance on any of the
issues presented in this appeal.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Andrew has provided no authority that the term "remarriage" as used in
section 4337 means anything other than a remarriage carried out in conformity
with the statutory requirements. Because Andrea and Todd did not meet those
requirements, they did not marry, and Andrew's obligation to pay spousal support
did not terminate under section 4337.

C. Estoppel

   Andrew next argues that even if the commitment ceremony between Andrea and
Todd did not constitute a remarriage under section 4337, Andrea should be
estopped to deny that she remarried. Andrew points to Evidence Code section 623,
which provides: "Whenever a party has, by his own statement or conduct,
intentionally and deliberately led another to believe a particular thing true
and to act upon such belief, he is not, in any litigation arising out of such
statement or conduct, permitted to contradict it."

   The doctrine of estoppel has been applied in the family law context. (See In
re Marriage of Valle (1975) 53 Cal.App.3d 837 [126 Cal. Rptr. 38] [applying
estoppel doctrine to prevent a man from denying that he was the father of his
brother's children].) However, as Andrew concedes, the estoppel  doctrine has
not been applied in California to prevent a person from denying the validity of
a marriage.7 Nevertheless, Andrew argues that Andrea, who voluntarily
participated in a marriage ceremony, should be held to have relinquished her
right to further support.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   We
decline to discuss the foreign authorities cited by Andrew, as he has failed to
convince us that they should be considered persuasive authority under California
law.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In order for estoppel to apply, the complaining party must show: "(1) [t]he
party to be estopped has engaged in blameworthy or inequitable conduct; (2) that
conduct caused or induced the other party to suffer some disadvantage; and (3)
equitable considerations warrant the conclusion that the first party should not
be permitted to exploit the disadvantage he has thus inflicted upon the second
party." (City of Hollister v. Monterey Ins. Co. (2008) 165 Cal.App.4th 455, 488
[81 Cal. Rptr. 3d 72].) Andrew makes no effort to show that the elements of
estoppel have been met in this case. Instead, he attempts to cast it as a case
of "quasi-estoppel." Under the concept of quasi-estoppel, Andrew argues, a
showing of actual reliance and disadvantage need not be shown.

   In support of his argument that the concept of quasi-estoppel should be
considered, Andrew cites only one California case, Campbell. Andrew argues that
the Campbell court described Sefton and Berkely as applying a quasi-estoppel
doctrine when those courts concluded that the ex-husband was entitled to rely
upon the apparent remarriage of his former spouse. (Campbell, supra, 136
Cal.App.4th at p. 509.) In those cases, Andrew argues, actual reliance was not a
requirement.

   While the Campbell court did note that the Sefton and Berkely courts "applied
what is essentially an estoppel analysis" (Campbell, supra, 136 Cal.App.4th at
p. 509), we find that the Campbell court did not intend to create a new concept
of "quasi-estoppel" as to marriage. We decline to apply this concept under the
circumstances before us.8

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -8
California courts have accepted a concept of quasi-estoppel, or judicial
estoppel, in limited circumstances. (People ex rel. Sneddon v. Torch Energy
Services, Inc. (2002) 102 Cal.App.4th 181, 188-189 [125 Cal. Rptr. 2d 365].) The
party invoking judicial estoppel must show that the party against whom the
estoppel is asserted took an inconsistent position in a prior judicial or
administrative proceeding, and that the position was adopted in the first
tribunal in some manner. (Id. at p. 189.) Andrew makes no effort to show that
these elements have been met.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

II. Length of marriage

   Andrew also argues that the trial court abused its discretion by giving
little or no weight to the short length of the parties' marriage. Andrew points
out that the parties were married for only about four and one-half years at the
time of their divorce. By the time of the trial and the December 16, 2010 order,
Andrew had been under an obligation to pay Andrea  spousal support for more than
half the length of their marriage. Andrew points out that the trial court
specifically noted that the Family Code provides a guideline which establishes
that spousal support should be paid for half the length of the marriage.

   The trial court correctly noted that: "The code provides a guideline, not a
hard and fast rule that support should be paid for half the length of the
marriage."

   This guideline is found in section 4320, which provides numerous factors for
the trial court to consider when determining the amount and duration of spousal
support. Among the factors that the court must consider is the duration of the
marriage. (§ 4320, subd. (f).) The section further provides that the trial court
shall consider: "The goal that the supported party shall be self-supporting
within a reasonable period of time. Except in the case of a marriage of long
duration as described in Section 4336, a 'reasonable period of time' for
purposes of this section generally shall be one-half the length of the marriage.
However, nothing in this section is intended to limit the court's discretion to
order support for a greater or lesser length of time, based on any of the other
factors listed in this section, Section 4336, and the circumstances of the
parties." (§ 4320, subd. (l).)9

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -9   Section
4336 provides that a marriage of 10 years or more is a marriage of long
duration.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The parties agree that the trial court's decision regarding the amount and
duration of spousal support is subject to the abuse of discretion standard. (
Kerr, supra, 77 Cal.App.4th at p. 93 ["In making its spousal support order, the
trial court possesses broad discretion so as to fairly exercise the weighing
process contemplated by section 4320, with the goal of accomplishing substantial
justice for the parties in the case before it."].) "In awarding spousal support,
the court must consider the mandatory guidelines of section 4320." (Kerr, at p.
93, fn. omitted.) However, once it does so, "the ultimate decision as to amount
and duration of spousal support rests within its broad discretion and will not
be reversed on appeal absent an abuse of that discretion." (Ibid.) Appellate
courts must act with "cautious judicial restraint" in reviewing spousal support
orders. (In re Marriage of Ostler & Smith (1990) 223 Cal.App.3d 33, 50 [272 Cal.
Rptr. 560].)

   The record reveals that the trial court took into consideration the length of
the parties' marriage when it made the modified spousal support order. As Andrew
points out, the court specifically noted that the Family Code sets a guideline
for spousal support of a period of one-half the length of the  marriage. The
court also considered Andrea's cohabitation with Todd. Despite its consideration
of these two factors, the court exercised its discretion to continue the spousal
support, at a reduced rate. In doing so, the court considered other factors, as
well as the circumstances of the parties, as permitted under section 4320.
Specifically, the court found that there was no competent evidence that Andrea
could be self-supporting, and that Andrew had been slow to pay Andrea the
amounts of community property that he agreed he owed her but still had under his
control. Simply put, the court felt that Andrew could not "withhold money that
rightfully belongs to [Andrea] and then argue his support should terminate."
Andrew presents no authority that the court's consideration of the failure to
turn over community property is impermissible.10 We find no abuse of discretion
in the court's decision to continue spousal support.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -10   Andrew
argues that section 2550 provides that the community estate of a couple is
normally divided at the time of the judgment of dissolution or at a later time
if jurisdiction to do so is reserved. Here, Andrew argues, because the court
reserved jurisdiction to divide the parties' property at a later time, Andrew
was not required to distribute any part of the community property estate to
Andrea until division of the entire estate. Without citation to legal authority,
Andrew claims that "the fact that Andrew did not distribute the entire amount
before trial cannot have been a ground for the trial court's refusal to
terminate support." We decline to accept Andrew's argument that the trial court
"cannot" consider the failure to distribute community property which all parties
have agreed belongs to the other spouse. Nothing precludes the trial court from
considering any relevant circumstance, and the trial court "knows much more
about the parties and what constitutes an appropriate duration for spousal
support than will ever be known by a later judge." (In re Marriage of Prietsch &
Calhoun (1987) 190 Cal.App.3d 645, 664 [235 Cal. Rptr. 587].) Further, as Andrea
points out, in In re Marriage of Stallcup (1979) 97 Cal.App.3d 294 [158 Cal.
Rptr. 679], the Court of Appeal affirmed a trial court decision ordering that
spousal support would continue until the wife received her share of the
community property. The Stallcup court concluded: "Given husband's history of
disobedience to court orders, it was entirely reasonable and within its
discretion for the trial court to provide for support until wife receives all
her share of the community property." (Id. at p. 302.) While the circumstances
in Stallcup were not identical to those in this matter, the case is at odds with
Andrew's position that this factor cannot be considered by the court.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

 III. Start date for modifications

   Andrew filed his OSC regarding termination of spousal support on October 19,
2009. Andrew's OSC raised various grounds for termination or reduction of
spousal support. Those grounds included Andrea's alleged remarriage; the length
of the marriage versus the length of time Andrew had been paying spousal support
; Andrea's failure to make efforts to become self-supporting; and Andrea's
cohabitation with Todd.

   On September 14, 2010, the trial court filed its ruling on submitted matter,
reducing the amount of spousal support from $32,547 per month to $20,000 per
month. However, the court made the reduced order effective as of May  15, 2010,
instead of October 19, 2009. The court noted that Andrew did not file an income
and expense declaration (form FL-150) until May 9, 2010. Based on the filing
date of Andrew's form FL-150, the court stated that it could "only go back in
time to May 15, 2010 in modifying support. The respondent cannot fail to comply
with the court's filing requirements and gain the time advantage of a
retroactive modification date."

   Andrew argues that the court's failure to make its modification retroactive
to October 19, 2009, resulted in a "windfall" to Andrea for the seven-month
period of October 19, 2009, to May 15, 2010. Andrew argues that since the trial
court reduced the support to $20,000 per month, Andrea's windfall amounted to
$87,829 ($32,547 - $20,000 x 7).

   Andrew argues that the court's focus on the date of Andrew's updated income
and expense declaration was error. First, Andrew argues, no statute or rule
required Andrew to file an income and expense declaration with his OSC
application. Second, where, as here, the financial condition of the moving party
is not pertinent to a determination of the relief requested, the moving party's
failure to provide an income and expense declaration does not prevent the trial
court from granting the relief.

   The parties agree that it is within the trial court's discretion to make an
order retroactive. Section 4333 states that "[a]n order for spousal support in a
proceeding for dissolution of marriage or for  legal separation of the parties
may be made retroactive to the date of filing the notice of motion or order to
show cause, or to any subsequent date." An order making a modification
retroactive to a certain date is reviewed for abuse of discretion. (In re
Marriage of Jacobs (1981) 126 Cal.App.3d 832, 834 [179 Cal. Rptr. 169].)

   The rule of court governing income and expense declarations provides that
such a declaration must be filed where it is relevant to the relief requested.
California Rules of Court, rule 5.128(a) provides: "A current Income and Expense
Declaration (form FL-150) ... when such form is appropriate ... must be served
and filed by any party appearing at any hearing at which the court is to
determine an issue as to which such declarations would be relevant. 'Current' is
defined as being completed within the past three months providing no facts have
changed."

   As Andrew points out, this rule only requires the filing of an income and
expense declaration when it is "appropriate" and "relevant." Andrew argues that
the grounds he asserted for termination and reduction had nothing to do with his
financial condition, therefore he was not required to file an income and expense
declaration at the time he filed his OSC in October 2009.

   The trial court clearly felt that an income and expense report was relevant
to Andrew's OSC. At the December 1, 2009 hearing, the court noted that it
needed an updated income and expense report "under California Rule[s] of Court[,
rule] 5.128" before considering Andrew's OSC. Under section 4320, ability to
pay, and the needs of the parties, are factors that the court must consider in
determining the amount and duration of an order for spousal support.11 In
addition, the court noted in its initial ruling that it was concerned about
Andrew's failure to consistently pay the amount of support that he owed, and
that Andrew should have already turned over money that both parties agreed
rightfully belonged to Andrea. Under the circumstances, we find no error in the
trial court's determination that an income and expense report was relevant, and
therefore required, under the California Rules of Court.12

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -11   Andrew
argues that section 4320 only governs permanent spousal support orders, not
pendente lite spousal support. Andrew argues that the statute governing pendente
lite spousal support, section 3600, only mentions two of the factors listed in
section 4320: domestic violence and spousal abuse. First, we note that Andrew
has relied on the principles codified in section 4320 in arguing that Andrea's
spousal support should be terminated because he has paid it for longer than half
the marriage. (§ 4320, subd. (f).) Andrew cannot rely on this statute when it
serves him but deny its applicability when it does not. Further, nothing in
section 3600 prevents a trial court from considering the factors listed in
section 4320, including ability to pay--especially where, as here, the payor has
been inconsistent.
12   Andrew also argues that, because he had a right against self-incrimination
in the contempt proceedings, the trial court made it clear that Andrew would not
have to respond to any financial requests pending the outcome of the contempt
proceedings. The court's precise words were: "[Andrew] is not required to
respond to any financial issue OSC until after the resolution of the contempt,
okay, that way you can file whatever you want and she will have her protection,
[Andrew] will have his protection." The court's language was limited to Andrew's
response to a "financial issue OSC." It did not relieve Andrew of the obligation
to file an updated income and expense report in connection with his own OSC,
which he had previously been directed to do.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

IV. Reservation of jurisdiction to retroactively modify child support

   In its September 14, 2010 ruling on submitted matter, the trial court
included  language indicating that it was reserving jurisdiction over the start
date of the modification of its child support order. A reservation of
jurisdiction to retroactively change a support order is impermissible under In
re Marriage of Murray (2002) 101 Cal.App.4th 581, 593-594 [124 Cal. Rptr. 2d
342]. (See In re Marriage of Gruen (2011) 191 Cal.App.4th 627, 639-642 [120 Cal.
Rptr. 3d 184].) However, in its final order dated December 16, 2010, the court
did not include such language.

   Andrea argues that the court's comments in its September 2010 ruling on
submitted matter are of no legal consequence, as that ruling was superseded by
the final order. (See In re Marriage of Ditto (1988) 206 Cal.App.3d 643, 646
[253 Cal. Rptr. 770] ["'[A] court is not bound by its statement of intended
decision and may enter a wholly different judgment than that  announced.'"].)
Andrew concedes that if this court agrees with Andrea, then he has nothing to
challenge.

   Because the language in the September 2010 ruling on submitted matter was not
included in the final order of the court, Andrew's appeal of this issue is
unnecessary.

DISPOSITION

   The order is affirmed. Each side to bear its own costs on appeal.

   Boren, P. J., and Doi Todd, J., concurred.

   A petition for a rehearing was denied September 11, 2012, and appellant's
petition for review by the Supreme Court was denied November 14, 2012, S205745.


                              63 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of BETTY J. and CHARLES V. NORTON.  BETTY
             J. NORTON, Appellant, v. CHARLES V. NORTON, Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 2456

            Court of Appeal of California, Fifth Appellate District

            71 Cal. App. 3d 537; 139 Cal. Rptr. 728; 1976 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2250


                               September 24, 1976

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Fresno County, No. 156694, Milo Popovich,
Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1) Dissolution of Marriage § 63--Support of Other Party--Guiding
Considerations.  --In making an award of spousal support, the trial court has
broad discretion and may consider such factors as the need for the support, the
ability of the other spouse to contribute, the duration of the marriage, the
ability of spouse requesting the support to engage in gainful employment, and
the life styles of the parties prior to separation. An abuse of discretion
occurs only when it can be said, after a calm and careful reflection of the
entire record, that no judge reasonably could have made the same order.

(2) Dissolution of Marriage § 64--Support of Other Party--Adequacy or
Excessiveness--Discretion.  --The trial court did not abuse its discretion in
fixing a wife's spousal support at $ 80 a month and in limiting the payments to
six months, where, although the evidence showed that the wife was having serious
financial difficulties, there was ample evidence to prove that the husband,
whose gross yearly earnings were approximately $ 15,000 per year, was "taxed to
the limits" of his ability to pay, where the husband's earning capacity for the
year was substantially reduced by the effects of a prior illness, where he had
assumed all of the community debts and was finding it difficult to discharge
those debts, and where he was trying to establish a new life and in so doing was
incurring new obligations.

(3) Dissolution of Marriage § 72--Support of Other Party--Termination of Order--
Discretion.  --The trial court, in a rehearing on the issue of spousal support,
abused its discretion in failing to retain jurisdiction over the issue of
spousal support for the wife after expiration of a six-month period, where the
wife was in dire need of financial assistance and there was little, if any,
assurance of steady employment in the near future due to the wife's lack of job
qualification, and where the husband would have a substantial earning capacity
as soon as he recovered fully from the effects of a prior illness. While an
order terminating the court's jurisdiction over spousal support has a desirous
social effect, it cannot be based on mere hopes or speculative expectations.

COUNSEL: Doty, Quinlan, Kershaw & Fanucchi and Edward L. Fanucchi for Appellant.


Stark, Stewart, Simon & Sparrowe, Belzer & Jackl and V. James Jackl for
Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Gargano, J., with Brown (G. A.), P. J., and Thompson, J., *
concurring.

*   Retired judge of the superior court sitting under assignment by the Chairman
of the Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: GARGANO

OPINION

     Appellant, Betty J. Norton, and respondent, Charles V.  Norton, were
married on May 22, 1954, in Dallas, Texas.  There were four children of the
marriage: Valerie,  Stephen, Vicki and Max.  The parties separated on October
27, 1972; at that time Valerie was 17 years old, Stephen was 15 years old, Vicki
was 14 years old, and Max was 5 years old.

   In December of the same year, appellant petitioned the Superior Court of
Fresno County for a dissolution of the marriage and for a division of the
community property; she also prayed for the custody of the children, for child
and spousal support, and for attorney's fees and costs.

   On April 8, 1974, an interlocutory judgment was entered dissolving the
marriage and dividing the community property of the parties; respondent was
ordered to assume all of the community obligations.  The court also awarded
appellant spousal support and the custody of the two minor children, Stephen and
Max; the oldest child, Valerie, had turned 18, and the daughter, Vicki, had
married and left home.  The court fixed the  spousal support at $ 70 a month and
the child support at $ 125 a month for each child; it then ordered that a
rehearing on the issues of spousal and child support be held on May 17, 1974.

   At the rehearing, appellant testified that she was having a difficult time in
"making ends meet" on the support payments she had been receiving before and
after the interlocutory judgment was entered.  Appellant stated that often
before she received a support payment there was hardly any food in the house and
that due to the heavy indebtedness, her brother took possession of the family
home; appellant was paying her brother $ 125 a month as rent.  She also stated
that she had been unable to find permanent employment and had been working as a
babysitter earning about $ 80 a month; however, the babysitting job was to
terminate within a few days, and appellant said that commencing in June 1974 she
was going to work in the packing houses during the summer season. It is
undisputed that appellant, who was 41 years old, had very little work
experience; she had not finished school and had been a homemaker during most of
her marriage.

   Respondent testified that he was employed as a bus driver for the Greyhound
Bus Company; he admitted that he had a substantial earning capacity when he took
advantage of the overtime available during the summer season. He said that
during 1973 he was hospitalized several months with infectious hepatitis and
that due to the lingering side effects of the illness, it was doubtful that he
would be working overtime during the 1974 summer season. Respondent reported
that his gross income for the first four months of 1974 was $ 5,188.04 and that
his income over that period was indicative of what his gross income would be for
the year.  Respondent related that he was living with a woman in Oakland and
that his share of the monthly rental was $ 135; he said he spent between $ 80
and $ 90 a month on food and that he had purchased a new compact automobile on
credit and was making payments on the car.  Respondent, who had assumed all of
the community obligations, stated that he was having difficulty meeting those
obligations.

   On June 11, 1974, the trial judge entered an order modifying the preexisting
order relating to child custody, child support and spousal support. In
accordance with the stipulation of the parties, the judge awarded custody of the
eldest son, Stephen, to respondent; he terminated the child support for Stephen,
but ordered respondent to continue paying appellant the sum of $ 125 a month for
the child, Max.  In addition,  the court awarded appellant $ 80 a month for a
period of six  months and, without reserving jurisdiction over the issue,
ordered the spousal support payments to terminate at the end of the six-month
period.

   Appellant has appealed solely from that part of the court's order pertaining
to the issue of spousal support. She asserts that the court abused its
discretion in fixing the spousal support at only $ 80 a month and in limiting
the monthly payments to a period of six months.  She also asserts that the court
abused its discretion in terminating spousal support at the end of six months
without reserving jurisdiction to make further modifications at that time if
necessary.  (See Civ. Code, § 4801, subd. (d).)

     In making an award of spousal support, the trial court has broad
discretion; the court may consider such factors as the need for the support, the
ability of the other spouse to contribute, the duration of the marriage, the
ability of the spouse requesting the support to engage in gainful employment,
and the lifestyles of the parties prior to separation. ( Nunes v. Nunes (1964)
62 Cal.2d 33, 38 [41 Cal.Rptr. 5, 396 P.2d 37]; Hall v. Hall (1954) 42 Cal.2d
435, 442 [267 P.2d 249]; In re Marriage of Lopez (1974) 38 Cal.App.3d 93,
114-117 [113 Cal.Rptr. 58]; In re Marriage of Dennis (1973) 35 Cal.App.3d 279,
283 [110 Cal.Rptr. 619].) An abuse of discretion occurs only when it can be
said, after a calm and careful reflection of the entire record, that no judge
reasonably could have made the same order.  ( In re Marriage of Lopez, supra, 38
Cal.App.3d 93, 114; Laird v. Laird (1962) 203 Cal.App.2d 806, 808 [21 Cal.Rptr.
924].)

     The court did not abuse its discretion in fixing appellant's spousal
support at $ 80 a month and in limiting the payments to six months.  Although
the undisputed evidence shows that appellant was having serious financial
difficulties, there was ample evidence to prove that respondent was "taxed to
the limits" of his ability to pay. In 1973 he contracted infectious hepatitis
and his earning capacity for the year 1974 was substantially reduced; he assumed
all of the community debts and was finding it difficult to discharge those
debts; he even was sued on some of the debts, and on one occasion his wages were
attached.  Respondent was trying to establish a new life for himself and in so
doing was incurring new obligations.

     However, the trial judge abused his discretion in failing to retain
jurisdiction over the issue of spousal support. (See Civ. Code, § 4801,  subd.
(d).) As we have indicated, appellant was in dire need of financial assistance
and, while she was trying to support herself, there was little, if any,
assurance of steady employment in the near future. In fact, it was undisputed
that during the 18 years of the marriage appellant devoted herself almost
exclusively to the task of being a homemaker and that she does not have the
practical experience and training needed to compete successfully in the labor
market.  On the other hand, respondent will have a substantial earning capacity
as soon as he recovers fully from the effects of hepatitis.  Albeit an order
terminating the court's jurisdiction over spousal support has a desirous social
effect ( In re Marriage of Lopez, supra, 38 Cal.App.3d 93, 118-119; In re
Marriage of Patrino (1973) 36 Cal.App.3d 186, 189 [111 Cal.Rptr. 367]), it
cannot, as in this case, be based upon "mere hopes or speculative expectations."
( In re Marriage of Rosan (1972) 24 Cal.App.3d 885, 896 [101 Cal.Rptr. 295]; see
In re Marriage of Kuppinger (1975) 48 Cal.App.3d 628, 638-639 [120 Cal.Rptr.
654]; In re Marriage of Dennis, supra, 35 Cal.App.3d 279, 284-285; cf.  In re
Marriage of Wilson (1975) 51 Cal.App.3d 116, 119 [123 Cal.Rptr. 887].)

   That part of the order appealed from modifying the award of spousal support
is affirmed with respect to the amount and duration of spousal support; that
part of the order is reversed with respect to the trial court's failure to
retain jurisdiction over the issue of spousal support after the end of the
six-month period, and the case is remanded to the trial court for further
proceedings consistent with the views expressed in this opinion.  Appellant
shall recover her costs on appeal and, upon proper application in the trial
court, she shall be entitled to reasonable attorney fees for her prosecution of
this appeal if such have not heretofore been awarded.


                              64 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           CAL-WESTERN RECONVEYANCE CORPORATION, Plaintiff, v. BARRY
             REED, Defendant and Appellant; VALERIE D. REED et al.,
                          Defendants and Respondents.

                                    B193014

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SECOND APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION EIGHT

          152 Cal. App. 4th 1308; 62 Cal. Rptr. 3d 244; 2007 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1106


                              June 29, 2007, Filed

PRIOR-HISTORY:
   Superior Court for the County of Los Angeles, No. TS007925, William R.
Chidsey, Jr., Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(1) Mortgages § 27--Sale by Trustee--Distribution of Surplus Proceeds--To County
for Child and Spousal Support Arrearages--Claims by Former Spouse--Attorney's
Lien.--Surplus proceeds from a sale of residential property were properly
distributed to a county for the satisfaction of child and spousal support
arrearages. The trial court erred, however, in distributing proceeds to the
debtor's former wife to satisfy her claims for an equalization payment and
attorney fees because no recorded lien or encumbrance secured those claims,
which in any event were discharged in the debtor's bankruptcy proceeding. The
trial court also erred in distributing surplus proceeds to the debtor's former
attorney because an attorney's lien on the prospective recovery of a client must
be enforced in a separate action.

   [1 Goldsmith et al., Matthew Bender Practice Guide: Cal. Debt Collection and
Enforcement of Judgments (2007) § 12.04; 8 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (4th ed. 1997)
Enforcement of Judgment, §§ 64, 209, 495; 4 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (10th
ed. 2005) Secured Transactions in Real Property, § 162; 1 Witkin, Cal. Procedure
(4th ed. 1996) Attorneys, § 198.]

COUNSEL: Walter L. Gordon III for Defendant and Appellant.

Law Offices of Errol Jay Gordon and Arnold Johnson for Defendant and Respondent
Valerie D. Reed.

Lori A. Cruz and Fesia A. Davenport for Defendant and Respondent County of Los
Angeles Child Support Services Department.

George M. Halimi, in pro. per., for Defendant and Respondent.

JUDGES: Boland, J., with Rubin, Acting P. J., and Flier, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: Boland

OPINION

    BOLAND, J.--

SUMMARY

   The trial court ordered the distribution of surplus proceeds from a trustee's
sale of residential property to satisfy the debtor's obligations for child and
spousal support arrearages, a community property equalization payment to the
debtor's former wife,  attorney fees ordered in a dissolution proceeding, and a
loan and attorney fees owed to the debtor's former attorney in this lawsuit. We
conclude that:

   (1) The distribution of surplus proceeds to satisfy child and spousal support
arrearages was proper.

   (2) The trial court erred in distributing proceeds to the debtor's former
wife to satisfy her claims for a community property equalization payment and for
attorney fees ordered in the dissolution proceeding, because no recorded lien or
encumbrance secured those claims, which in any event were discharged in the
debtor's bankruptcy proceeding.

   (3) The court also erred in distributing proceeds to the debtor's former
lawyer, who was retained to assist the debtor in the collection of proceeds from
the trustee's sale, because an attorney's lien on the prospective recovery of a
client must be enforced in a separate action.

   (4) The debtor failed to produce sufficient evidence to support his claim
that he was entitled to a homestead exemption applicable when a debtor is
physically disabled and unable to engage in substantial gainful employment.

FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

   This case involves the appropriate disposition of the surplus proceeds of a
trustee's sale of real property. Cal-Western Reconveyance Corporation was the
trustee under a deed of trust on the real property executed by trustor Barry
Reed. After the trustee's sale on May 25, 2004, and payment of costs and the
obligations secured by the deed of trust, surplus proceeds were available to
satisfy "obligations secured by any junior liens or encumbrances in the order of
their priority." (Civ. Code, § 2924k, subd. (a)(3).) Cal-Western determined a
conflict existed among potential claimants to the surplus proceeds, and on
February 25, 2005, filed a "Petition and Declaration Regarding Unresolved Claims
and Deposit of Undistributed Surplus Proceeds of Trustee's Sale" under the
provisions of Civil Code section 2924j. In accordance with the code, Cal-Western
provided written notice of its intent to deposit the surplus proceeds
($175,619.76) with the court and that any claims for the funds were required to
be filed with the court. The claimants to the surplus proceeds were:

    --Barry Reed, the trustor, who was represented by Attorney George M. Halimi.

   --Valerie D. Reed, the former spouse of Barry Reed. Valerie claimed she was
entitled to:

   --An equalization payment of $13,993.45 ($7,936.00 in principal plus
$6,057.45 in accumulated interest), due from Barry to Valerie as specified in
the October 15, 1996 judgment of dissolution of their marriage.

   --Attorney fees of $3,886.03 ($2,000 principal and $1,886.03 in interest).

   --Los Angeles County (County). The county's department of child support
services claimed it was currently enforcing a judgment for child support, as
well as child and spousal support arrearages, against Barry. The County sought
child support arrearages of $31,006.76 and spousal support arrearages of
$1061.05, as of March 31, 2005. The County, as judgment creditor, had applied
for an abstract of a support judgment on May 13, 1998, which the court issued on
May 21, 1998, and which was recorded on June 8, 1998.

   On April 14, 2005, the court issued an order allowing Cal-Western to deposit
the surplus proceeds, and discharging Cal-Western of further responsibility. At
the hearing on April 14, Barry, who was then represented by Attorney Halimi,
informed the court he wished to obtain new counsel, and the matter was
continued. Four days later, on April 18, 2005, Barry substituted Attorney Halimi
out of the case and proceeded to represent himself. On the same day, Attorney
Halimi filed a notice of lien in the Cal-Western action. His notice stated that,
by virtue of a written fee agreement dated July 26, 2004, Halimi had claims
ahead of all others to secure payment for legal services, in an amount equal to
15 percent of the surplus proceeds, plus an advance Halimi made to Barry of
$5,000, plus costs and expenses advanced on Barry's behalf of $314.23.

   A hearing was held on December 15, 2005. The trial court concluded the County
was entitled to recover amounts due under prior orders of the family law court,
consisting of $33,309.92 for child support through December 15, 2005, and
$1,141.65 in spousal support plus accrued interest. The remaining claims were
taken under submission, and the claimants were given an opportunity to present
evidence by way of written stipulation or declarations.

   On March 14, 2006, the court issued its final order, distributing the surplus
proceeds as follows:

   --The sum of $33,678.90, "for Claimant Valerie Reed's claim to satisfy child
support arrearages through March 14, 2006 ... ," payable to the County court
trustee.

   --The sum of $1,162.84, "for Claimant Valerie Reed's claim to satisfy spousal
support arrearages through March 14, 2006 ... ," again payable to the County
court trustee.

   --The sum of $3,887.12, for Valerie's attorney fee claim, payable to the Law
Offices of Errol J. Gordon.

   --The sum of $15,424.11, for Valerie's equalization payment claim, payable to
Valerie.

   --The sum of $8,863.06, payable to George Halimi, for his $5,000 loan,
interest on the loan, costs advanced, and quantum meruit for services rendered
($2,725 of the total).

   In making its order, the court found that Valerie's claims for child support,
spousal support, attorney fees and the equalization payment were not discharged
by Barry's bankruptcy, and that Barry was not disabled at the time of the
trustee's sale and  was therefore not entitled to a $150,000 homestead
exemption.

   Barry filed a timely notice of appeal from the trial court's order.

DISCUSSION

   We conclude that the distribution of surplus proceeds to the County for the
satisfaction of child and spousal support arrearages was proper. The trial court
erred, however, in distributing proceeds to Valerie to satisfy her claims for
the equalization payment and attorney fees, because no recorded lien or
encumbrance secured those claims, which in any event were discharged in Barry's
bankruptcy proceeding. The court also erred in distributing surplus proceeds to
Halimi, because an attorney's lien on the prospective recovery of a client must
be enforced in a separate action. We discuss each point in turn.

A. The distribution to the County to satisfy child and spousal support
arrearages was proper.

   Barry argues that the County had no legal right to record the abstract of
support judgment, so that the lien is not valid. According to Barry, because
Valerie was not a welfare mother and did not assign her child support rights to
the County, and because no testimony in the record indicates that Valerie
authorized the County to act on her behalf, the district attorney acted without
authority when it recorded the abstract in 1998. Barry thus asks us to conclude
the abstract did not satisfy the requirements of Code of Civil Procedure section
697.320, subdivision (a), citing Lawyers Title Co. v. Bradbury (1981) 127 Cal.
App. 3d 41 [179 Cal. Rptr. 363] (Lawyers Title). We disagree.

    Code of Civil Procedure section 697.320 governs, among other liens, a
judgment lien for installments under a support judgment. It provides that a
judgment lien on real property is created by recording an abstract, a notice of
support judgment, or a certified copy of a judgment for child, family, or
spousal support payable in installments, with the county recorder. (Code Civ.
Proc., § 697.320, subd. (a).) That is exactly what the County did: it recorded
an abstract of the support judgment. Lawyers Title does not suggest any
impropriety in the district attorney's action.

   In Lawyers Title, the district attorney caused an order pendente lite, which
required the husband to pay child and spousal support, to be recorded as a lien
against the husband's property under Code of Civil Procedure former section
674.5, a predecessor statute. The order pendente lite provided that the order "
'shall not be served upon anyone not a party to this action' " (Lawyers Title,
supra, 127 Cal. App. 3d at p. 44), and was succeeded by a later interlocutory
decree, which was never recorded. The Court of Appeal concluded the district
attorney's recording of the pendente lite order was a nullity. The reason,
however, was because the pendente lite order expressly stated it was not to be
served upon anyone not a party to the action. The court observed that recording
is a form of service on or notice to third parties and, by the express terms of
the order, was not authorized. The court concluded the district attorney "had no
greater authority to cause the order to be recorded than the party whom he
purports to represent, to wit, [the wife]." (Id. at p. 45.) In short, nothing in
Lawyers Title supports Barry's claim that the County's abstract of judgment was
not validly recorded.

   Further, Barry did not raise any objection with the court to the County's
authority to file the abstract of judgment. Instead, he objected to the County's
accounting and argued he should have the  opportunity to conduct discovery to
determine "the true balances of these arrears." Accordingly, we reject Barry's
claim the County "did not sustain its burden to prove it had authority [from
Valerie] to record the lien." Because Barry made no objection to the County's
authority, it had no reason to produce evidence on the point. And, although she
was not sworn as a witness, the County's attorney represented to the court that
the County was authorized to do so. 1 (See also Fam. Code, § 17304 ["local child
support agency ... shall be responsible for promptly and effectively
establishing, modifying, and enforcing child support obligations, ... [and]
enforcing spousal support orders established by a court of  competent
jurisdiction"; Cal. Code Regs., tit. 22, § 116130, subd. (a); see id., subd. (e)
["[a] local child support agency shall prepare and submit for recording a real
property lien within 45 days of the date a money judgment or order is received
by the local child support agency, a case is opened for enforcement of an
existing order or judgment, or an existing order is registered for
enforcement"].) Accordingly, the County's abstract of judgment was properly
recorded and the distribution of proceeds to the County was likewise proper.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   The
County's lawyer stated: "So she [Valerie] hasn't assigned any right to us but
she has requested that we enforce on her behalf so we step into her shoes as to
enforcement services." When the court enquired, "And you are statutorily
authorized to do that?" the County's lawyer replied, "Absolutely."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

B. The trial court erred in distributing proceeds to Valerie to satisfy her
equalization payment and attorney fee claims.

   The court erred in distributing surplus proceeds to satisfy Valerie's claims
for the equalization payment and attorney fees owed by Barry, because (1) no
lien or encumbrance secured those claims, and (2) the claims in any event were
discharged in Barry's bankruptcy.

1. No lien or encumbrance supported Valerie's claims.

   Barry argues that, even if the County's lien was valid, it was only effective
"to collect the child support owed from the surplus funds," not the spousal
support, equalization payment or attorney fees. As to the equalization payment
and attorney fees, we agree.

   The County's abstract of support judgment created a lien on the judgment
identified in the abstract, which was an order dated December 4, 1997. In that
order, the court required Barry to pay child support, additional support for
childcare expenses, and child support arrearages, all in specified sums per
month. The order also stated the court received evidence from Valerie, unrefuted
by Barry, that the total amount of child support and spousal support arrears as
of April 16, 1997, was approximately $13,000. 2 The order, however, made no
reference to attorney fees or to Valerie's equalization payment. Consequently,
the abstract of judgment filed by the County is effective as a lien for the
collection of child support and spousal support arrearages, but not for other
debts not identified in the order. 3 Indeed, the   abstract of judgment does not
purport to cover anything but support. (See Ellrott v. Bliss (1983) 147 Cal.
App. 3d 901, 905 [195 Cal. Rptr. 446] [exclusive method of establishing a lien
on real property for child and spousal support payments is pursuant to Code Civ.
Proc., § 697.320; wife did not acquire a valid lien when she recorded an
abstract of judgment under different statutory provisions, and in any event
abstract was inadequate and its recording a nullity because the amount of the
judgment could not be ascertained from the abstract recorded]; Keele v. Reich
(1985) 169 Cal. App. 3d 1129, 1131 [215 Cal. Rptr. 756] [omission of required
information, known to the judgment creditor, in an abstract of judgment
nullified the abstract].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Valerie
and Barry waived their respective rights to receive spousal support from the
other party in the October 15, 1996 judgment of dissolution of their marriage.
The spousal support arrearages arose from an order of October 26, 1994, entered
a few weeks after the dissolution action was filed.
3   Barry also asserts that the abstract was not effective as a lien for the
spousal support arrearages, because the judgment shows the trial court continued
the matter to November 25, 1997, for both parties to submit evidence on the
issue of any arrears. The judgment, however, was entered after the continuance
date, on December 4, 1997, so it is obvious that no evidence was submitted to
change the conclusion in paragraph 6 of the judgment specifying the total amount
of child and spousal support arrears.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Nor was Valerie's right to her equalization payment and attorney fees secured
by any other lien or encumbrance that would justify distributing surplus
proceeds to her. Civil Code section 2924k requires that the proceeds of a
trustee's sale be distributed in the following order of priority:

   "(1) To the costs and expenses of exercising the power of sale and of sale
... .

   "(2) To the payment of the obligations secured by the deed of trust or
mortgage which is the subject of the trustee's sale.

   "(3) To satisfy the outstanding balance of obligations secured by any junior
liens or encumbrances in the order of their priority.

   "(4) To the trustor ... ." (Civ. Code, § 2924k, subd. (a)(1)-(4).)

   From the face of the statute, it is apparent that it authorizes distribution
of proceeds only to satisfy secured obligations: first, the obligation secured
by the trust deed or mortgage that is the subject of the sale, and then the
obligations "secured by any junior liens or encumbrances ... ." (Civ. Code, §
2924k, subd. (a)(3).) Valerie's right to receive her equalization payment and
attorney fees was not secured by any recorded lien or encumbrance on the real
property or its proceeds. Consequently, Civil Code section 2924k did not
authorize the court to distribute proceeds to her, and indeed required the court
to distribute proceeds to Barry, as trustor, after all other liens and
encumbrances had been satisfied. (Civ. Code, § 2924k, subd. (a)(3), (4).)

   Valerie tenders two arguments in her effort to avoid this result.

   First, Valerie argues that Family Code section 290 authorized the trial
court's award of surplus proceeds to her. Family Code section 290 states: "A
judgment or order made ... pursuant to this code may be enforced by the court by
execution, the appointment of a receiver, or contempt, or by any other order as
the court in its discretion determines from time to time to be necessary." (Fam.
Code, § 290.) Valerie argues section 290 gives the court broad discretion to
fashion orders enforcing Family Code judgments--in this case, the pendente lite
attorney fee order, and the judgment of dissolution which called for the
equalization payment--and this broad discretion has been recognized in many
cases, such as In re Marriage of Schofield (1998) 62 Cal.App.4th 131 [73 Cal.
Rptr. 2d 1] (Schofield). While we do not disagree with the proposition that the
trial court's discretion to fashion orders enforcing family law judgments is
broad,  we cannot conclude its discretion extends to ignoring the express terms
of Civil Code section 2924k.

   Statutory requirements of various kinds exist for establishing and recording
liens on real property, including filing abstracts of support judgments, as the
County did under Code of Civil Procedure section 697.320, and filing abstracts
of money judgments. (See Code Civ. Proc., § 674.) No authority suggests that
Family Code section 290 gives the trial court discretion to bypass statutory
requirements by, in effect, implying the existence of a recorded lien or
encumbrance when there is none. Schofield does not suggest otherwise. Indeed,
the decision shows that the court's order in that case--which directed a federal
office to pay a former wife specified amounts, including arrearages, from her
former husband's retirement fund (previously determined to be a community
asset)--was "in compliance with applicable federal law and regulations, as well
as community property principles ... ." (Schofield, supra, 62 Cal.App.4th at pp.
133, 140 [federal statutes and regulations "clearly allow[ed] the trial court to
craft an order which will deal with the problem of collecting arrearages that
have been accrued pursuant to a valid judgment" and "[t]hat was done here in
accordance with established federal procedure"].) In short, section 290 does not
supersede Civil Code section 2924k.

   Second, Valerie argues that the December 14, 1994 notice of lis pendens,
which she recorded two months before the judgment of dissolution and which Barry
never expunged, operates as an "encumbrance" allowing the trial court to
distribute proceeds to her. 4 She offers no legal support for this proposition.
As Barry points out, a notice of lis pendens does not make the person who
recorded it a secured creditor. (See Campbell v. Superior Court (2005) 132
Cal.App.4th 904, 914 [34 Cal. Rptr. 3d 68] ["true purpose of the lis  pendens
statute is to provide notice of pending litigation and not to make plaintiffs
secured creditors of defendants"].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   Valerie's
notice of lis pendens referred to her dissolution action and stated the action
was to determine the ownership of the real property, although Valerie did not
hold title to the property, having quitclaimed it to Barry in a deed recorded on
December 8, 1994.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

2. In any event, Barry's obligations to pay Valerie the equalization amount and
to pay the attorney fees ordered in the dissolution proceeding were discharged
in Barry's bankruptcy.

   Even if distribution of surplus proceeds to Valerie were authorized without a
recorded lien or encumbrance, Barry's obligations to make the equalization
payment and to pay the attorney fees were discharged in his bankruptcy
proceeding. The trial court's contrary conclusion was erroneous. 5

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   At the
hearing, the court stated: "[I]f an order is made in a family law court which in
effect constitutes either child support or spousal support ... , whether it
included an equal distribution of the property ... or whether or not it included
attorneys' fees which were incurred with respect to the receipt of spousal or
child support, that they are deemed to be in the form of child and spousal
support, and, therefore, pursuant to federal bankruptcy statute, are not
dischargeable. ... [T]he court finds that the ... [equalization payment and]
attorney's fees that were awarded to Mr. Gordon were in the form of child and
spousal support. They were incurred at or about the time that the initial child
and spousal support orders were granted."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Obligations for child and spousal support are not discharged in bankruptcy. (
11 U.S.C. § 523(a)(5) [discharge "does not  discharge an individual debtor from
any debt ... [¶] ... [¶] ... for a domestic support obligation"].) Property
settlement payments, however, are dischargeable. (In re Marriage of Lynn (2002)
101 Cal.App.4th 120, 125 [123 Cal. Rptr. 2d 611] ["[p]roperty settlement
payments ordered in dissolution proceedings to effect the equitable division of
community property, as opposed to payments for spousal or child support, are
dischargeable in bankruptcy"].) Barry's obligations to Valerie for the
equalization payment and to Attorney Gordon for attorney fees were both listed
as claims in Barry's bankruptcy proceeding, and Valerie and Attorney Gordon
appear on the certificate of service for the discharge order. The order itself
states that Barry was discharged from all debts provided for by the plan,
"except any debt ... in the nature of alimony to, maintenance for, or support of
a spouse, former spouse, or child of the debtor in connection with a ... divorce
decree or other order of a court of record, or property settlement agreement, as
specified in 11 U.S.C. Section 523(a)(5) ... ."

   Valerie argues that "the effect of the foregoing order was that the Family
Law Court orders were not discharged," and were "specifically excepted" from
Barry's discharge. Valerie's assertion is erroneous. Debts "in the nature of ...
support" were excepted, but Valerie's equalization payment had nothing to do
with child or spousal support. As for Attorney Gordon's fees, Valerie contends
that the attorney fee order "was established for purposes of  obtaining a child
support order," but cites to nothing in the appellate record to support that
claim. The order in question was filed October 26, 1994, a month after
commencement of the dissolution proceeding, and provided for custody and
visitation, child support, spousal support, and attorney fees of $2,000, payable
at the rate of $200 per month and commencing two months later, on December 10,
1994. The attorney fees ordered were not "payable as child support" nor "payable
as spousal support," as neither of those boxes were checked in the order.

   Valerie contends In re Ratcliff (Bankr. C.D.Cal. 1996) 195 B.R. 466 supports
her claim that the attorney fee order "is deemed to be in the nature of child
support." It does not. In re Ratcliff involved attorney fees incurred during a
child custody hearing, and the court held that "a child custody proceeding is
always in the nature of child support," so that "any award of attorneys' fees
against the debtor becomes a nondischargeable debt pursuant to [11 U.S.C.]
Section 523(a)(5)." (In re Ratcliff, supra, 195 B.R. at p. 467.) The court
explained that the purpose of the custody proceeding was to determine who could
provide the best home for the child, so that fees incurred for the custody
hearing were in the nature of child support and nondischargeable. (Id. at p. 468
; see also In re Chang (9th Cir. 1998) 163 F.3d 1138, 1140-1141 [debts arising
from custody proceeding, for guardian ad litem fees, neutral experts' fees and
health professionals' expenses, were "in the nature of ... support"; California
law permitted the compensation of such persons in consideration of the child's
best interests, and bankruptcy court correctly concluded the law creating the
debt created an obligation of support and was therefore nondischargeable].)

   This case did not involve debts arising from a custody proceeding. It
involved a prospective order to pay attorney fees that were not designated to be
"payable as child support" or "payable as spousal support." Moreover, neither
Valerie nor Attorney Gordon appeared in Barry's bankruptcy proceeding to contest
the dischargeability of the listed debts. (Cf. In re  Marriage of Sprague &
Spiegel-Sprague (2003) 105 Cal.App.4th 215, 220-221 [129 Cal. Rptr. 2d 261]
[state court's order characterizing attorney fees as "in the nature of support"
was void because attorney failed to obtain relief from automatic stay; attorney
never asked the bankruptcy court for a determination that attorney fees were
nondischargeable, and "[t]hus, the bankruptcy court's order granting [wife's]
discharge in bankruptcy discharged the ... attorney fees"].) In short, Valerie's
claim that the attorney fees were not discharged in the bankruptcy proceeding is
without merit.

C. The trial court erred when it distributed surplus proceeds to Barry's former
attorney for the attorney's loan to Barry, interest, costs and attorney fees.

   In the retainer agreement between Barry and Halimi, Halimi agreed to
represent Barry in the collection of proceeds from the trustee's sale.
Specifically, Halimi undertook Barry's representation "with respect to his
claims against Bank of America and trustees of the deed of trust on [the real
property], for collection of proceeds of sale." Attorney fees were "contingent
upon the recovery of damages and surplus funds from the sale ... ," and were set
at 15 percent of the recovery. Barry also agreed to pay all costs, and the
agreement gave Halimi a lien for attorney fees and costs advanced, and for the
$5,000 personal loan, "on all proceeds of any recovery and surplus funds from
the sale obtained (whether by settlement, arbitration award, or court
judgment)."

   While Halimi has a lien on Barry's recovery of surplus proceeds, Barry
correctly asserts that the trial court did not have jurisdiction to hear
Halimi's lien claims. An attorney's lien on the prospective recovery of a client
must be enforced in a separate action, and "[a]ny order or judgment granting the
attorney fees made in the main action is in excess of the court's jurisdiction
and is void." (Bandy v. Mt. Diablo Unified Sch. Dist. (1976) 56 Cal. App. 3d
230, 234 [126 Cal. Rptr. 890] (Bandy).) The rule has been stated many times: "
'Appellate courts have consistently held that the trial court in the underlying
action has no jurisdiction to determine the existence or validity of an attorney
lien on the judgment. [Citations.] The trial court does have fundamental
jurisdiction over the subject matter and over the parties. Nevertheless, because
the attorney is not a party to the underlying action and has no right to
intervene, the trial court acts in excess of its jurisdiction when it purports
to determine whether the attorney is entitled to foreclose a lien on the
judgment. [Citations.] Nor can the court entertain a motion to terminate the
lien. [Citation.] After the client obtains a judgment, the attorney must bring a
separate, independent action against the client to establish the existence of
the lien, to determine the amount of the lien, and to enforce it. [Citations.]
An order within the underlying action purporting to affect an attorney's lien is
void.' " (Brown v. Superior Court (2004) 116 Cal.App.4th 320, 328 [9 Cal. Rptr.
3d 912] (Brown), quoting Carroll v. Interstate Brands Corp. (2002) 99
Cal.App.4th 1168, 1173 [121 Cal. Rptr. 2d 532].) Thus, Brown explained, "while
Brown was entitled to assert his lien claim against the proceeds of the VMT
judgment by filing a notice of lien in the VMT action, the trial court had no
power to determine in that action whether Brown's lien claim was valid  or
invalid." (Brown, supra, 116 Cal.App.4th at p. 329.)

   This case presents the precise circumstances described in Brown: Halimi was
entitled to assert his claim--against any surplus proceeds Barry might  receive
in this action--by filing a notice of lien in the action, as he did, but the
trial court had no authority to determine the validity of his claim. As Brown
explains, the rule that the trial court in the underlying action lacks
jurisdiction to affect an attorney lien "is founded on the fundamental principle
'that one who is not a party to a proceeding may not make a motion therein.'
[Citation.]" 6 (Brown, supra, 116 Cal.App.4th at p. 329; see also, e.g., Bandy,
supra, 56 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 235, 234 [in the case of an attorney who has been
granted a lien under a contingent fee contract, but who has been discharged
prior to the happening of the contingency, "all that remains to be done by him,
once the contingency has occurred ... is to seek an adjudication in an
independent action of the reasonable amount of the attorney fees due him"; trial
court's order granting lien in the underlying action "was improper and premature
as the contingency stated in the contract had not occurred"]; Hendricks v.
Superior Court (1961) 197 Cal. App. 2d 586, 588-589 [17 Cal. Rptr. 364] [because
attorney "was not a party in the original action any order or judgment therein
giving him attorney's fees is in excess of jurisdiction," and "[s]uch an order
or judgment, if made, is void"; "the enforcement of [the attorney's] contractual
lien necessarily requires that he obtain his relief through an independent
action in which petitioner may set up any defenses she may have"].) 7

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   Limited
circumstances exist under which an attorney might be entitled to intervene as a
party in a client's action, but such circumstances do not exist here. The
Supreme Court has explained: " ' "The right of an attorney to intervene for the
purpose of settling a dispute between him and his client as to attorney's fees
for services rendered in the same action is limited to those actions wherein, by
virtue of the contract of employment between the attorney and client, the former
is given a specific present interest in the subject matter of the action, which
interest might be jeopardized by the client's discharge of his original attorney
and the employment of another to prosecute the action." ' ... [Citation.]" (
Isrin v. Superior Court (1965) 63 Cal.2d 153, 160 [45 Cal. Rptr. 320, 403 P.2d
728].) The cases "uniformly hold that such an interest is not created by the
execution of a contingent fee contract" even where the client expressly grants
the attorney a lien to secure his fee. (Id. at pp. 160-161.) "The fact that [the
attorney] has a right by contract to participate in the proceeds of any judgment
that may be obtained does not make him in any true sense of the word a party in
interest." (Id. at p. 161.)
7   During the December 15, 2005 hearing, Barry indicated he had "no problem
paying the $5,000" loan from Halimi, although he observed that the agreement
stated "I will pay him after I receive my proceeds," and that he "[hadn't]
received anything." Barry vehemently objected to the claim for attorney fees.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Halimi does not attempt to distinguish the cited authorities, but merely
argues that an interpleader procedure was proper, where the trustee held surplus
proceeds to which there were conflicting claims, and he was therefore required
to file his claim against the proceeds in the Cal-Western action. He also cites
no authority for the latter proposition, and it is erroneous. This was not an
interpleader action, but was filed in accordance with procedures  established in
Civil Code section 2924j. 8 Halimi was not and could not have been a claimant in
Cal-Western's action, as he was not among those persons "with recorded
interests in the real property as of the date immediately prior to the trustee's
sale ... ." (Civ. Code, § 2924j, subd. (a).) Indeed, his claim had not yet
arisen when Cal-Western filed its petition. In short, we can see no basis upon
which to conclude the trial court had any authority to determine Halimi's claim
in the Cal-Western action.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -8   The
procedures in Civil Code section 2924j, subdivisions (a) through (d), apply
"[u]nless an interpleader action has been filed ... ." (Civ. Code, § 2924j,
subd. (a); see id., subd. (e).)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

D. The trial court correctly rejected Barry's claim of a homestead exemption of
$150,000.

   On January 31, 1995, Barry recorded a homestead declaration on the real
property. He contends he was physically disabled at the time of the trustee's
sale. The exemption statutes provide that the amount of the homestead exemption
is $150,000, if the judgment debtor "is at the time of the attempted sale of the
homestead ... [¶] ... [¶] ... [a] person physically or mentally disabled and as
a result of that disability is unable to engage in substantial gainful
employment." (Code Civ. Proc., § 704.730, subd. (a)(3)(B).) The County's
attorney told the court the County received wage assignment payments, one at the
end of April 2004, one in July 2004, and others since that date, indicating that
Barry was "in fact engaging in employment." When the trial court asked Barry if
he was employed at any time during 2004, Barry testified that: "I don't remember
the exact date, Your Honor, that I went out on disability but I know at the time
my property sold, I was on disability. I have to check my records." The court
concluded there was a lack of evidence to substantiate Barry's claim that he was
disabled within the meaning of Code of Civil Procedure section 704.730, and
limited the homestead exemption to $50,000. (Code Civ. Proc., § 704.730, subd.
(a)(1).)

   Barry contends that the homestead law is designed for the protection of the
homeowner, not the creditor, and the trial court was required, as stated in
Title Trust Deed Service Co. v. Pearson (2005) 132 Cal.App.4th 168 [33 Cal.
Rptr. 3d 311], " 'to adopt a liberal construction of the law and facts to
promote the beneficial purposes of the homestead legislation to benefit the
debtor. [Citations.]' " (Id. at p. 174.) A "liberal construction of the law and
facts," however, does not mean the trial court is at liberty to apply an
exemption in the absence of satisfactory evidence that Barry was "unable to
engage in substantial gainful employment." (Code Civ. Proc., § 704.730, subd.
(a)(3)(B).) We are similarly not at liberty to interfere with the trial court's
conclusion on this point.

DISPOSITION

   The order is affirmed in part and reversed in part, and the cause is remanded
with directions to enter a new order consistent with this opinion. The parties
are to bear their own costs.

   Rubin, Acting P. J., and Flier, J., concurred.


                              65 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              In re the Marriage of RUTH MAXINE and BENJAMIN M.B.
           CROBARGER.  RUTH MAXINE CROBARGER, Respondent, v. BENJAMIN
                           M.B. CROBARGER, Appellant

                                  No. D002863

           Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District,
                                  Division One

            178 Cal. App. 3d 56; 223 Cal. Rptr. 480; 1986 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2634


                               February 27, 1986

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of San Diego County, No. D 56101, Sheridan E.
Reed, Judge.

COUNSEL: Robert J. Baumer and Baumer & Groves for Appellant.

Robert E. Madruga and Hammett, Madruga & Whitson for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Mitchell, J., * with Staniforth, Acting P. J., and Work, J.,
concurring.

*   Assigned by the Chairperson of the Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: MITCHELL

OPINION

     Benjamin M. B. Crobarger appeals an order (1) failing to terminate spousal
support to Ruth Maxine Crobarger, (2) modifying spousal support, and (3)
ordering payment of arrearages and attorney's fees.

   Facts

   On July 20, 1972, the court ordered Benjamin to pay spousal support to Ruth
in the sum of $ 600 per month.  The marriage was of 24 years in duration.
Benjamin was employed in the merchant marine and Ruth was a homemaker. On
December 6, 1984, Ruth filed her notice of motion for wage assignment and
arrearages. On January 18, 1985, Benjamin filed his order to show cause and
request for termination of the existing spousal support order. After hearing,
the court ordered Benjamin to pay all arrearages ($ 2,400) at the rate of $ 200
per month for 12 months, and to pay Ruth's attorney's fees in the amount of $
400.  The court also modified the preexisting  support order to a monthly
payment to Ruth of $ 400.

    Benjamin, now age 66 and retired, had a net monthly income of $ 1,322.72 in
1972, and presently receives net retirement income of $ 1,468.70 per month.  He
claims he is not physically capable of returning to his previous employment.
Ruth, age 61, is employed as a food preparer, has a net monthly income of $
609.41, and anticipates no income after retirement other than social security.
Benjamin claims savings of approximately $ 5,000.  Ruth retains and resides in
the former family residence.  Both parties claim monthly expenses in excess of
income.

   Discussion

   The issues on appeal are whether the trial court abused its discretion in
failing to terminate the existing spousal support order and by further ordering
Benjamin to pay Ruth's attorney's fees.  Benjamin failed to discuss the issue of
arrearages on appeal and we will assume the issue has been abandoned.  We
conclude there was no abuse of discretion.

     As to attorney's fees, in bringing the motion Ruth was attempting to
enforce an existing order for spousal support and to obtain the arrearages owed.
Civil Code 1 section 4370, subdivision (d), requires that unless good cause to
the contrary is found, the court, upon determining the supporting spouse has the
ability to pay, to award reasonable attorney's fees to a supported spouse where
such spouse is enforcing an existing order for spousal support.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   All
statutory references are to the Civil Code unless otherwise specified.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   We conclude the trial court, in finding the amount of $ 400 to be reasonable
attorney's fees to prepare for and attend a contested hearing in order to secure
an order for $ 2,400 in arrearages, did not abuse its discretion.  Further, the
finding Benjamin had the ability to pay with a net monthly income of $ 1,468.70
and an additional reduction of expenses of $ 200 per month by reason of the
modification of the spousal support order, was well within the trial court's
discretion.

     As to the court's failure to terminate the spousal support payment to Ruth,
Benjamin cites Hall v. Hall (1954) 42 Cal.2d 435 [267 P.2d 249]. In Hall, the
court reversed the trial court's award of spousal support payable to the wife in
the sum of $ 350 per month.  Husband had a net income of $ 1,060 per month and
was left with $ 270 per month for living expenses after making monthly payments
for court ordered spousal support, child support, attorney's fees and insurance
premiums.  In the present case, from a net monthly income of $ 1,468.70,
Benjamin is left with $ 868.70 for monthly living expenses for 12 months and $
1,068.70 per month thereafter.   In both Hall and the present case, the
contended monthly living expenses exceeded net income after payment of support.
"In making that award the trial court has a wide discretion." ( Id., at p. 442.)

   Benjamin asserts the holding in Becker v. Becker (1944) 64 Cal.App.2d 239
[148 P.2d 381], affirming a 40 percent reduction in spousal support, requires a
reversal in the present case.  Benjamin fails to disclose the existing spousal
support order was entered after a default hearing and the record on appeal did
not include the circumstances upon which the previous order was entered.  In
affirming the reduction of the award to $ 45 per month, the court in Becker
stated: "While this appeal is from an order modifying an initial award of $ 75
per month, we do not believe that plaintiff may successfully claim that the
trial court abused its discretion in making the modification in the absence of a
more complete showing than that found in the record before us." ( Id., at p. 242
; see also Leupe v. Leupe (1942) 21 Cal.2d 145 [130 P.2d 697].)

   After reference to In re Marriage of Poppe (1979) 97 Cal.App.3d 1 [158
Cal.Rptr. 500], where the court denied husband's request for modification or
termination of spousal support, Benjamin, undaunted,  cites section 4801,
subdivision (a)(5), to support his position: "The ability of the supported
spouse to engage in gainful employment without interfering with interests of
dependent children in the custody of the spouse." He also cites In re Marriage
of Brantner (1977) 67 Cal.App.3d 416 [136 Cal.Rptr. 635], as support for the
proposition that the approaching equality of women and men should be reflected
in the law governing marriage dissolution.  As valid as Benjamin's position may
be, unfortunately, as a homemaker for 24 years and now 61 years of age, employed
as a food preparer, with no hope of any retirement income other than social
security, the opportunity for Ruth to catch the wave of equality in the
employment market has passed.  As stated by the court in Brantner: "The new
Family Law Act, and particularly Civil Code, section 4801, has been heralded as
a bill of rights for harried former husbands who have been suffering under
prolonged and unreasonable alimony awards.  However, the act may not be used as
a handy vehicle for the summary disposal of old and used wives." ( Id., at p.
419.)

   In Cushing v. Cushing (1970) 3 Cal.App.3d 882 [84 Cal.Rptr. 76], the court
affirmed the trial court's termination of spousal support. Benjamin urges the
change in circumstances in Cushing is similar to that in the present case.
Although certain similarities are present, the court in Cushing did not hold
that as a matter of law a termination of spousal support was required, but
indicated, "The order is supported by the evidence of changed circumstances, and
we may not argue with the discretionary ruling of the trial court.  ( Levie v.
Levie 219 Cal.App.2d 500 . . . .)" (Id., at p. 885.)

    Finally, Benjamin invokes section 4801, subdivision (a)(7), "[the] age and
health of the parties," and Edwards v. Edwards (1975) 52 Cal.App.3d 12 [124
Cal.Rptr. 742], in his quest to be relieved of his burden of spousal support.
Although at age 66 the advancing years may have ended his employment in the
merchant marine, at age 61 and employed in food service Ruth is not far behind.
In affirming the trial court's decision to refuse to terminate spousal support,
the court in Edwards stated: "The fact that Husband has paid spousal support for
18 years would not itself justify termination. . . .  [para. ] The determination
whether the circumstances justify modification of the previous order rests
primarily in the discretion of the trial court, whose decision will not be
disturbed on appeal if there is substantial evidence to support it." ( Id., at
p. 15.)

   Citing In re Marriage of Siegel (1972) 26 Cal.App.3d 88 [102 Cal.Rptr. 613],
Ruth contends the trial court properly exercised its discretion in reducing
spousal support from $ 600 to $ 400 per month after considering all the
circumstances of the parties.  We agree with Ruth.  Although Ruth is employed,
she has limited skills and a limited earning capacity due to her age, lack of
education and lack of future retirement income. Given the court's wide
discretion, modification rather than termination of spousal support was proper.

   Judgment affirmed.


                              66 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            In re the Marriage of RICHARD JOHN KERR and DEEDEE JEAN
            KERR. RICHARD JOHN KERR, Appellant, v. DEEDEE JEAN KERR,
                                  Respondent.

                                  No. D027224.

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FOURTH APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION ONE

           77 Cal. App. 4th 87; 91 Cal. Rptr. 2d 374; 1999 Cal. App.
            LEXIS 1108; 99 Cal. Daily Op. Service 10011; 2000 Daily
                                 Journal DAR 25


                           December 23, 1999, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:      APPEAL from an order of the Superior Court of San Diego
County. Super. Ct. No. D423260. Edward B. Huntington, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports

(1) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 63--Spousal Support--Guiding
Considerations--Appeal--Standard of Review.  --An award of spousal support is a
determination to be made by the trial court in each case before it, based upon
the facts and equities of that case, after weighing each of the circumstances
and applicable statutory guidelines. In making its spousal support order, the
trial court possesses broad discretion so as to fairly exercise the weighing
process contemplated by Fam. Code, § 4320, with the goal of accomplishing
substantial justice for the parties in the case before it. The issue of spousal
support, including its purpose, is one that is truly personal to the parties. In
awarding spousal support, the court must consider the mandatory guidelines of §
4320. Once the court does so, the ultimate decision as to amount and duration of
spousal support rests within its broad discretion and will not be reversed on
appeal absent an abuse of that discretion. Because trial courts have such broad
discretion, appellate courts must act with cautious judicial restraint in
reviewing these orders.

(2a) (2b) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 68--Spousal Support--
Modification--Factors Considered--Income From Exercise of Future Stock Options--
Use of Percentage to Calculate Award Amount.  --In marital dissolution
proceedings, although the trial court properly awarded the wife additional
spousal support based on the husband's income from the exercise of future stock
options from his employment, use of a percentage to calculate the amount of
support (initially 40 percent and later 25 percent), under the unique
circumstances of this case, was reversible error. The value of the stock, which
was $ 39 per share at the time the parties divided their property, had increased
more than twentyfold. The court carefully considered the parties' unique
circumstances and weighed the various factors of Fam. Code, § 4320, before
exercising its broad discretion to make its support order based on a percentage
of income once the stock options were exercised and a financial gain was
realized. Generally, the use of percentages to determine support will
beneficially remove the need for further litigation with its attendant costs
and, oftentimes, emotional upheaval. In this case, however, the court was not
presented with the typical range of stock activity that would generate some
additional income. Rather, due to the enormous increase in value of the stock
and consequently the husband's stock options, the court's percentage support
order would have far exceeded the parties' standard of living, even considering
their investment and reinvestment history, during or at the end of their
marriage.

   [See 11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (9th ed. 1990) Husband and Wife, § 219 et
seq.]

(3) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 63--Spousal Support--Guiding
Considerations--Marital Standard of Living.  --In awarding spousal support, need
is but one circumstance to be considered and must be weighed with the other
circumstances. Among these circumstances is the marital standard of living,
which establishes a basis or reference point against which the various statutory
guidelines may be weighed. The Legislature intended the marital standard of
living to mean reasonable needs commensurate with the parties' general station
in life, achieved by the date of separation. This standard is best understood in
its ordinary sense, that is, upper, middle, or lower income, although findings
should be specific enough to be helpful in later appellate or modification
proceedings. The marital standard is just one factor to be weighed with all
other applicable factors to reach a just and reasonable result.

(4a) (4b) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 100--Permanent Child Support
Orders--Determination of Amount--Statutory Guideline Formula--Application--
Propriety--Award Based on Income From Exercise of Future Stock Options.  --In a
marital dissolution proceeding, although the trial court properly awarded the
wife additional child support while the children were minors based on the
husband's income from the exercise of future stock options from his employment,
use of a percentage to calculate the amount of support (initially 40 percent and
later 25 percent), under the unique circumstances of this case, was reversible
error. The value of the stock, which was $ 39 per share at the time the parties
divided their property, had increased more than twentyfold. Fam. Code, § 4053,
sets forth the criteria underlying the child support guidelines. Courts are
required to adhere to these criteria, which provide that a child needs support
at a level commensurate with both parents' abilities and standards of living.
Fam. Code, § 4055, provides a guideline formula for determining the amount of
support based on the net disposable incomes of the parents. Under the unique
circumstances of this case, applying the guideline formula was inappropriate
without a finding that the amount ordered would not exceed the children's needs.


(5) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 100--Permanent Child Support Orders--
Determination of Amount--Parents' Current Station in Life.  --Unlike spousal
support awards requiring consideration of the parties' standard of living during
marriage, child support awards must reflect a minor child's right to be
maintained in a lifestyle and condition consonant with his or her parents'
position in society after dissolution of the marriage. A child's need is
measured by the parents' current station in life.

(6) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 100--Permanent Child Support Orders--
Determination of Amount--Statutory Guideline Formula--Application.  --Fam. Code,
§ 4055, provides a formula for determining the amount of child support based on
the net disposable incomes of the parents. The court must calculate the annual
gross income of each parent, defined as income from whatever source derived,
with certain specified exceptions. The payment established by the guideline
formula is presumed to be the correct amount of child support to be ordered.
This presumption is one affecting the burden of proof and may be rebutted by
admissible evidence showing that application of the formula would be unjust or
inappropriate in the particular case under certain enumerated circumstances. One
of those circumstances is when the supporting parent has such extraordinarily
high income that the guideline amount would exceed the child's needs.

COUNSEL: Stephen Temko for Appellant.

Sharron Voorhees for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Joseph, J., * with Kremer, P. J., and Nares, J., concurring.


*   Judge of the San Diego Superior Court, assigned by the Chief Justice
pursuant to article VI, section 6 of the California Constitution.

OPINION BY: JOSEPH

OPINION

     JOSEPH, J. * --Richard John Kerr (Richard) appeals an order setting spousal
support and child  support after dissolution of his 20-year marriage to Deedee
Jean Kerr (Deedee). Richard contends the court erred in awarding Deedee
additional spousal and child support based on a percentage of postdissolution
stock option income from his employment with Qualcomm, Inc. (Qualcomm).

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*   Judge of
the San Diego Superior Court, assigned by the Chief Justice pursuant to article
VI, section 6 of the California Constitution.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Although we conclude the court properly awarded Deedee additional spousal
support and child support based on Richard's income from the exercise of future
stock options, we further conclude use of a percentage to calculate the amount
of support, under the unique circumstances here, 1 was error. Accordingly, we
affirm the order in part and remand the matter for a determination of a proper
amount of support based on the parties' standard of living during the marriage
and the needs of the minor children.  2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   At the
time the parties divided their property, they valued Qualcomm stock at $ 39 per
share. Since that time, the value of Qualcomm stock has increased more than
twentyfold.
2   We note the older child, Jesse, became 18 years old on October 1, 1999. (See
Fam. Code, § 3901.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

   Richard and Deedee were married on February 3, 1973, and separated on August
21, 1993. They have shared joint legal custody of their two children,  Jesse
John (born October 1, 1981) and Dustin Nelson (born March 12, 1984), who reside
primarily with Deedee. Deedee has a 12th grade education and was a homemaker
throughout the marriage. According to her income and expense declaration, Deedee
has monthly interest income of $ 1,883 and monthly expenses of approximately $
6,500. Deedee claims these monthly expenses do not reflect the marital standard
of living. She has had to sell some stocks to generate funds for expenses and
reduce certain expenses due to lack of funds.

   Richard is vice-president of engineering at Qualcomm. His annual salary was $
110,427 at the time of separation and $ 159,735 at the time the court issued its
order. During the marriage, Richard received yearly stock options from Qualcomm,
producing substantial additional income, which the parties used to enhance their
standard of living. 3 The parties also accumulated wealth by selling stocks or
reinvesting their stock options.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Between
1987 and 1995, Richard was granted options to purchase 125,000 shares of
Qualcomm stock.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    After separation, Richard agreed to pay Deedee $ 1,143 per month in spousal
support and $ 2,166 per month in child support. Richard and Deedee agreed to a
division of their community property. Under the terms of a stipulated judgment,
Richard agreed to transfer his interest in the family residence to Deedee and to
pay her $ 1,108,500 to equalize the division of property. All stock options
existing at the time of separation were included in their property division.

   Deedee filed an order to show cause re: modification of spousal and child
support. The parties then agreed to have the court determine the issue of
permanent spousal support and child support. At the court's request, the parties
provided additional information about the Qualcomm stock option plan.

   After hearing argument and taking the matter under submission, the court
issued its tentative statement of decision. Having considered all the factors of
Family Code 4 sections 4053 and 4320, the court ordered Richard to pay $ 2,000
per month in spousal support and $ 2,806 per month in child support. The court
found: "Absent the award of child support and spousal support from future
options, the ongoing  monthly amount set herein does not adequately meet the
parties' former standard of living."

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   All
further statutory references are to the Family Code unless otherwise specified.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   As to the Qualcomm stock options, the court found the future grant of both
incentive stock options and nonqualified stock options was part of  Richard's
overall compensation package from employment and must be considered in setting
both spousal support and child support. The court further found its award of
support based on future options did not constitute a division of property, but
instead was a method or formula for determining additional spousal support and
child support derived from Richard's total compensation from his employment.
Thus, in addition to its support order based on Richard's salary and bonuses,
the court ordered Richard to transfer to Deedee 40 percent of the beneficial
ownership in any future Qualcomm stock options he exercised until April 1, 2003,
when the 40 percent award would be reduced to 25 percent,  and would continue
until further court order.

   Richard requested the court make findings and state the legal and factual
basis for its tentative decision. On July 31, 1996, the court held a hearing at
which it responded to the request for findings. With respect to the option
income, the court explained Deedee was entitled to 40 percent as spousal support
and child support until both children were no longer minors, at which time
Deedee would receive 25 percent of the option income as spousal support. In
setting support, the court noted it was required to consider all income from
employment, including stock option income, in order to meet the needs of the
family and maintain the marital standard of living. The court emphasized that
Richard was entitled to seek modification if, in the future, he believed the
support orders exceeded the family's needs.

   Richard unsuccessfully moved to reopen and enter a decision different than
announced. The court modified its written tentative decision to include its
findings made on July 31, 1996, and entered a supplemental judgment.  5

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   The
supplemental judgment, filed April 21, 1997, provides that the statement of
decision shall consist of the August 16, 1996, statement of decision as
modified. Further, the supplemental judgment incorporated by reference the
transcript of the proceedings of July 31, 1996, at which the court made findings
and stated the legal and factual basis for its tentative decision.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    DISCUSSION

   Richard contends the court abused its discretion in awarding Deedee, as
additional spousal support and child support, a percentage of his undetermined
future Qualcomm stock option income. Richard concedes the future grant of these
options, in addition to his salary, is part of his overall compensation package
and may be considered in setting spousal support and child support. However,
Richard objects to the court's award of a percentage, initially 40 percent and
later 25 percent, because it is not based on Deedee's or the children's needs,
nor is there a gap between their needs and his ability to pay.

    I. Spousal Support

     An award of spousal support is a determination to be made by the trial
court in each case before it, based upon the facts and equities of that case,
after weighing each of the circumstances and applicable statutory guidelines. (
In re Marriage of Smith (1990) 225 Cal. App. 3d 469, 481 [274 Cal. Rptr. 911]
[applying the guidelines of former Civ. Code, § 4801, subd. (a)].)  In making
its spousal support order, the trial court possesses broad discretion so as to
fairly exercise the weighing process contemplated by section 4320, with the goal
of accomplishing substantial justice for the parties in the case before it. "The
issue of spousal support, including its purpose, is one which is truly personal
to the parties." (In re Marriage of Smith,  supra, 225 Cal. App. 3d at p. 481.)
In awarding spousal support, the court must consider the mandatory guidelines of
section 4320.  6 Once the court does so, the ultimate decision as to amount and
duration of spousal support rests within its broad discretion and will not be
reversed on appeal absent an abuse of that discretion.  (225 Cal. App. 3d at pp.
479-480.) "Because trial courts have such broad discretion, appellate courts
must act with cautious judicial restraint in reviewing these orders." ( In re
Marriage of Ostler & Smith (1990) 223 Cal. App. 3d 33, 50 [272 Cal. Rptr. 560].)


- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   The
version of section 4320 in effect at the time of the hearing sets forth the
circumstances the court must consider in ordering spousal support: "(a) The
extent to which the earning capacity of each party is sufficient to maintain the
standard of living established during the marriage, taking into account all of
the following: [P] (1) The marketable skills of the supported party; the job
market for those skills; the time and expense required for the supported party
to acquire the appropriate education or training to develop those skills; and
the possible need for retraining or education to acquire other, more marketable
skills or employment. [P] (2) The extent to which the supported party's present
or future earning capacity is impaired by periods of unemployment that were
incurred during the marriage to permit the supported party to devote time to
domestic duties. [P] (b) The extent to which the supported party contributed to
the attainment of an education, training, a career position, or a license by the
supporting party. [P] (c) The ability to pay of the supporting party, taking
into account the supporting party's earning capacity, earned and unearned
income, assets, and standard of living. [P] (d) The needs of each party based on
the standard of living established during the marriage. [P] (e) The obligations
and assets, including the separate property, of each party. [P] (f) The duration
of the marriage. [P] (g) The ability of the supported party to engage in gainful
employment without unduly interfering with the interests of dependent children
in the custody of the party. [P] (h) The age and health of the parties. [P] (i)
The immediate and specific tax consequences to each party. [P] (j) Any other
factors the court determines are just and equitable."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      Richard asserts a percentage award of his future option income should have
been based on Deedee's need rather than on the parties' historical level of
financial investment, a factor he claims is inconsistent with the purpose of
permanent support.   However, "need is but one circumstance to be considered and
must be weighed with the other circumstances." ( In re Marriage of Ostler &
Smith, supra, at p. 47.) Among those  circumstances is the marital standard of
living, which establishes a basis or reference point against which the various
statutory guidelines may be weighed. (§ 4320, subd. (a); In re Marriage of
Ostler & Smith, supra, 223 Cal. App. 3d at p. 48, fn. 11; In re Marriage of
Smith, supra, 225 Cal. App. 3d at p. 484.) The Legislature intended the marital
standard of living to mean "reasonable needs commensurate with the parties'
general station in life," achieved by the date of separation.  (225 Cal. App. 3d
at p. 491.) 7 "The marital standard is just one factor to be weighed with all
other applicable factors to reach a 'just and reasonable' result." ( Id. at p.
490.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   This
standard is best understood in its ordinary sense, that is, upper, middle or
lower income, although findings should be specific enough to be helpful in later
appellate or modification proceedings. ( In re Marriage of Smith, supra, 225
Cal. App. 3d at p. 491.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     Here, the court considered the parties' unique circumstances, and weighed
the various factors of section 4320 in ordering additional spousal support based
on a percentage of Richard's future option income. The court found that after a
lengthy marriage during which Deedee devoted herself to domestic duties, she
needed substantial financial assistance to maintain the marital standard of
living, which included current expenses as well as the cost of reinvestment. (§
4320, subds. (a)(2), (b), (d), (f).) As the court noted, the parties' standard
of living based on the use of their options had permitted them to improve that
standard, to save money and invest wisely, and thereby increase their  wealth.
The court's order for additional support allows them to maintain the marital
standard of living.

   The court also considered Deedee's impaired earning ability caused by her
20-year absence from the out-of-home work force on behalf of Richard and the
children, which allowed Richard to develop and maintain a lucrative career. (§
4320, subds. (a)(2), (b).) The purpose of the order awarding additional spousal
support was to provide Deedee time to adjust to the reality of having to
eventually contribute to her own economic support. In fashioning an order for
additional spousal support, based on compensation from the exercise of future
stock options, the court properly intended to address the disparity in the
parties' present financial positions. Contrary to Richard's argument, Deedee
will not be receiving a portion of his separate property if he exercises a stock
option. Rather, any income Richard receives upon exercising an option is
properly considered for purposes of setting support.

   There was ample evidence of Deedee's needs and earnings to justify an award
of additional support. Deedee's income and expense statements showed she
presently had monthly interest income of $ 1,883 and monthly expenses of
approximately $ 6,500. She had sold stock and used savings to generate
sufficient funds to pay expenses. Those figures show Deedee could not, without
additional support, maintain the marital standard of living.

    The record before us reflects the court carefully weighed and considered the
parties' unique circumstances before exercising its broad discretion to make its
support order based on a percentage of income once the stock options were
exercised, and a financial gain was realized. In setting a percentage of
uncertain earnings, the court was attempting to avoid an indefinite number of
future hearings at which the details of income, expenses, investment success or
failure, tax consequences and fairness must be reevaluated. Generally, the use
of percentages to determine support will beneficially remove the need for
further litigation with its attendant costs, and oftentimes, emotional upheaval.
(See, e.g., In re Marriage of Ostler & Smith, supra, 223 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 42,
49.) Here, however,  the court was not presented with the typical range of stock
activity that would generate some additional income. Rather, due to the enormous
increase in value of Qualcomm stock and consequently Richard's stock options,
the court's percentage support order will far exceed the parties' standard of
living, even considering their investment and reinvestment history, during or at
the end of their marriage.

   Accordingly, we reverse that part of the court's order requiring Richard to
transfer to Deedee 40 percent of the beneficial ownership in any future Qualcomm
stock options he exercises until April 1, 2003, stepped down to 25 percent
thereafter. We remand the matter to the trial court to determine an amount of
additional support that is "just and equitable" (§ 4320, subd. (l)), using the
parties' marital standard of living as a point of reference against which the
other statutory factors must be weighed. Once the court does so, a percentage
support award based on Richard's exercised option income would be permissible as
long as the court sets a maximum amount proportionate to its findings of the
marital standard of living.

   II. Child Support

     Richard contends the evidence of the children's needs was insufficient to
support an award of additional child support. He asserts the court's order was a
deviation from the statewide uniform guidelines for child support, requiring the
court to make a finding that the award would not exceed the children's needs.

   Section 4053 sets forth the criteria underlying the child support guidelines.
Courts are required to adhere to these  criteria which provide that a child
needs support at a level commensurate with both parents' abilities and standards
of living. (§ 4054, subd. (g).)   Unlike spousal support awards requiring
consideration of the parties' standard of living during marriage, child support
awards must reflect a minor child's right to be  maintained in a lifestyle and
condition consonant with his or her parents' position in society after
dissolution of the marriage. ( Johnson v. Superior Court (1998) 66 Cal. App. 4th
68, 71 [77 Cal. Rptr. 2d 624]; see also Estevez v. Superior Court (1994) 22 Cal.
App. 4th 423, 428 [27 Cal. Rptr. 2d 470].) A child's need is measured by the
parents' current station in life. ( In re Marriage of Catalano (1988) 204 Cal.
App. 3d 543, 551 [251 Cal. Rptr. 370].) "[T]ying needs to the standard of living
enjoyed during marriage has no place in child support as opposed to spousal
support determinations. Adults who separate and dissolve their marriage do so
with eyes open, each choosing a separate course and appreciating the possibility
that the other will go on to attain a far more comfortable standard of living.
Limiting increases in spousal support to the supported spouse's living standards
during marriage justifiably holds the supported spouse to those expectations.
The child, on the other hand, is an innocent victim of the dissolution, with no
choice in the breakup but with reason to expect that both parents will continue
to provide for him or her in whatever manner they can in life. Limiting
increases in child support to the living standards enjoyed before the marriage
ended would defeat that expectation for no good reason." (Ibid.)

   Indeed, the Legislature, in enacting the implementing provision for child-
support guidelines, expressly provided: "Children should share in the standard
of living of both parents. Child support may therefore appropriately improve the
standard of living of the custodial household to improve the lives of the
children." (§ 4053, subd. (f).)

     Section 4055 provides a formula for determining the amount of child support
based on the net disposable incomes of the parents. The court must calculate the
"annual gross income" of each parent, defined as "income from whatever source
derived," with certain specified exceptions not applicable here. (§ 4058; County
of Placer v. Andrade (1997) 55 Cal. App. 4th 1393, 1396 [64 Cal. Rptr. 2d 739].)
Richard had substantial income in addition to his salary and bonuses in the form
of stock options. This additional income is part of his overall employment
compensation and must be used to calculate child support. ( In re Marriage of
Ostler & Smith, supra, 223 Cal. App. 3d at p. 52.)

   The payment established by the guideline formula "is presumed to be the
correct amount of child support to be ordered." (§ 4057, subd. (a).) This
presumption is one affecting the burden of proof and may be rebutted by
admissible evidence showing application of the formula would be unjust or
inappropriate in the particular case under certain enumerated circumstances. (§
4057, subd. (b).) One of those circumstances is when the supporting parent has
such extraordinarily high income that the guideline amount would exceed the
child's needs. (§ 4057, subd. (b)(3).)

      Here, in addition to child support of $ 2,806 per month, the court awarded
15 percent of Richard's option income. The court found the amount of support
required by the guideline formula, without the option income, was insufficient
to meet the family's former standard of living. (§ 4056, subd. (a)(1), (2).)
This finding implies Richard's option income was needed to maintain that
standard of living and was therefore in the children's best interests. (§ 4056,
subd. (a)(3).) However, as we previously expressed with respect to spousal
support, the percentage of option income represents an extremely high dollar
amount, given the enormous increase in Qualcomm stock value. Applying the
guideline formula under these circumstances is inappropriate without a finding
that the amount ordered would not exceed the children's needs. Thus, we reverse
that part of the court's order providing for a percentage of the option income
as child support while the children are minors.

   On remand, the court must determine the children's needs in light of both
parents' abilities and standards of living. (§ 4054, subd. (g).) 8 Given the
court's broad discretion in ordering child support (see In re Marriage of
Aylesworth (1980) 106 Cal. App. 3d 869, 876 [165 Cal. Rptr. 389]), a percentage
award based on the realized income from the exercise of stock options would be
permissible, as long as the court sets a maximum amount that would not exceed
the children's needs.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -8   We note
the children are entitled to share in their father's higher standard of living,
permitting an award of additional child support from the option income. Their
needs will necessarily include the continued security of their financial future.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    DISPOSITION

   That part of the order awarding a percentage of Richard's income from the
exercise of future stock options as spousal support and child support is
reversed. In all other respects, the order is affirmed. Both parties to bear
their own costs on appeal.

   Kremer, P. J., and Nares, J., concurred.


                              67 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of BRIAN F. and VICTORIA DAVIS.  BRIAN F.
                DAVIS, Respondent, v. VICTORIA DAVIS, Appellant.

                                    B169206

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SECOND APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION FOUR

          120 Cal. App. 4th 1007; 16 Cal. Rptr. 3d 220; 2004 Cal. App.
            LEXIS 1175; 2004 Cal. Daily Op. Service 6631; 2004 Daily
                                Journal DAR 8964


                              July 22, 2004, Filed

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY: Rehearing denied by Davis v. Davis, 2004 Cal. App. LEXIS
1400 (Cal. App. 2d Dist., Aug. 16, 2004)
Review denied by In re Davis, 2004 Cal. LEXIS 9698 (Cal., Oct. 13, 2004)

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Los Angeles County, No. ND041757, Kenneth
A. Black, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports

(2) Dissolution of Marriage § 50.4--Spousal Support--Division of Community
Property--Public Pensions and Retirement Benefits--Enhancement to Retirement
Benefit.--In a marriage dissolution proceeding in which a husband and wife
agreed that the husband would pay the wife spousal support until she received a
payment that reflected her community property interest in her husband's
retirement benefits, and the husband participated in a deferred retirement
option plan (DROP) which gave him an account that was credited monthly in the
amount of his pension payment, the spousal support obligation should not have
ended when the husband began participating in the DROP, and the wife should not
have been ordered by the trial court to reimburse the husband, out of her share
of the community property DROP account, for the spousal support payments she
received after he began participating in the DROP. A monthly credit made to the
husband's DROP account did not constitute the wife receiving her interest in his
pension. The DROP simply constituted an enhancement to the husband's retirement
benefits which induced him to continue working for the police department rather
than retiring and actually receiving monthly pension payments.

   [11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (9th ed. 1990) Community Property, §§ 40, 40A
168B.]

COUNSEL: Nancy Bennett Bunn for Appellant.

Brian F. Davis, in pro. per., for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Curry, J., with Epstein, Acting P. J., and Hastings, J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: CURRY

OPINION

    CURRY, J.--

INTRODUCTION

   This matter arises after a judgment of marital dissolution was entered as to
the  marriage of Brian and Victoria Davis. Victoria appeals from a domestic
relations order entered after Brian brought an order to show cause with regard
to the effect of a postdissolution enhancement of his retirement benefits on his
obligation to pay spousal support. Based on the nature of the retirement
benefits at issue and the language of the judgment of dissolution, which
incorporated the terms of the parties' marital settlement agreement, the trial
court ruled that Brian's spousal support obligation effectively terminated at
the time he began participating in the enhanced retirement program. As we will
explain, based on our independent interpretation of the relevant case law and
the language of the judgment of dissolution, we reverse.

FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

1. The Judgment of Marital Dissolution

   The parties were married on September 4, 1966. Brian filed a petition for
marital dissolution on January 9, 2001. Victoria filed a response on January 18,
2001. On March 8, 2001, the parties filed a stipulation agreeing that Brian
would pay Victoria $ 1,480 per month as spousal support, pending further order
of the court. Brian's employer was the Los Angeles City Police Department;
accordingly, the Los Angeles City Fire and Police Pension Plan was joined as an
Employee Benefit Plan claimant to the action for marital dissolution on December
28, 2001.

   The parties reached a marital settlement agreement, which was incorporated
into the judgment of marital dissolution entered February 6, 2002. Therein, the
parties agreed their date of marital separation was February 14, 2000.

   Brian began employment with the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) on April
21, 1969. Victoria has been employed by Albertson's since November 1986. As part
of their marital settlement agreement, they agreed that each would keep as their
separate property all of their respective earnings after the date of separation.
They agreed that Victoria could keep as her separate property the pension
benefits she had earned during the marriage.

   Victoria wished to keep the community property residence in Newport Beach;
the home contains a rental unit, which would provide supplemental  income. This
supplemental income was taken into account in determining the spousal support
order and property division. To equalize the property division, the parties
agreed that Victoria would be awarded a reduced share of Brian's pension, 25
percent rather than 50 percent. In paragraph 1(A), spousal support was set at $
1,480 per month "commencing September 1, 2001, and continuing thereafter until
the death of either party, the remarriage of [Victoria], or the date [Victoria]
receives the first payment that reflects her 25% interest in [Brian's] pension,
and the gross amount of that payment exceeds $ 1,480.00 per month, whichever
shall first occur, at which time spousal support shall terminate forever." In
paragraph 1(C), the judgment further provided: "Neither the amount nor the
duration of spousal support is modifiable under any circumstances, and/or for
any reason, and the Court is without jurisdiction to modify the amount or
duration of spousal support. In the event [Brian] pays spousal support to
[Victoria] for a month in which [Victoria] receives her 25% interest in
[Brian's] pension and the gross amount she receives exceeds $ 1,480.00,
[Victoria] shall immediately reimburse the spousal support she received for that
month to [Brian]." As to Brian's pension plan, the judgment provided in
paragraph 4(A): "[Brian's] pension plan, Los Angeles  City Fire And Police
Pension System Plan (L.A. City Safety XVIII Plan), shall be divided by a
Qualified Domestic Relations Order prepared by attorney Nancy Bunn or other
qualified preparer agreed to by both parties. The Plan, which is fully vested,
shall be divided 75% to [Brian] and 25% to [Victoria], to equalize the division
of community assets." 1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1    We note
that thereafter, Bunn associated into the action as cocounsel for Victoria.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

2. Subsequent Changes in Brian's Retirement Benefits

   Shortly after the parties executed the stipulated agreement at the end of
2001, Brian's retirement options changed. At that time, Brian had been with the
LAPD for over 30 years and had reached the maximum retirement available under
his then-current retirement tier, tier 2 (i.e., 70 percent of his final salary).
On January 1, 2002, the City of Los Angeles Department of Fire and Police
Pensions Board (the Pension Board) offered eligible members the option of
transferring from their current tier to tier 5, under which contributions to the
pension plan could continue until a member reached 33 years of services, rather
than ceasing at 30 years. Tier 5 allowed a member to retire at 90 percent of his
salary upon reaching 33 years of service. Brian elected this option, with the
effect that it would increase both his and Victoria's monthly payments from his
pension once he retired. Brian reached "maximum benefit retirement date," or 33
years of service, on April 21, 2002.

   On May 1, 2002, the Pension Board made available a second retirement option,
the "Deferred Retirement Option Plan" (the DROP), for which Brian was also
eligible. The DROP was intended to offer an incentive to officers  who were
eligible to retire to continue working for the LAPD, as it was having difficulty
recruiting new officers and retaining veteran officers. Under the DROP, eligible
officers could "retire" and commence drawing their pensions while continuing to
work and earning a salary for up to an additional five years. Rather than
actually receiving monthly pension payments, however, a DROP account was created
which would be credited monthly in the amount of the member's pension payment.

   According to materials distributed to members of the pension plan, the "DROP
account is set up like a savings account within the Pension Plan. Every month
while [the officer is] in DROP, [his] entire monthly service pension amount is
deposited into [his] DROP account." Members would retire at the same percentage
of their salary whether they chose the conventional retirement option or the
DROP option. The pension payment credited monthly to the DROP account would
receive annual cost of living increases and earn interest at the rate of 5
percent per year. Members could participate in the DROP for a maximum of five
years, but could leave service sooner. 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2    Brian
notes he elected to stay two additional years, having submitted a statement of
intention to exit DROP and terminate employment effective May 1, 2004.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Upon discontinuing participation in the DROP and terminating employment with
the LAPD, the member would begin to receive monthly pension payments based upon
years of service and salary at the time of entering the DROP, plus cost of
living increases received while in the DROP. At that time, members could receive
the DROP funds in a lump sum, or could elect to roll the funds over into a
tax-deferred account.

    Under the DROP, members "are considered 'retired' for purposes of pension
calculations only." Participants can no longer qualify a new spouse for survivor
benefits, even though they continue to work for the LAPD. No further service
credit is earned during the DROP participation period. Participants in the DROP
have the same rights, privileges, and benefits as with active employment. "DROP
account funds are not eligible for distribution until after actual
retirement/termination as a sworn member of the Fire or Police Department."

   Brian made the irreversible election to participate in the DROP from its
inception date, which was 10 days after he reached his maximum benefit
retirement date (33 years of employment) on April 21, 2002. Thus, his ability to
retire at 90 percent of his salary was not impeded. He had planned to leave the
LAPD as of April 21, 2002, and obtain other employment, in order to augment his
retirement income and purchase a home. Instead, he decided to participate in the
DROP.

    Upon entering the DROP, the monthly pension payment deposited into Brian's
DROP account was $ 6,876.84. Victoria's 25 percent interest was $ 1,719.21, $
239.21 more per month than the spousal support award of $ 1,480 per month. Brian
received two cost of living increases to his pension benefits after electing to
participate in the DROP, on July 1, 2002 and July 1, 2003. Brian continued to
make monthly spousal support payments, i.e., $ 1,480 per month, to Victoria
throughout the time of his participation in the DROP.

   Brian understood that Victoria could not receive directly from the Pension
Board her monthly interest in his pension from the date it commenced. Prior to
electing to participate in the DROP, Brian contacted Victoria and offered to pay
to her monthly her share of his pension benefits from his separate property
earnings from the time the pension benefits commenced being credited to his DROP
account, in exchange for her agreement that because he would be advancing her
share that the entire DROP account would be designated as his separate property.
Victoria did not agree to the proposal.

   Bunn prepared a qualified domestic relations order (QDRO), but Brian did not
agree to its provisions. His attorney sent a letter to Attorney Bunn on April
25, 2002, advising her of his disagreement, noting that the QDRO allowed
Victoria to accumulate her share of Brian's monthly pension payments in the DROP
account concurrently during the months he paid her spousal support without
providing for reimbursement of these pension payments as purportedly required by
the stipulated judgment. No agreement could be reached between the parties.

3. Commencement of the Proceedings Now Before Us

   On September 25, 2002, Brian filed an order to show cause seeking declaratory
relief concerning the proper language of the QDRO, and with regard to whether he
should pay Victoria her share of his pension and thereby terminate spousal
support.

   Victoria filed a responsive declaration in opposition on December 27, 2002,
requesting that the court file and certify the QDRO previously drafted, and deny
Brian's request for relief. She filed a supplemental memorandum of points and
authorities on January 7, 2003. Victoria filed a proposed QDRO with the court on
February 20, 2003.

   Brian filed a reply to the opposition on February 25, 2003, now acting in
propria persona.

    The matter was heard on March 4, 2003. Victoria asserted that Brian was not
retired, and therefore the relief he sought should not be granted. The court
stated that the evidence indicated Brian's status with the LAPD was "retired."
Finding further clarification regarding the DROP was necessary, the court
continued the hearing to April 30, 2003. Victoria's attorney requested that the
city attorney present testimony at that time.

   On April 29, 2003, Victoria filed additional documents. On the same date,
Brian filed a supplemental declaration in response.

   On April 30, 2003, Deputy City Attorney Mary Jo Curwen testified. Thereafter,
the trial court found that Brian's service pension is entirely community
property and that all funds in his DROP account constitute his service pension
entitlement; accordingly, the court awarded 25 percent of Brian's service
pension to Victoria. However, it further ordered Brian to "make an interest-free
loan to [Victoria] of 1480 deductible dollars a month. And then once she
collects the DROP money, then she pays him back $ 1480 for each month that she
got." The court requested that the city attorney prepare a domestic relations
order in keeping with the court's ruling.

   On June 5, 2003, the court entered the domestic relations order. It provided
that "[Brian's] service pension is entirely community property. All funds in
[Brian's] DROP account constitute [Brian's] service pension entitlement."
Further, "25% of [Brian's] service pension is hereby awarded to [Victoria] as
her separate property and that any allowable cost of living adjustments shall be
made applicable thereto; that 75% of [Brian's] service pension, including any
allowable cost of living adjustments applicable thereto, is awarded to [Brian]
as his separate property." Finally, "at such time as DROP account proceeds
become payable to [Brian and Victoria], Claimant is hereby ordered to make the
following adjustment in the parties' respective interests in these DROP proceeds
and to make payment to the parties accordingly: Claimant shall deduct the sum of
$ 1480 per month from [Victoria's] share of the DROP account for each month in
which [Victoria's] share of the DROP account exceeds the $ 1480 per month that
[Brian] paid to [Victoria] as spousal support, which sum shall then be credited
by the Plan to [Brian's] share of the DROP account; the $ 1480 deduction shall
be a fixed sum (no adjustment on account of cost of living increases or related
to interest payable to the DROP account) and shall be pro-rated by the Plan for
any partial month of entitlement. This adjustment shall be considered an
adjustment in the respective community interests of the parties based upon the
provisions set forth in the last sentence of Paragraph 1(C) of the Judgment and
shall satisfy [Victoria's] obligation to [Brian] arising therein."

   Victoria filed a notice of appeal from that order on August 1, 2003.

DISCUSSION

I. Characterization of the DROP Benefit

   We begin by discussing whether the DROP account is accurately characterized
as community property, or as Brian's separate property. While other California
cases have considered the characterization to be given to different forms of
enhanced retirement benefits, none have specifically involved a DROP benefit.

   We review de novo the issue of the characterization to be given (as separate
or community property) to the enhanced retirement benefit at issue here. Because
its resolution requires a critical consideration,  in a factual context, of
legal principles and their underlying values, the determination in question
amounts to the resolution of a mixed question of law and fact that is
predominantly one of law. (In re Marriage of Lehman (1998) 18 Cal.4th 169, 184
[74 Cal. Rptr. 2d 825, 955 P.2d 451].) We conclude based on our independent
review that the trial court correctly determined that the DROP benefits at issue
here were community property.

   In re Marriage of Lehman, supra, 18 Cal.4th 169 (Lehman), involved a
"Voluntary Retirement Incentive" (VRI) retirement program, under which an
employee of PG&E was given the option of being credited with three putative
years of service and enjoying a waiver of the normal actuarial reduction of 18
percent for taking early retirement. The employee retired under the VRI program,
and his ex-wife sought an order determining that she owned a community property
interest in his retirement benefits as enhanced. (Id. at pp. 175-176.) The
Supreme Court granted review in order to address the issue of characterization
of retirement benefits as community or separate property under a defined benefit
retirement plan. Specifically: "Does a nonemployee spouse who owns a community
property interest in an employee spouse's retirement benefits under such a plan
own a community property interest in the [latter's] retirement benefits as
enhanced?" (Id. at p. 174, italics added.) The Supreme Court answered the
question in the affirmative.

   The Supreme Court explained: "The right to retirement benefits 'represent[s]
a property interest; to the extent that such [a] right[] derive[s] from
employment' during marriage before separation, it 'comprise[s] a community asset
... .' " (Lehman, supra, 18 Cal.4th at p. 177, quoting In re Marriage of Brown
(1976) 15 Cal.3d 838, 842 [126 Cal. Rptr. 633, 544 P.2d 561].) "The right to
retirement benefits is a right to 'draw[] from [a] stream of income  that ...
begins to flow' on retirement, as that stream is then defined." (Lehman, supra,
at pp. 177-178, italics added, quoting In re Marriage of Cornejo (1996) 13
Cal.4th 381, 383 [53 Cal. Rptr. 2d 81, 916 P.2d 476], and citing In re Marriage
of Gillmore (1981) 29 Cal.3d 418, 428 [174 Cal. Rptr. 493, 629 P.2d 1]; and In
re Marriage of Brown, supra, 15 Cal.3d at p. 848.) "The stream's volume at
retirement may depend on various events or conditions after separation and even
after dissolution. [Citations.] Such events and conditions include both changes
in the retirement-benefit formula [citations], and also changes in the basis on
which the retirement-benefit formula operates [citations]." (Lehman, supra, at
p. 178.) The stream's volume at retirement may turn out to be less than feared,
or to be even more than hoped for. (Ibid.) "That the nonemployee spouse might
happen to enjoy an increase, or suffer a decrease, in retirement benefits
because of postseparation or even postdissolution events or conditions is
justified by the nature of the right to retirement benefits as a right to draw
from a stream of income that begins to flow, and is defined, on retirement
[citations], with the nonemployee spouse, at one and the same time, holding the
chance of more [citations], and bearing the risk of less [citation], equally
with the employee spouse. Because the nonemployee spouse is compelled to share
the bad with the employee spouse [citation], he or she must be allowed to share
the good as well." (Id. at p. 179.)

    "The employee spouse is 'free[] to change or terminate ... employment, to
agree to a modification of the terms of ... employment (including retirement
benefits), or to elect between alternative retirement programs'--in a word, he
or she is 'free[]' to 'define ... the nature of the retirement benefits owned by
the community.' [Citation.] [¶] But regardless how the employee spouse might
choose to exercise such freedom, the 'nonemployee spouse owns an interest' in
what he or she chooses by owning an interest in the community. [Citation.] [¶]
It follows that a nonemployee spouse who owns a community property interest in
an employee spouse's retirement benefits owns a community property interest in
the latter's retirement benefits as enhanced. That is because, practically by
definition, the right to retirement benefits that accrues, at least in part,
during marriage before separation underlies any right to an enhancement.
[Citation.]" (Lehman, supra, 18 Cal.4th at pp. 179-180.)

   "[V]arious events and conditions after separation and even after dissolution
may affect the amount of retirement benefits that an employee spouse receives.
But not their character. Once he or she has accrued a right to retirement
benefits, at least in part, during marriage before separation, the retirement
benefits themselves are stamped a community asset from then on." (Lehman, supra,
18 Cal.4th at p. 183.)

    " '[B]oth parties' rights are generally subject to changes in the terms of a
retirement plan, as well as to circumstances largely beyond their control, such
as the salary level finally achieved by the employee and used to calculate the
pension benefit. What the nonemployee spouse possesses, in short, is the right
to share in the pension as it is ultimately determined ... . [Any] enhancement'
in the amount is a 'modification of an asset not the creation of a new one.' " (
Lehman, supra, 18 Cal.4th at p. 184, quoting Olivo v. Olivo (1993) 82 N.Y.2d
202, 209-210 [604 N.Y.S.2d 23, 624 N.E.2d 151].) "[A]n enhancement effected
through 'additional years of service,' 'increase in earnings,' or 'increase in
age' ... is uncontestedly a community asset." (Lehman, supra, at p. 185, quoting
In re Marriage of Adams (1976) 64 Cal. App. 3d 181, 186 [134 Cal. Rptr. 298].)

   At the time the parties separated and thereafter when the judgment of
dissolution was entered, Brian had been employed by the LAPD for over 30 years.
3 At that time he had reached his maximum retirement benefit level in his
retirement tier, i.e., he would receive 70 percent of his salary as monthly
pension payments. Thus, all of the 30 years of service necessary to qualify for
the enhancement of moving to tier 5 (in which he could continue to make pension
contributions until he reached 33 years of service, and thereby receive 90
percent of his salary in pension payments) had been during the marriage.
Similarly, participation in the DROP required 25 years of service, all of which
Brian acquired during the marriage. Victoria undisputedly owns a community
property interest in Brian's retirement benefits, and therefore owns a community
property interest in his retirement benefits as enhanced. Brian's right to
participate in the DROP enhancement would not exist but for his having accrued
the retirement  rights that he did during the parties' marriage.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3    At the
time of separation, February 14, 2000, he had been employed by LAPD for 30 years
and 10 months.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

II. Termination of Spousal Support

   While we agree with the trial court's characterization of the DROP benefit as
community property, we disagree with its interpretation of the language of the
judgment of dissolution as applied to the situation presented. The question
before us is whether, under the terms of the judgment, spousal support payments
were to terminate at the time Brian entered the DROP and began receiving monthly
credits to his DROP account, in which Victoria owned a 25 percent interest, or
whether spousal support payments were to continue until Victoria actually began
receiving her 25 percent interest in Brian's pension benefits. Answering that
question involves our analyzing and interpreting the  terms of the settlement
agreement and ensuing judgment of dissolution, a question of law, and a task
which we undertake independently. We are not bound by the trial court's analysis
and conclusions regarding the interpretation to be given the settlement
agreement and judgment. (Plaza Freeway Ltd. Partnership v. First Mountain Bank
(2000) 81 Cal.App.4th 616, 621 [96 Cal. Rptr. 2d 865].)

   "An MSA [marital settlement agreement] is governed by the legal principles
applicable to contracts generally. (In re Marriage of Hasso (1991) 229 Cal. App.
3d 1174, 1180 [280 Cal. Rptr. 919] ... .) 'Under statutory rules of contract
interpretation, the mutual intention of the parties at the time the contract is
formed governs [its] interpretation. [Citation.] Such intent is to be inferred,
if possible, solely from the written provisions of the contract. [Citation.]' (
AIU Ins. Co. v. Superior Court (1990) 51 Cal.3d 807, 821-822 [274 Cal. Rptr.
820, 799 P.2d 1253].)" (Tanner v. Tanner (1997) 57 Cal.App.4th 419, 424-425 [67
Cal. Rptr. 2d 204].)

   Under the terms of the judgment of dissolution incorporating the marital
settlement agreement (paragraph 1(A)), spousal support was to continue "until
... the date [Victoria] receives the first payment that reflects her 25%
interest in [Brian's] pension, and the gross amount of that payment exceeds $
1,480.00 per month ... at which time spousal support shall terminate forever."
(Italics added.) In paragraph 1(C), the judgment provided that "[n]either the
amount nor the duration of spousal support is modifiable under any circumstances
... . In the event [Brian] pays spousal support to [Victoria]  for a month in
which [Victoria] receives her 25% interest in [Brian's] pension and the gross
amount she receives exceeds $ 1,480.00, [Victoria] shall immediately reimburse
the spousal support she received for that month to [Brian]." (Italics added.)
The parties agreed that Brian's pension "shall be divided 75% to [Brian] and 25%
to [Victoria]." 4

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4    This
portion of the judgment varies from the typical arrangement under which a "time
rule" is applied which apportions the pension amount as between time worked
during the marriage versus time worked after separation. "Under that method, the
community property interest in retirement benefits is the percentage
representing the fraction whose numerator is the employee spouse's length of
service during marriage before separation, ... and whose denominator is the
employee spouse's length of service in total ... ; the separate property
interest is the percentage representing the remainder of 100 percent minus the
community property interest percentage." (In re Marriage of Lehman, supra, 18
Cal.4th 169, 176.) Here, no apportionment calculation is necessary because the
parties agreed that Victoria's community property interest in Brian's total
retirement benefits is 25 percent.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The trial court concluded that once Brian began participating in the DROP,
Victoria  was not entitled to collect monthly spousal support and also
eventually collect her 25 percent interest in the monthly pension payments
credited to Brian's DROP account. In the court's view, this would constitute a
"double-dip" and "overreaching" beyond the parties' contemplation in agreeing to
the terms of the judgment of dissolution. The court based its conclusion on
paragraph 1(c) of the judgment, "In the event [Brian] pays spousal support to
[Victoria] for a month in which [Victoria] receives her 25% interest in
[Brian's] pension and the gross amount she receives exceeds $ 1,480.00,
[Victoria] shall immediately reimburse the spousal support she received for that
month to [Brian]."

   The judgment requires that Brian continue to pay spousal support "until ...
the date [Victoria] receives the first payment that reflects her 25% interest in
[Brian's] pension." A monthly credit being made to Brian's DROP account does not
constitute Victoria receiving a payment reflecting her interest in his pension.
The DROP account could not be distributed until Brian left employment with the
LAPD.  Therefore, the so-called reimbursement clause was not triggered. Brian
did not pay spousal support to Victoria for a month in which she "received" her
25 percent interest in his pension. The DROP was simply an enhancement to
Brian's retirement benefits, which induced him to continue working for the LAPD
rather than retiring when eligible and actually drawing monthly pension
payments, and also working elsewhere to earn a salary. The DROP account was
essentially a promise of future payment at the time Brian actually left
employment; indeed under certain circumstances he could have forfeited the DROP
account, for example, by taking disability retirement. Neither Brian nor
Victoria actually received pension payments within the contemplation of the
judgment when Brian began participating in the DROP. The final sentence of
paragraph 1(C) clearly was intended to address the situation in which Brian made
a spousal support payment to Victoria without knowing that she had in the same
month received a payment for her interest in his pension.

   Essentially what Brian requested was that he be allowed to force Victoria to
accept monthly payments of 25 percent of the credits made to his DROP account.
There is no support in the law of this state nor in reason for permitting him to
do so. 5 The trial court reasoned that his decision was "a reverse of
Gil[l]more," referring to In re Marriage of Gillmore, supra, 29 Cal.3d 418 (
Gillmore). We find no support for the trial court's order in the holding or
underlying rationale of Gillmore.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5    We note
that under the trial court's order, she was not even receiving the amount of the
pension payment to which she was entitled (approximately $ 1,720), but was
merely receiving the spousal support amount ($ 1,480). The DROP account earned 5
percent interest and annual cost of living adjustments, but Brian had the
present use of the extra $ 240 or so, which is not accounted for by 5 percent
interest. In effect she was merely receiving spousal support, while also being
deprived of a substantial portion of her community property interest in the DROP
account.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    In Gillmore, the Supreme Court held that a former wife could elect to begin
receiving payments representing her community property interest in her former
husband's pension as soon as he became eligible to retire, whether or not he
actually retired. The court reasoned: "Under the cases and statutory law,
[husband] cannot time his retirement to deprive [wife] of an equal share of the
community's interest in his pension. It is a 'settled principle that one spouse
cannot, by invoking a condition  wholly within his control, defeat the community
interest of the other spouse.' [Citations.]" (Gillmore, supra, 29 Cal.3d at p.
423.) By continuing to work, the employee spouse would subject the nonemployee
spouse to the risk of losing the pension completely if the employee spouse were
to die while still employed. Although the employee spouse has every right to
choose to postpone the receipt of his or her pension and to run that risk, he or
she should not be able to force the nonemployee spouse to do so as well. (Id. at
p. 424.)

   The court made clear that the nonemployee spouse can make an election. "[T]he
nonemployee spouse may choose to wait, preferring to receive the retirement
benefits when the employee spouse actually retires. The nonemployee may thereby
ensure some protection for the future and may be able to share in the increased
value of the pension plan. [Citation.] However, if the nonemployee spouse
chooses to receive immediate payments, as [wife] does, he or she has a right to
do so. Any inequities caused by the immediate distribution of retirement
benefits can be resolved through adjustments in spousal support." 6 (Gillmore,
supra, 29 Cal.3d at p. 428, fn. omitted.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6    In
footnote 9, the court clarified that the nonemployee spouse "cannot have it both
ways. The decision to ask for distribution of the retirement benefits before the
employee spouse actually retires 'constitutes an irrevocable election to give up
increased payments in the future which might accrue due to increased age, longer
service and a higher salary.' [Citation.] Thus, if [wife] chooses to receive her
share of the retirement benefits immediately, she will forfeit her right to
share in the increased value of those benefits in the future." (Gillmore, supra,
29 Cal.3d at pp. 428-429.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    "The employee spouse retains the right (1) to change or terminate
employment; (2) to agree to a modification of the retirement benefits; or (3) to
elect between alternative benefits. [Citation.] '[T]he employee spouse retains
the right to determine the nature of the benefits to be received.' [Citation.]"
(Gillmore, supra, 29 Cal.3d at p. 425.)

   The only guidance to be gleaned from Gillmore  as applicable to the case
before us is that Brian cannot force Victoria to elect to begin receiving
payments which he designates to be pension payments in order to terminate the
spousal support payments. He cannot invoke a condition wholly within his control
to defeat Victoria's community property interest in his DROP  account. That
result is not supported by either the language of the judgment or the existing
case law. Under Gillmore, it is the nonemployee spouse who gets to make an
election and take her chances. The DROP benefit differs from the benefits at
issue in Gillmore in that the future enhancement of benefits is largely certain
rather than speculative (except with regard to the availability and amount of
future cost of living adjustments), but that does not mean that the nonemployee
spouse should lose her right to choose.

   According to Brian, "It was the understanding and agreement of both parties
that though Brian could remain employed and continue to earn a salary after
retirement that his obligation to pay Victoria spousal support would terminate
nonetheless." He claims Victoria's attorney confirmed this understanding prior
to execution of the agreement in a letter to Brian's counsel, saying she advised
Victoria "not to agree to a permanent waiver of spousal support upon receipt of
her share of [Brian's] pension benefits" because Brian could "be drawing his
pension, and possibly,  holding another full-time job." Despite the admonition,
Victoria advised her attorney that "she made an agreement with [Brian] and is
prepared to abide by that agreement."

   But the current situation is different than the one within the parties'
contemplation. The exceptional benefits at issue here became available only
because he continued to work for the same employer where his retirement benefits
accrued during the lengthy marriage, thus rendering the enhanced benefits
community property. Had he retired from the LAPD and changed jobs, he would have
actually received pension payments (in which Victoria would have received her
interest), and spousal support would have terminated. Under the circumstances in
which they now find themselves, both Brian and Victoria are entitled to enjoy
the enhancement in Brian's benefits, because those benefits are community
property.

   In summary, Victoria should not have been ordered to reimburse Brian out of
her share of the community property DROP account, for the spousal support
payments she received after he began participating in the DROP. Pursuant to the
terms of the judgment, she was entitled to receive her full 25 percent interest
in the DROP account once Brian left the employ of the LAPD and the proceeds of
the DROP account became available for distribution.

DISPOSITION

   The domestic relations order of June 5, 2003, is reversed and the matter
remanded to the trial court with directions to delete paragraph 6 of the order.
Appellant is awarded costs on appeal.

   Epstein, Acting P. J., and Hastings, J., concurred.

   A petition for a rehearing was denied August 16, 2004, and respondent's
petition for review was denied October 13, 2004.


                              68 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In re the Marriage of MILDRED and BERNARD GAVRON.  BERNARD
                GAVRON, Respondent, v. MILDRED GAVRON, Appellant

                                  No. B027510

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Five

            203 Cal. App. 3d 705; 250 Cal. Rptr. 148; 1988 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 832


                                 July 11, 1988

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Los Angeles County, No. D932545, Richard
Montes, Judge.

COUNSEL: Hillman, Friedman & Cohen and Ira M. Friedman for Appellant.

Bernard Silverman and Honey Kessler Amado for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Boren, J., with Ashby, Acting P. J., and Kennard, J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: BOREN

OPINION

     The issue in this appeal is whether the trial court abused its discretion
in terminating spousal support to the 57-year-old wife based on the wife's
failure to become gainfully employed or to seek vocational training. Because
there was no showing of a material change of circumstances since the court's
prior support order, the court did abuse its discretion.  We reverse.

   Facts

   After being married for approximately 25 years and with one adult child, the
parties separated in December of 1976.  An interlocutory judgment of dissolution
of marriage was entered in November of 1978, and a final judgment was entered on
June 1, 1979.  The court reserved jurisdiction and ordered on August 3, 1979, as
part of its further judgment on reserved issues, that the husband pay spousal
support of $ 1,100 per month until further order of the court.  In May of 1981,
the court denied without any  findings the husband's request to reduce the
spousal support to $ 550 per month for a year and thereafter to terminate the
support.

   In June of 1986, the husband again sought a modification of the spousal
support order and requested a termination of his obligation to pay spousal
support. The parties filed declarations in support of and in opposition to the
requested modification. After a hearing in March of 1987, the court ordered on
March 10, 1987, that (1) the previously ordered support payments of $ 1,000
continue until August 1, 1987, and then cease, and (2) the court retain
jurisdiction over the issue of spousal support until the death or remarriage of
the wife.

   According to the testimony at the hearing and declarations of the parties,
early during the marriage the wife attended classes one year at city college,
soon thereafter became a licensed electrolysis technician, and maintained her
license for approximately 12 years but never worked in that capacity.
Apparently while the husband was in dental school, the wife was employed for
several years as a business office representative for the telephone company
where she took orders for telephone service and answered questions about
services.  She then worked for nine months in her husband's newly opened dental
office where she acted as a receptionist, made appointments, did filing and
bookkeeping, developed X-rays and kept the office clean.

   Many years later and after the husband and wife were separated in 1976, the
wife performed volunteer charitable work at Cedars-Sinai Hospital where she
wheeled a snack cart into patients' rooms.  In 1982, the wife worked for a
salary as a receptionist in a beauty shop but quit after three months.
Essentially, the tasks required were too physically demanding.  As the wife
explained, "I really couldn't handle it at that time.  I had to get into the
safe on the floor, and it was too hard to get up and down, and I had to jump up
from the phone every time it rang and ask the beautician, of which there were a
lot, 'Do you want to come to the phone?' or 'Can you see this person?' or this
type of thing.  It was just overwhelming, and run out to the meter to put coins
in their meters and --"

   For approximately five months in 1984, the wife worked as an occasional
driver four or five hours a week for an elderly woman.  However, she stopped
working in that capacity because, as she explained, "That was also physically
impossible.  After you get there and help her out and fasten her belt and open
the car door.  She had this large heavy car door with the arms, and to get her
in and when you get where you're going you repeat the process and then go park
the car.  It's--it was just too hard on me." The wife also chauffeured her
mother about and found that driving for both of these women "was too much."

    The wife's 87-year-old mother lived in the house with her, and she tended to
the needs of the elderly woman.  The wife's mother had income, contributed money
for food but not household expenses, and maintained joint checking and stock
brokerage accounts with the wife.

   The wife had tumors on her feet which necessitated the use of a corrective
insert  in her shoes.  She also had a shoulder problem and arthritis in her
knees and hands for which she exercised and took medication.  According to the
wife, these health problems limited her mobility and thus impaired her ability
to work.  The wife's medical claims were undocumented but uncontradicted.  Other
than as previously discussed, she sought no other employment and no job training
or counseling since separating from her husband.

   The wife claimed that since 1981, she had to sell several assets and had to
forego needed repairs on her car and her house.  However, the wife had $ 40,000
in the bank, owned her unmortgaged home which she valued at approximately $
24,000, owned interests in several real estate ventures, received monthly
interest and investment income of $ 633, and owed no money to anyone.  Three
years earlier, she took a vacation in China.

   Although the husband was not legally obligated to do so, he has paid the
substantial educational expenses of his two step-children who attend private
schools.  The husband also alleged a diminished ability to contribute to his
retirement and profit-sharing plans and a decreased demand for his dental
specialty (root canal work) because that area of dental expertise is being
increasingly handled by general practitioners.  The husband used money from the
profit-sharing trust to purchase a new home and to pay the balance of the money
owed to the wife at the time of dissolution.  After the March 1987 hearing, the
court found that the husband terminated his pension plan and borrowed heavily
against his profit-sharing plan to sustain his current standard of living.  The
court further determined that the husband's income had increased somewhat and
his expenses had decreased, but that the husband still claimed his expenses
exceeded his income.  According to the 1985 tax returns of the husband and his
current wife, they had an adjusted gross income of $ 93,359; the husband's
current wife is employed by him at a gross monthly salary of $ 1,500.

   In its ruling on the requested modification of spousal support, the court
concluded, in part, as follows: "Aside from demonstrating a lack of diligence,
in regards to becoming employed, [Wife] remains highly improvident by relying on
[Husband] for her sole support.  She apparently has given no thought to the
possibility that [Husband] may become incapacitated or meet an untimely demise.
It should be noted that a marriage of twenty-five (25) years is not tantamount
to social security.  The Court is mindful that  this is a lengthy marriage and
that [Husband's] duty to support [Wife] will not terminate by the mere passage
of time. Nonetheless, the [Wife's] failure to become employable or to seek
training after so many years [shifts] the burden to her to demonstrate her
continued need for support in light of her continued inaction in this regard."

   Discussion



   (1)  It is well settled that although a trial court has broad discretion in
modifying or revoking an award of spousal support ( Civ. Code, § 4801, subd. (a)
), the court's discretion is not unlimited.  (  In re Marriage of Prietsch &
Calhoun (1987) 190 Cal.App.3d 645, 655 [235 Cal.Rptr. 587];  In re Marriage of
Melton (1980) 107 Cal.App.3d 559, 564 [165 Cal.Rptr. 753].) (2)  "To obtain a
modification of a previous spousal support order, the moving party must show a
material change of circumstances since the time of the prior order." (  In re
Marriage of Norvall (1987) 192 Cal.App.3d 1047, 1060 [237 Cal.Rptr. 770]; see
In re Marriage of McElwee (1988) 197 Cal.App.3d 902, 909 [243 Cal.Rptr. 179];
In re Marriage of Kuppinger (1975) 48 Cal.App.3d 628, 633 [120 Cal.Rptr. 654].)
Although the passage of time may be related to a change in circumstances, it is
not alone a sufficient basis for modification. (  Edwards v. Edwards (1975) 52
Cal.App.3d 12, 15 [124 Cal.Rptr. 742];  In re Marriage of Wilson (1975) 51
Cal.App.3d 116, 119 [123 Cal.Rptr. 887].) The "change of circumstances" which
can be considered includes all factors affecting need and ability to pay. (  In
re Marriage of Morrison (1978) 20 Cal.3d 437, 454 [143 Cal.Rptr. 139, 573 P.2d
41];  In re Marriage of Prietsch & Calhoun, supra, 190 Cal.App.3d at p. 655.)

   In  In re Marriage of Sheridan (1983) 140 Cal.App.3d 742, 748 [189 Cal.Rptr.
622], the original support order scheduled payments only for a limited five-year
period and was made with the court's expectation that the supported spouse would
become self-supporting by the end of that time.  When the court's stated
expectation was not met, then a change in circumstances was deemed to have
occurred, justifying a modification in the support order. Similarly,  in  In re
Marriage of Pekar (1985) 173 Cal.App.3d 367, 371-372 [218 Cal.Rptr. 823], where
the spouse was already gainfully employed, the spousal support was scheduled to
terminate at the end of a five-year period based on the legitimate assumption
that the supported spouse would continue working and be self-supporting as of
the termination date.  The court held that after the cut-off date for spousal
support, the supported spouse would be required to carry the burden of showing
the necessity for continued support and the existence of good faith efforts to
become self-sufficient. (  Id. at p. 372.)

    (3a)  The present situation, however, involves no material change of
circumstances which could justify the trial court's termination of spousal
support. Unlike in Pekar, the wife was unemployed at the time of the original
order for spousal support in 1979 and had been unemployed for many years.  Also,
in contrast to the situation in Sheridan, at the time of the original order the
court did not set forth any requirements or conditions envisioning the wife's
employment.  In 1981, after the husband's request to reduce and then terminate
the wife's spousal support was denied, the wife was briefly and marginally
employed on two occasions.  In 1987, when the husband obtained the order
terminating spousal support, nothing regarding the wife's employment had
materially changed.  She remained in March of 1987 as she was at the time of the
prior order, unemployed and, at best, marginally employable.

   Nor had there been any material change in the husband's ability to pay the
previously ordered spousal support. In fact, the court found that his income had
increased somewhat and his expenses had decreased. The husband still claimed his
expenses exceeded his income.  His overall financial picture remained
essentially the same.

   We recognize that it is in the best interests of both spouses and of society
in general that the supported spouse become self-sufficient. Civil Code section
4801, subdivision (a)(1)(A) expressly directs that in determining the amount and
duration of spousal support, a court is to consider as a factor the supported
spouse's marketable skills and ability to engage in gainful employment. (4)  As
the court observed in In re Marriage of Morrison supra,  20 Cal.3d at page 451,
"It certainly may be inferred that by specifically setting forth this factor,
the Legislature intended that all supported spouses who were able to do so
should seek employment.  It also appears the Legislature expected that courts
would issue orders encouraging these spouses to seek employment and to work
toward becoming self-supporting." (See  In re Marriage of Pekar, supra, 173
Cal.App.3d at p. 371;  In re Marriage of Rosan (1972) 24 Cal.App.3d 885, 896
[101 Cal.Rptr. 295].)



   (3b)  Nonetheless, the trial court here erroneously held that the wife's
"failure to become employable or to seek training after so many years [shifts]
the burden to her to demonstrate her continued need for support in light of her
continued inaction in this regard." (5)  To the contrary, absent stated or
reasonably undisputed prior expectations as to the supported spouse's future
self-sufficiency at the time of the previous support order, after a lengthy
marriage and an appropriate retention of jurisdiction to modify spousal support,
"the burden of justification is on the party seeking termination." (  In re
Marriage of Dennis (1973) 35 Cal.App.3d 279, 285 [110  Cal.Rptr. 619]; see  In
re Marriage of Prietsch & Calhoun, supra, 190 Cal.App.3d at p. 660.)

   (3c)  Inherent in the concept that the supported spouse's failure to at least
make good-faith efforts to become self-sufficient can constitute a change in
circumstances  which could warrant a modification in spousal support is the
premise that the supported spouse be made aware of the obligation to become
self-supporting. It is particularly appropriate here that there should have been
some reasonable advance warning that after an appropriate period of time the
supported spouse was expected to become self-sufficient or face onerous legal
and financial consequences.  There was a lengthy marriage during which the wife
was unemployed except at the outset.  The wife also presumably devoted herself
initially to the development of her husband's earning capacity, rather than to
her own earning capacity, then to wifely and parental duties, and now to the
care of her elderly mother.

   The prerequisite awareness of the judicial expectation of future
self-sufficiency can arise in numerous contexts.  For example, there may be an
explicit statement by the court at the time of its original support order
regarding employment expectations of the supported spouse (  In re Marriage of
Sheridan, supra, 140 Cal.App.3d at pp. 746, 748), a motion and ensuing order
that the supported party "submit to an examination by a vocational training
consultant" ( Civ. Code, § 4801, subd. (e)), a stipulated agreement which
addresses the wife's ability to obtain future employment (see  In re Marriage of
Norvall, supra, 192 Cal.App.3d at p. 1062), or a justified assumption of
continued future employment based on the supported spouse's employment during
the parties' separation and at the time of the original support order which
contained a reasonable termination date for support (see  In re Marriage of
Pekar, supra, 173 Cal.App.3d at p. 368). Here, however, the record does not
indicate that this unemployed 57-year-old wife had any prior awareness that the
court would require her to become self-sufficient.

   The wife may have lacked the personal foresight to more diligently seek
employment prospects eight years earlier in 1979 when the original support order
was fashioned.  Nonetheless, she cannot be penalized now, years later, because
of an apparent lack of judicial foresight in not forcing her to focus on the
drastic legal and financial consequences of the then-unrevealed expectation that
she become self-sufficient.

   Finally, the court's March 10, 1987, order, constituting one giant step-down
in spousal support in approximately four and one-half months from $ 1,100 per
month to nothing, was not "based upon reasonable inferences to  be drawn from
the evidence, [but upon] mere hopes or speculative expectations." (  In re
Marriage of Rosan, supra, 24 Cal.App.3d at p. 896.)

(6)  Even if the court's order had not constituted one abrupt, future cutoff but
had entailed automatically and gradually decreasing support payments at
specified intervals, it "'. . . cannot be based on mere supposition as to what
the supported party's future circumstances might be.  Evidence in the record
must support a reasonable inference that needs will be less with each step-down
and that the spouse can realistically be self-supporting at the time nominal
payments are set to begin.' [Citation]." (  In re Marriage of Prietsch &
Calhoun, supra, 190 Cal.App.3d at p. 656.)

(3d)   The record here is barren of any such evidence.

   The order under review is reversed.  The trial court is directed to reinstate
the spousal support provisions which existed in the original order of August 3,
1979, until any appropriate further order of the trial court.  Appellant is
awarded costs on appeal.


                              69 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             In re the Marriage of MARILYN J. and DANIEL J. BAKER.
          MARILYN J. BAKER, Respondent, v. DANIEL J. BAKER, Appellant.

                                  No. A050041

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FIRST APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION FIVE

            3 Cal. App. 4th 491; 4 Cal. Rptr. 2d 553; 1992 Cal. App.
          LEXIS 137; 92 Cal. Daily Op. Service 1210; 92 Daily Journal
                                    DAR 1948


                           February 7, 1992, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Contra Costa County, No. 267827, James H.
Libbey, Commissioner.

COUNSEL: Casper, Loewenstein & Schwartz, Peter G. Loewenstein and William
Hassler for Appellant.

Burak & Berg and Robert Berg for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by King, Acting P. J., with Low, J., * and Haning, J.,
concurring.)

*   Retired Presiding Justice of the Court of Appeal, First District, sitting
under assignment by the Chairperson of the Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: KING, J.

OPINION

     In this case involving a marriage of less than 10 years' duration in which
the supported spouse's income from future employment was speculative, we hold
that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in refusing to fix a
termination date or a future step-down in the amount of spousal support. We also
hold that it is premature to consider a claim that the order is erroneous
because, without a future change of circumstances, it requires the payment of
spousal support for a period far in excess of the length of the marriage. Even
if there were no change of circumstances, the court possesses jurisdiction in
the future to modify the order if, upon a proper motion, the court finds it
would be  just and equitable to do so.

   FACTS

   Marilyn and Daniel Baker were married on January 7, 1978.  It was the fourth
marriage for Daniel and the second marriage for Marilyn. 1 There were no
children of this marriage and neither party had children by any previous
marriage. The parties first separated on January 15, 1985, but reconciled in
October.  The reconciliation failed, and marital status was dissolved in a
bifurcated proceeding on December 30, 1988.  Marilyn was 51 at the time of the
dissolution and Daniel was 50.  Both parties were in good health.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   For ease
of reference, we will refer to the parties by their first names, Daniel and
Marilyn.  (See In re Marriage of Smith (1990) 225 Cal.App.3d 469, 475, fn. 1
[274 Cal.Rptr. 911].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Prior to the parties' marriage, Marilyn was briefly employed as a real estate
agent. During the marriage, Marilyn was essentially out of the job  market.  She
testified that she gave up her real estate career at Daniel's insistence because
he wanted her to be home when he got home, and he did not want her to work on
weekends.  However, she occasionally used her real estate license to sell
property owned by one or both of the parties.  Marilyn's earnings were nominal
throughout the marriage, ranging from nothing whatsoever in 1981 and 1984 to a
high of $ 31,000 in 1986 earned in connection with the sale of the parties'
home.

   Prior to and during his marriage to Marilyn, Daniel was an insurance broker
in an insurance company in which he had a 20 percent shareholder interest.
Daniel's yearly earnings were routinely in excess of $ 100,000.

   The court heard evidence that the life-style of the parties was "opulent,"
including part ownership and use of a $ 100,000 yacht; vacations to the Bahamas,
Hawaii, and Europe; and the use of BMW and Mercedes Benz automobiles.  The
Lafayette residence in which the parties resided during 5 years of their
marriage was 3,800 square feet on an acre of land and sold for $ 775,000 in
1985.  They employed a housekeeper and a gardener to help maintain the
residence.  Daniel never placed a limit on Marilyn's expenses, and he gave her
more than $ 50,000 worth of jewelry, including three Rolex watches.

   At the time of trial Marilyn was living in a condominium in Lafayette worth
approximately $ 200,000 and driving a Toyota while Daniel was living in a home
in Alamo purchased for $ 550,000 and driving a red BMW, a white BMW and a Jeep
Wagoneer.  Marilyn had returned to work as a real estate agent, and she believed
her long-range future looked good.  However, she testified that her income was
not sufficient to cover her expenses.  Marilyn believed  her earning ability was
hindered because she had been out of the real estate business for so many years,
and during her absence the market had changed and she had lost clients.  In
addition, the market was experiencing "an incredibly quick slowdown" which would
in all likelihood continue.  She declined to predict her future earnings because
there were too many uncertain economic factors to consider.

   The court ordered Daniel to pay Marilyn $ 2,400 monthly spousal support until
"terminated by further order of the court, petitioner or respondent's death, or
petitioner's remarriage, whichever first occurs." The spousal support order was
based on the court's finding that Marilyn had a gross annual income of $ 30,000,
less $ 5,619 in unreimbursed business expenses, as compared with Daniel's gross
annual income of $ 106,000, less $ 18,000 in unreimbursed business expenses.
The court also continued its prior order  requiring Daniel to maintain health
insurance for Marilyn.  This appeal followed. 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   After
Daniel filed his notice of appeal, Marilyn filed a cross-appeal.  Her
cross-appeal was ordered dismissed on January 9, 1991, based on her failure to
procure the record on appeal within the time limits allowed or to apply for
relief from that default.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   ANALYSIS

     Daniel submits that the trial court, as a matter of law, should have
limited the duration of spousal support by either setting a termination date or
providing a "step-down" procedure whereby the level of support would decrease
over time.  In picturesque language, he claims the trial court's order chained
him "to the carcass of this dead marriage for the remainder of his days."

     It is within the broad discretion of the trial judge to fix the amount and
duration of spousal support. ( In re Marriage of Morrison (1978) 20 Cal.3d 437,
454 [143 Cal.Rptr. 139, 573 P.2d 41].) In exercising that discretion, the trial
court must evaluate the factors set out in Civil Code section 4801, subdivision
(a). 3 ( In re Marriage of Smith, supra, 225 Cal.App.3d at p. 479.) These
factors as applicable here include: the earning capacity of each spouse; their
respective needs; the obligations and assets of each; the duration of the
marriage; the time required for the supported spouse to acquire appropriate
education, training and employment; the ability of the supported spouse to
engage in gainful employment; the age and health of the parties; their standard
of living; and any other factors which the court deems just and equitable. "
'[A]n abuse of discretion is shown--i.e.,--where, considering all the relevant
circumstances, the court has "exceeded the bounds of reason" or it can "fairly
be said" that no judge would reasonably make the same order under the same
circumstances.' " (Id. at p. 480, citations omitted.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Unless
otherwise indicated, all further statutory references are to the Civil Code.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      In determining this was not a case warranting a fixed termination date for
spousal support, the trial court made findings which closely parallel the
Supreme Court's language and reasoning in In re Marriage of Morrison, supra, 20
Cal.3d at page 437. 4 In that  case the Supreme Court found an abuse of
discretion when the trial court divested itself of jurisdiction to  award future
spousal support in a 28-year marriage without any evidence in the record that
the wife would be self-supporting. In Morrison, the wife had no significant job
skills or work history and had been able to secure only low-paying, part-time
employment.  Additionally, the record indicated that the wife's ability to
obtain full-time employment might be hampered by medical problems.  The court
emphasized that by terminating jurisdiction, a court "loses forever its power to
extend support payments, no matter what circumstances subsequently develop." (
Id. at p. 454, fn. 11.) Consequently, the lesson of Morrison is that a court
should not "burn its bridges" and fail to retain jurisdiction if the record does
not contain evidence of  the supported spouse's ability to meet his or her
future needs.  (Id. at p. 453.) In a subsequent case, the Supreme Court
emphasized that Morrison was "particularly applicable to lengthy marriages." (
In re Marriage of Vomacka (1984) 36 Cal.3d 459, 467 [204 Cal.Rptr. 568, 683 P.2d
248] [marriage of 11 years held to be of sufficient length to bring it within
reasoning of Morrison].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4
Commissioner James H. Libbey, the judicial officer who tried this case, is one
of the most experienced, knowledgeable, conscientious and competent family law
judicial officers in California.  He has been the judicial officer handling most
family law cases in the Contra Costa County Superior Court at all stages,
including trial, for over 10 years.  His expertise is exemplified by his
statement of decision as it pertains to the issues Daniel raises on appeal:
"Respondent request[s] that the current order include a substantive step-down or
an absolute termination date is denied.  The marriage of the parties is just
under ten years duration. Both are working to capacity.  [Daniel's] gross income
is in excess of three times that of [Marilyn's] (and since separation has varied
from three to nine times that of [Marilyn's] income).  [Marilyn] is not capable
of supporting herself in a condition which even remotely resembles the marital
standard of living.  No evidence has been presented from which the court can
conclude that at some specific point in the future [Marilyn] will become able,
or even better able, to support herself without continuing assistance from
[Daniel].  An order for a substantive step-down or a termination date at this
point could only be based on totally unsupported speculation. The court declines
to so speculate."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Daniel argues there are several reasons why any reliance on the reasoning in
Morrison is misplaced.  Primarily, he emphasizes that the marriage at issue was
less than 10 years and thus was not presumptively a long marriage (§ 4801, subd.
(d)); that the parties were both mature and established adults when they entered
into this marriage; that Marilyn could not be considered a "displaced homemaker"
who sacrificed her career for her husband and children; and that he had already
paid temporary spousal support for more than two years.

   He goes on to argue that if the reasoning of our decision in In re Marriage
of Hebbring (1989) 207 Cal.App.3d 1260 [255 Cal.Rptr. 488] had been followed,
the court would have appropriately exercised its discretion by setting a
termination date for Daniel's obligation to pay spousal support or at least
would have set a step-down where permanent spousal support would decrease over
time.  In Hebbring, we found an abuse of discretion in the trial court's open-
ended retention of jurisdiction over spousal support after a two-year, two-
month childless marriage where the supported spouse was in good health  and had
permanent employment providing enough income for self-support.  (Id. at pp.
1266-1267.) Any reliance on the reasoning in Hebbring is misplaced because the
marriage under scrutiny herein was of much  longer duration than the marriage in
Hebbring and the supported spouse in Hebbring was able to generate enough income
to support herself while Marilyn was only partially self-supporting and had an
uncertain financial future.

     The court possesses broad discretion in balancing all of the applicable
factors in section 4801, subdivision (a), and making a determination whether or
not to divest itself of jurisdiction over spousal support on a certain date.
Considering the myriad of factual circumstances which the trial court must
consider in making its order, it is the rare case, such as Morrison or Hebbring,
where a court is duty bound to exercise its discretion in only one way.
Daniel's arguments on appeal, in effect, ask us to review the evidence anew,
determine the weight to be given each factor listed in section 4801, subdivision
(a), and use our own independent judgment in deciding whether jurisdiction
should be terminated in this case.  This we cannot do.  We are neither
authorized nor inclined to substitute our judgment for the judgment of the trial
court.  Where the issue on appeal is whether the trial court abused its
discretion, the showing necessary for reversal is insufficient if it merely
emphasizes facts which afford an opportunity for a different opinion.  Daniel
must show "that no judge would reasonably make the same order under the same
circumstances." ( In re Marriage of Lopez (1974) 38 Cal.App.3d 93, 114 [113
Cal.Rptr. 58].) Daniel has not done so.

     The pertinent facts were that the parties were married for less than 10
years, during which Marilyn was not expected to and did not work outside the
home because of the life-style of the parties; that after the parties separated
she reentered the work force as a real estate agent but was not producing an
income anywhere near what would be sufficient to assimilate the life-style
enjoyed by the parties during their marriage; and that there was no way to
accurately predict her future earnings because the real estate market was
volatile and subject to economic factors beyond her control.  Meanwhile, Daniel
continued to enjoy the same life-style enjoyed during the marriage; he had a
stable income of long duration; and he had the existing ability to provide such
support.  "Orders for changes in support to take effect in the future must be
based upon reasonable inferences to be drawn from the evidence, not mere hopes
or speculative expectations.  [Citations.]" ( In re Marriage of Rosan (1972) 24
Cal.App.3d 885, 896 [101 Cal.Rptr. 295].) On this record, any order directing
Marilyn to be self-supporting on a certain date would be based on "mere hopes or
speculative expectations." Consequently, the court was not required to "burn its
bridges" by terminating jurisdiction or ordering automatic reductions in spousal
support. Such unknown future developments are better left to modification
proceedings which have been provided for that very purpose.  (Ibid.)

    In further support of his argument that the court abused its discretion,
Daniel relies on a number of cases where the trial court's exercise of
discretion in terminating jurisdiction was upheld.  (See In re Marriage of
Wilson (1988) 201 Cal.App.3d 913 [247 Cal.Rptr. 522] [affirming termination of
jurisdiction after support had been paid for almost five years after a
five-year, ten-month marriage]; In re Marriage of Bukaty (1986) 180 Cal.App.3d
143 [225 Cal.Rptr. 492] [affirming termination of jurisdiction after three years
of spousal support after a nineteen-month marriage]; ( In re Marriage of
Harrison (1986) 179 Cal.App.3d 1216 [225 Cal.Rptr. 234] [affirming termination
of jurisdiction after five-year marriage to wife who was epileptic but
employable].) 5

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   Daniel
also relies upon In re Marriage of Ostler & Smith (1990) 223 Cal.App.3d 33 [272
Cal.Rptr. 560], but mischaracterizes the holding as finding "no fault" with a
spousal support award ordering an automatic step-down at the end of three years.
At the time the court issued its order, the supported spouse had custody of two
minor children, had no job experience as a result of attending to domestic
duties exclusively during the twenty-one-year marriage, and had no job
prospects.  Although the automatic step-down was criticized in the opinion as
being "based on optimistic speculation rather than on solid evidence," the
supported spouse did not appeal from this order. (Id. at p. 50.) Since the court
did not consider and decide the merits of ordering a step- down in spousal
support, Ostler & Smith lends no support to Daniel's position.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    We find these cases of limited value in reviewing the court's exercise of
discretion here.   (See fn. 6.) None of the marriages under review in those
cases could be considered "lengthy" for purposes of invoking the rule of
Morrison. ( In re Marriage of Morrison, supra, 20 Cal.3d at p. 453.) 6  While
the number of years the parties were married herein just fell short of the 10
years necessary to qualify for the statutory presumption that the parties'
marriage was of "long duration" (§ 4801, subd. (d)), the 10-year statutory
minimum is not absolute.  The statute itself points out that "nothing in this
section precludes a court from determining that a marriage of less than 10 years
is a marriage of long duration." (§ 4801, subd. (d).) Consequently, the trial
court could consider the marriage "lengthy" for purposes of concluding that
termination of support on a specific date was unwarranted absent evidence
Marilyn would be self- supporting by that time.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   As we
have seen, the "Morrison rule" precludes an absolute termination of support
without a determination that the supported spouse can adequately meet his or her
financial needs.  However, this rule has been held to apply only to "lengthy"
marriages. (See In re Marriage of Bukaty, supra, 180 Cal.App.3d at p. 149; In re
Marriage of Prietsch & Calhoun (1987) 190 Cal.App.3d 645, 663 [235 Cal.Rptr.
587] [Morrison rule not applicable to short-term marriages].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    But more importantly, Daniel's reliance on these cases ignores the
difference between  an appellate court upholding the exercise of the trial
court's discretion and finding an abuse of that discretion.   "Although patterns
in marital breakups emerge, each couple has such a diverse mix of  circumstances
that trial courts must have broad discretion in weighing and balancing the
various factors in each particular marriage before making a suitable support
award.  ...  Because trial courts have such broad discretion, appellate courts
must act with cautious judicial restraint in reviewing these orders." ( In re
Marriage of Ostler & Smith, supra, 223 Cal.App.3d at p. 50.) All the decisions
relied upon by Daniel found that terminating jurisdiction was within the broad
discretion possessed by the trial court in fixing the duration of spousal
support. None held that as a matter of law it would have been an abuse of
discretion, under the same facts, if the court had decided to make an
alternative order on the issue of spousal support. For this reason, these cases
are of limited usefulness in convincing us that the trial court abused its
discretion.

     We have previously discussed in considerable detail the factors to be
considered by the trial court in considering the issue of spousal support,
particularly the issue of whether to fix a termination date. "Having conducted
the trial, the trial judge knows much more about the parties and what
constitutes an appropriate duration for spousal support than will ever be known
by a later judge called upon to decide a motion for termination of jurisdiction
on a busy domestic relations law and motion calendar.  [P] For this reason the
trial judge must not be reluctant and, indeed, has a duty to fix a termination
date for spousal support where justified, after considering the circumstances
set forth in section 4801, subdivision (a), which are applicable to the case,
and the reasonable inferences to be drawn from the evidence.  Likewise there
should be no reluctance to have the duration for spousal support open-ended
where the evidence and the section 4801, subdivision (a), circumstances in the
case justify it.  If the trial judge believes a termination date is appropriate
but is concerned that future changes in circumstances might require an
extension, the proper  approach is to fix a termination date and reserve
jurisdiction until that date to consider a motion to modify the termination
date. [P] If the trial judge makes what all too often is the typical order, that
is, spousal support of a specified amount payable with no termination date, the
judge hearing a motion to terminate years later may conclude that the trial
judge really intended that spousal support should not end except upon the death
of the parties or the remarriage of the supported spouse. If that is not what
the trial judge intends, he or she owes a duty to the parties, and to the
colleague who will hear a future motion to termination jurisdiction, to say so
in ordering spousal support. Both the parties and any judge hearing future
motions are entitled to know the intentions of the trial judge in ordering
spousal support." (See In re Marriage of Prietsch & Calhoun, supra, 190
Cal.App.3d at pp. 664-666.)

     Here, in his statement of decision the trial judge made it clear that
fixing a termination date or ordering a future step-down would be inappropriate
speculation. The record certainly supports that conclusion.  However,   the
trial judge also carried out his responsibility, as we discussed it in Prietsch
& Calhoun, because his statement of decision also sets forth findings as to the
employment history of the parties, their marital standard of living, their age
and health and, most importantly, the absence of evidence from which a
determination could be made when Marilyn would be fully self-supporting. Daniel
had the burden of proving that Marilyn would become fully or more completely
self-supporting at some point in the future.  He failed to sustain his burden of
proof.  Also, the statement of decision clearly demonstrates that a modification
or termination of the order would be appropriate when economic conditions
improve and Marilyn's real estate employment produces sufficient income to
provide for her own support.

   Finally, we come to Daniel's contention that the failure of the trial court
to fix a  termination date or to provide for a step-down in the amount of
spousal support constituted reversible error because it may require the payment
of temporary and permanent spousal support for a period far in excess of the
length of marriage, if no change in circumstances occur.   "The propriety of an
order modifying spousal support 'rests within the trial court's sound
discretion.  So long as the court exercised its discretion along legal lines,
its decision will not be reversed on appeal if there is substantial evidence to
support it.  [Citations.] Reversal requires a clear showing of abuse of
discretion. [Citations.] A motion for modification of spousal support may only
be granted if there has been a material change of circumstances since the last
order.  [Citation.] Otherwise, dissolution cases would have no finality and
unhappy former spouses could bring repeated actions for modifications with no
burden of showing a justification to change the order.  Litigants 'are entitled
to attempt, with some degree of certainty, to reorder their finances and
[life-style] in reliance upon the finality of the decree.' [Citations.] Absent a
change of circumstances, a motion for modification is nothing more than an
impermissible collateral attack on a prior final order." ( In re Marriage of
Smith, supra, 225 Cal.App.3d at p. 480.)

   Thus, the reason for the change of circumstances rule is to preclude
relitigation of the same facts.   However,  there can be cases where there have
been no change of circumstances yet it would be just and equitable to modify an
existing order.  Although the specification of " '[a]ny other factors which [it]
deems just and equitable' " has appeared in section 4801, subdivision (a), since
its enactment as part of the Family Law Act, it was not utilized as the basis
for an appellate decision for 20 years.  (See In re Marriage of Smith, supra,
225 Cal.App.3d at p. 485; In re Marriage of Ostler & Smith, supra, 223
Cal.App.3d at p. 48.) No matter how detailed the statutory scheme for marital
dissolution becomes, orders issued for spousal support must be and remain just
and equitable.

    Under limited circumstances, trial courts can exercise their broad
discretion to modify or terminate a support order after weighing the
circumstances of the parties and the factors contained in section 4801,
subdivision (a), especially where, from the evidence, the court finds "factors
which it deems just and equitable." In a recent concurring opinion, Justice
Patricia Benke stated, "it is conceivable the lengthy duration of support, even
if examined superficially, will be clearly unjust in light of the short duration
of the marriage and will alone qualify as a changed circumstance under Civil
Code section 4801, subdivision (a)(10)." ( In re Marriage of Heistermann (1991)
234 Cal.App.3d 1195, 1205 [286 Cal.Rptr. 127].) Whether this truly constitutes a
change of circumstances, or will be an exception to the change of circumstances
rule, we leave for another day when that issue is properly before us for
decision.  In this appeal, the issue is premature and not ripe for decision.  It
is gross speculation to assume that circumstances will not change before it
would be just and equitable to modify the order for spousal support based upon
the order's duration alone.

   Daniel also challenges the trial court's order requiring him to maintain
Marilyn's health benefits.  He does so on identical grounds as his challenge to
the trial court's retention of jurisdiction over the issue of spousal support.
By parity of reasoning, we also reject this claim.

   The judgment is affirmed.

   Low, J., * and Haning, J., concurred.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*   Retired
Presiding Justice of the Court of Appeal, First District, sitting under
assignment by the Chairperson of the Judicial Council.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -




                              70 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            In re the Marriage of PATRICIA and RONALD T. HURTIENNE.
            RONALD T.  HURTIENNE, Appellant, v. PATRICIA HURTIENNE,
                                   Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 61024

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Five

            126 Cal. App. 3d 374; 178 Cal. Rptr. 748; 1981 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2424


                                December 3, 1981

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Los Angeles County, No. D 991569, Hugh E.
Macbeth, Jr., Temporary Judge. *

*   Pursuant to Constitution, article VI, section 21.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1a) (1b) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 63 -- Support of Other Party --
Guiding Considerations -- Husband's Unemployment.  --In an interlocutory decree
in a marriage dissolution proceeding, the trial court erred in ordering the
husband to pay spousal support of $ 400 per month, where the husband had been
discharged shortly before trial from his long-term employment without fault on
his part, and where there was no showing that he had any other source of income.
The trial court should have determined all of the other issues involved in the
dissolution proceeding and then continued the issue of spousal support for 90
days or any other reasonable time to permit the facts concerning the husband's
good faith attempt to find employment to materialize.  Though the decree
contained a 30-day delay in commencement of the support payments, such delay was
not realistic under the facts of the case.

(2) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 63 -- Support of Other Party --
Guiding Considerations -- Husband's Unemployment.  --Though an award of alimony
and child support may be based on the husband's ability to earn as distinguished
from his actual income, the rule is applied only when it appears from the record
that there is a deliberate attempt on the part of the husband to avoid his
financial family responsibilities by refusing to seek or accept gainful
employment, wilfully refusing to secure or take a job, deliberately not applying
himself to his business, intentionally depressing his income to an artificial
low, or intentionally leaving his employment to go into another business.

(3) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 54 -- Division of Community and
Quasi-community Property -- Additional Award or Offset for Purposes of
Restitution -- As Additional Spousal Support. --In dividing the community
property of the parties in an interlocutory decree of dissolution of marriage,
the trial court did not err in granting the wife an interest-free option to
purchase the interest of the husband in the family residence at a future date,
without provision for appreciation, where the denial of interest on the deferred
payment was ordered as additional spousal support, where there was evidence the
wife could live more economically in the home than she could if she rented, and
where the husband was then unemployed and unable to make cash support payments.

(4) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 53 -- Division of Community and
Quasi-community Property -- Award of Particular Asset to One Party to Effect
Equal Division -- Clarity of Decree.  --In a marriage dissolution proceeding,
the trial court erred in connection with an award of the husband's fully vested
pension.  It appeared that the court intended to award the entire retirement to
the husband and offset it with awards of other assets to the wife, but the
interlocutory decree was not clear concerning disposition of the pension fund if
the wife did not elect to exercise an option granted her in the decree to
purchase the husband's interest in the family residence.

(5) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 52 -- Division of Community and
Quasi-community Property -- Valuation -- Arbitrariness.  --In a marriage
dissolution proceeding, the record did not establish arbitrariness in the trial
court's valuation in the interlocutory decree of community assets consisting of
a leasehold interest in a cabin and a pickup truck. There was conflicting
evidence on the cabin's value and the court's valuation was between the high and
low valuations. The truck, valued at $ 2,000, was purchased for $ 4,800, and the
court disbelieved the husband's testimony that it was worth only $ 1,000.

COUNSEL: Irsfeld, Irsfeld & Younger, James J. Waldorf and Michael R. Younger for
Appellant.

Richard N. Deyo for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Hastings, J., with Stephens, Acting P. J., and Ashby, J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: HASTINGS

OPINION

     This is an appeal by Ronald T. Hurtienne (Ronald) from an interlocutory
judgment of dissolution of marriage dissolving a marriage of approximately 28
years to Patricia Hurtienne (Patricia).   Ronald, who was unemployed through no
fault of his own at the date of trial, appeals the award of spousal support to
Patricia based solely on his ability to earn. He also challenges an option given
by the court to Patricia to purchase the community residence at a future date
without provision for appreciation, and distribution of assets at values that he
claims are unsupported by the evidence.

   There were two grown children of the marriage. The community property of the
parties included (1) a family residence located in Norwalk, California,
stipulated to have a net fair market value of $ 60,000 at  time of trial; (2) a
leasehold interest in a cabin located in Saugus, California, the value of which
was disputed; (3) a pension plan with Rockwell International, fully vested,
entitling Ronald to benefits depending upon his date of retirement, between age
55 and 65; 1 and (4) other miscellaneous assets not involved in this appeal.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Ronald
was 53 at time of trial and had no income from the pension plan.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Ronald had been discharged the Friday prior to trial by Rockwell
International where he had been a training quality control engineer.  He was
earning at time of discharge a gross salary of $ 2,146 per month.  The
termination was due to a reduction in personnel.

   The Spousal Support Issue

   The interlocutory decree ordered Ronald to pay spousal support of $ 400 per
month commencing on April 1, 1980.  Included in the award was the following
provision: "Petitioner having been terminated from his long-term employment by
Rockwell on January 18, 1980, without cause on the part of petitioner, the
previous temporary order is in effect only through the spousal support
installment payable on February 15, 1980." Prior to trial, the court had ordered
pendente lite spousal support in the sum of $ 375 per month. 2 The court handed
down its memorandum of intended decision on February 14, 1980, and it contained
the quoted provision.  The interlocutory decree was signed on April 28, 1980.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   This sum
was payable in two (2) equal installments every month.  The February 15th
payment would cover 15 days.  No spousal support was ordered for the month of
March.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   No reason is given by the court for the 30-day pause in spousal support. We
assume that the court, through its intended decision of  February 14, 1980, was
impliedly informing Ronald that he had 30 days to obtain employment, thus
justifying the $ 400 award order. 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   There is
nothing in the record to suggest that Ronald had other income that could be
tapped to pay the award.  This opinion applies only to a situation where spousal
support payments can be met by the wages of the paying spouse.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Ronald argues that the spousal support award based solely on his ability to
earn rather than on his actual income when he was discharged through no fault of
his own, was error.  He relies on Philbin v. Philbin (1971) 19 Cal.App.3d 115,
121 [96 Cal.Rptr. 408], where the court stated: "While it is true that an award
of alimony and child support may be based upon the husband's ability to earn as
distinguished from his actual income, the rule seems to be applied only when it
appears from the record that there is a deliberate attempt on the part of the
husband to avoid his financial family responsibilities by refusing to seek or
accept gainful employment [citation], wilfully refusing to secure or take a job
[citations], deliberately not applying himself to his business [citation],
intentionally depressing his income to an artificial low [citations], or
intentionally leaving his employment to go into another business [citation]."

   Although we are convinced that the Philbin rule is the law today, it is still
argued by some, including Patricia, that it is not the final word on the issue
and that the court in some instances may base an award of spousal support solely
on the paying spouse's ability to earn. Usually cited in support of this
argument is a comment by Justice Tobriner in Meagher v. Meagher (1961) 190
Cal.App.2d 62 [11 Cal.Rptr. 650], where in writing the opinion for the court he
stated: "Yet the cases have frequently and uniformly held that the court may
base its decision on the husband's ability to earn, rather than his current
earnings. If the court were limited to the momentary current earnings of a
husband, particularly one who was engaged in a seasonal industry or whose
earnings had widely fluctuated, the court would get a distorted view of his
financial potential." (190 Cal.App.2d at p. 64.)

   When viewed in the proper context of the Meagher case we are satisfied
Justice Tobriner's statement is consistent with the law as enunciated in Philbin
.  After noting that  the husband in Meagher had quit a well-paying job in a
family-owned corporation immediately after the separation of the parties for a
much lower paying job, the opinion states: "He apparently terminated his
favorable association with that  corporation at the very time he deserted his
family and sought to shed his family responsibilities.  In view of those facts
the trial court could properly conclude that the 'potential of this man' and his
apparent 'substantial interest' in the family corporation indicated his ability
to meet the awarded payments.  The court could evaluate the peculiar coincidence
of salary reduction in the family-owned firm and the marital separation." (190
Cal.App.2d at pp. 63-64.) It thus appears that, in supporting the trial court's
award of spousal support, the Meagher opinion took into consideration the
husband's own voluntary course of conduct that reduced his apparent ability to
meet his financial family responsibilities.  In such a situation the court is
not in error in applying the ability to earn standard.

   Subsequent cases have relied upon Philbin, namely, In re Marriage of Reese
(1977) 73 Cal.App.3d 120 [140 Cal.Rptr. 589], and In re Marriage of Rome (1980)
109 Cal.App.3d 961 [167 Cal.Rptr. 351]. In Reese, the court applied the rule to
child support. Husband, a musician, was averaging only $ 250 a month and the
court noted that there was no evidence to show that he was seeking to avoid his
family responsibility.  Evidence disclosed that his earning power was limited by
economic problems facing the entertainment field at that time.  The award of $
195 per month child support from an average salary of $ 250 per month was held
to be an abuse of discretion without a showing that he was intentionally trying
to avoid his family responsibilities.

   We see a different twist to the rule in In re Marriage of Rome, supra. The
appellate court reversed a reduction of spousal support because the trial court
had not permitted the wife to invoke the Philbin rule.  The trial court had
accepted at face value the husband's explanations as to why he was not working.
The wife had requested the court to continue the matter for 90 days so that the
parties would have a clearer picture of the husband's employment situation.  Her
request was denied.  The opinion held that the court should have granted the
90-day extension so that evidence of husband's good or bad intentions could be
more easily determined.  In other words, had wife been able to establish that
husband was seeking to avoid his financial responsibilities, the reduction of
the award from $ 1,000 a month to $ 100 a month would have been an abuse of
discretion.

    In our present case, a realistic approach to the problem would have been
similar to that suggested in Rome.  The trial court should have determined all
of the other issues involved in the dissolution proceeding  and then continued
the issue of spousal support for 90 days or any other reasonable time to permit
the facts concerning Ronald's good faith attempt to find employment to
materialize.  The court perhaps thought it was doing this when it gave Ronald 30
days of suspended payments before the $ 400 per month spousal support commenced.
However, we do not believe this delay was realistic under the facts of this
case.  Ronald received notice of the court's intentions only through its
memorandum of intended decision.  If Ronald, acting in good faith, had not found
employment in 30 days, the spousal support automatically commenced even though
Ronald had no other income to pay the award.  The better approach would have
been to make no spousal support award and to order the parties back for a
Philbin hearing.

   Division of the Community Property

   (1) The trial court placed the family residence in tenancy in common.  The
judgment then provided: "Respondent (Patricia) is granted an option to purchase
the interest of petitioner (Ronald) therein . . . payable in full without
interest on or before September 1, 1981.  The forebearance of immediate receipt
of said sum by petitioner, and the denial of interest on the deferred payment
thereof, is ordered by way of additional spousal support payable by petitioner
to respondent."  Ronald's objection is the delayed option given to Patricia by
this provision.  He claims that since real property is increasing at a rate that
far exceeds the increase in the general cost of living, Patricia has an
additional monetary benefit which results in an unequal division of the
community property as of the date of judgment.  Ronald has overlooked the fact
that the denial of interest on the deferred payment was ordered as additional
spousal support. There was testimony that Patricia would have had to pay rent of
approximately $ 400 to $ 450 per month if she did not have the home to live in.
There was evidence that she could live more economically in the home than she
could if she rented.  In view of Ronald's inability to pay spousal support
because of his unemployment, the court did not err as a matter of law in
permitting a portion of spousal support to be paid in such a manner.  Although
earlier in this opinion we reversed the $ 400 per month portion of the spousal
support award for the reasons stated, we conclude this form of partial spousal
support award was permissible.  This portion of the order will not work the
hardship on Ronald that the cash award would do if he remained unemployed. We
are satisfied under the facts of this case that there was a sufficient economic
interest involved that supports this portion of the court's order.

    (2)  Ronald next maintains that the award of the fully vested pension, owed
him by Rockwell International, was uncertain.  In this contention, he is
correct.  The court provided that Patricia could apply her interest of $
8,193.50 towards the purchase price of the family residence should she elect to
exercise the option.  If, however, she did not elect to purchase the family
residence, the interlocutory decree provides that the property would be sold and
the proceeds divided in proportions necessary to equalize the distribution of
the community property after taking into consideration reimbursements for taxes,
mortgage payments, etc., as provided in In re Marriage of Epstein (1979) 24
Cal.3d 76 [154 Cal.Rptr. 413, 592 P.2d 1165]. It would appear that the court
meant to award the entire retirement to Ronald and offset this with other assets
to Patricia, but this is only clear if Patricia exercises the option to purchase
the family residence. The interlocutory decree is silent concerning the pension
fund if Patricia does not purchase the property.  On remand, this oversight can
easily be corrected.

   (3)  Ronald's final argument is that the trial court arbitrarily placed a
value of $ 15,000 on the leasehold interest in the cabin in Bouquet Canyon, and
$ 2,000 on the 1972 Dodge pickup truck. This is incorrect.  There was
conflicting testimony on the cabin's value.  The high valuation was $ 22,500 and
the low valuation was $ 10,000.  Under these facts the court's valuation was not
in error.  The same reasoning applies to the value placed on the Dodge pickup
truck. It was purchased for $ 4,800 and the court disbelieved Ronald's testimony
that it was worth only $ 1,000.

   The judgment concerning the spousal support is reversed.  On remand, the
court shall modify the judgment concerning Ronald's retirement fund.  In all
other respects, the judgment is affirmed.  Both parties to stand their own costs
of appeal.


                              71 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In re the Marriage of DARLAINE A. and ROGER EARL THORNTON.
            DARLAINE A. THORNTON BRIONES, Respondent, v. ROGER EARL
                              THORNTON, Appellant.

                                  No. B149529.

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SECOND APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION SEVEN

          95 Cal. App. 4th 251; 115 Cal. Rptr. 2d 380; 2002 Cal. App.
             LEXIS 359; 2002 Cal. Daily Op. Service 469; 2002 Daily
                                Journal DAR 597


                           January 16, 2002, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:      APPEAL from the order of the Superior Court for the County
of Los Angeles, Douglas M. Haigh, Temporary Judge. ** Super. Ct. No. KD 022658.

**   Pursuant to California Constitution, art. VI, § 21.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports

(1a) (1b) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 73--Spousal Support--Failure of
Stipulated Judgment to Provide for Termination on Remarriage of Supported Spouse
--Termination by Operation of Law.  --The trial court erred in entering a
postjudgment order requiring a former husband to continue paying spousal support
following his former wife's remarriage. Although the stipulated judgment of
dissolution did not state that support would terminate on the former wife's
remarriage, Fam. Code, § 4337, provides that spousal support terminates on the
remarriage of the supported spouse except as otherwise agreed in writing, and
there was no such written agreement. The former husband's failure to pursue an
earlier motion to modify the judgment did not constitute a waiver of § 4337 or
result in an estoppel to assert it. Because statutory provisions terminating
spousal support on remarriage are self-executing and are automatically included
in support judgments unless specifically waived by the parties, no court action
is required to terminate support upon a wife's remarriage. Also, the fact that a
stipulated judgment contains a list of terminating factors that does not include
remarriage of the supported spouse does not waive the statutory termination of
support on remarriage.

   [See 11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (9th ed. 1990) Husband and Wife, § 276.]

(2) Statutes § 20--Construction--Judicial Function.  --Construction of a statute
and its applicability to a given situation are matters of law to be determined
by the court.

COUNSEL: Law Offices of Rocky L. Crabb and Rocky L. Crabb for Appellant.

Law Office of Gary W. Kearney and Gary W. Kearney for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Perluss, J., with Johnson, Acting P. J., and Woods, J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: PERLUSS

OPINION

     PERLUSS, J.

   Appellant Roger Earl Thornton (husband) appeals from a postjudgment order
requiring him to continue spousal support to his former wife, respondent
Darlaine A. Thornton Briones (wife), after her remarriage on March 24, 2000.
Husband argues  Family Code section 4337 1 terminated his spousal support
obligation by operation of law upon wife's remarriage. We agree with husband and
reverse the order of the trial court.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Family
Code section 4337 provides: "Except as otherwise agreed by the parties in
writing, the obligation of a party under an order for the support of the other
party terminates upon the death of either party or the remarriage of the other
party." Unless otherwise indicated, all further statutory references are to the
Family Code.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

   Husband and wife were married in 1977 and separated in 1994. The parties'
stipulated judgment for dissolution of marriage was filed with the court on May
14, 1997. Judgment was entered the same day. The stipulated judgment provides in
part: "The Court finds that Respondent [husband] shall pay to Petitioner [wife]
for her support the sum of $ 400.00 per month as and for spousal support,
payable one-half on the first and one-half on the fifteenth day of each month,
commencing May 15, 1997, and continuing until further Order of the Court, death
of either party, or for a period until March 1, 2003, whichever first occurs.
Said spousal support shall be non-modifiable."

   Two days after judgment was entered, husband filed a motion to stay entry of
judgment (the 1997 motion), supported by a declaration from his trial counsel,
contending that the omission of wife's remarriage as an event terminating
spousal support was inadvertent. Wife opposed the motion and filed a declaration
stating, inter alia, "the terminating factor on spousal support stated only that
it terminates on the death of either party, and a specified date in the year
2003,  but there were no other terminating factors." Wife's declaration also
stated that husband had signed the stipulated judgment without complaint, and
"[t]herefore, the issue of terminating on my remarriage never came up."

   For reasons not apparent from the record, the parties did not appear at the
hearing on the 1997 motion, and it was taken off calendar. Husband paid spousal
support pursuant to the stipulated judgment until wife remarried on March 24,
2000. Shortly after wife's remarriage, husband informed her he intended to
terminate spousal support payments effective April 1, 2000. Wife objected, and
husband filed an application for an order to terminate spousal support. Wife
filed an opposition to the application, arguing that the parties had not
intended spousal support to terminate upon her remarriage and husband had waived
the provisions of section 4337.

   A hearing on husband's application was held on February 21, 2001. The trial
court issued its ruling on February 23, 2001, denying husband's application to
terminate support and awarding attorney fees to wife. Husband filed a timely
appeal.

   DISCUSSION

   1. The Standard of Review

     This case requires us to construe section 4337 as it applies to the facts
of this case.   "[C]onstruction of a statute and its applicability to  a given
situation are matters of law to be determined by the court." ( Estate of Madison
(1945) 26 Cal. 2d 453, 456 [159 P.2d 630]; see also Robinson v. Grossman (1977)
57 Cal. App. 4th 634, 642, fn. 6 [67 Cal. Rptr. 2d 380] ["construction of
statutes presents an issue of pure law, and thus we review the matter de
novo"].) 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   The basic
facts relating to the stipulated judgment and the 1997 motion are essentially
undisputed. No more is necessary for us to resolve the legal issues raised
regarding the applicability of section 4337. We do note that each party claims
the other has misstated additional factual information in the appellate briefs.
Our own review of the record indicates that neither side has taken significantly
greater liberties with the facts than the other.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     2. Spousal Support Terminates Upon the Supported Spouse's Remarriage Absent
a Written Agreement to the Contrary

     Section 4337 provides: "Except as otherwise agreed by the parties in
writing, the obligation of a party under an order for the support of the other
party terminates upon the death of either party or the remarriage of the other
party." THIS SECTION MEANS WHAT IT SAYS: A written agreement to waive its
provisions must be specific and express. An agreement making support
"non-modifiable" is not the same as an agreement making support non-terminable
upon the statutorily specified events. "If the parties intend that support is to
be 'non-terminable for any reason whatsoever,' they must say so in their
agreement. No particular words are required. [Citation.] On the other hand,
silence will not do. [Citation.] Language stating that the support is not
modifiable also will not do." ( In re Marriage of Glasser (1986) 181 Cal. App.
3d 149, 151 [226 Cal. Rptr. 229] (hereinafter Glasser).)

   3. Husband Did Not Waive Section 4337 by Abandoning   the 1997 Motion

   Because the parties did not agree otherwise in writing, husband contends
section 4337 terminated his support obligation by operation of law upon wife's
remarriage. Wife admits there was no express waiver, but argues section 4337 may
be impliedly waived by conduct, as well as by a writing. She contends husband
effectively waived section 4337's provision for termination of support upon
remarriage by allowing the 1997 motion to be taken off calendar without
obtaining a ruling. Wife's waiver-by-conduct argument is refuted by the express
language of section 4337 itself, which unambiguously requires that any waiver be
"agreed by the parties in writing." (Italics added.)

   Wife also asserts that, by failing to obtain a ruling on the 1997 motion,
husband intentionally "induce[d wife] to conclude his acquiescence to the
support continuing after her remarriage" and should therefore be estopped from
asserting his rights under section 4337 now that wife has remarried and  "been
irreparably harmed." Wife's argument is unsupported by any reference to the
record. In fact, the record gives no hint as to the reasons for husband's
failure to obtain a ruling on the motion; nor does it contain any facts
establishing that wife reasonably believed such failure constituted a waiver of
section 4337. Thus, wife has not met her burden of establishing estoppel or
waiver. (See In re Marriage of Fell (1997) 55 Cal. App. 4th 1058, 1065 [64 Cal.
Rptr. 2d 522] [party claiming waiver of statutory rights must prove it by clear
and convincing evidence].)

   Indeed, husband may well have permitted his motion to go off calendar because
it was unnecessary: Even without a provision specifically terminating spousal
support on wife's remarriage, there is nothing in the stipulated judgment that
reasonably can be said to constitute a written waiver of section 4337. (See
Glasser, supra, 181 Cal. App. 3d at p. 151.) Statutory provisions terminating
spousal support on remarriage are self-executing and are automatically included
in support judgments unless specifically waived by the parties. Therefore, no
court action is required to terminate support  upon wife's remarriage. ( Stucker
v. Katz (1949) 92 Cal. App. 2d 843, 844 [207 P.2d 879].) Because there was no
such waiver in the stipulated judgment, there was nothing for husband to
correct. Neither the filing of the 1997 motion nor its removal from the court's
calendar had any effect on the applicability of section 4337 to the support
order.

   4. The Trial Court Erred in Relying on In re Marriage of Nicolaides

   The order denying husband's application to terminate spousal support states:
"This court finds that the agreement is a fully integrated agreement; that the
omission of the usual spousal support language about termination on remarriage
is significant and not a mere oversight; see [In re] Marriage of Nicolaides
(1974) 39 Cal. App..[3d] 192 [114 Cal. Rptr. 56] [(hereafter Nicolaides)]. The
parties bargained for the agreement and it should be upheld." Husband contends
this was error because the rationale underlying the decision in Nicolaides has
been eliminated by statue, as explained in Glasser, supra, 181 Cal. App. 3d 149.
We agree.

   In Nicolaides, supra, 39 Cal. App. 3d 192, the parties entered into an
"integrated marital settlement agreement" providing for spousal support payments
for a period of five years. The agreement contained no provision for termination
of support on the death or remarriage of either party. ( Id. at p. 196.)
Unbeknownst to the wife, the husband obtained an interlocutory judgment of
divorce providing for spousal support for the agreed-upon period " 'unless
terminated at an earlier time by death or remarriage . . . .' " ( Id. at p. 197
.) The wife remarried and sought to amend the judgment to  conform to the
settlement agreement. (Ibid.) The husband argued that "even if the provision for
early termination of payments had not been added to the interlocutory decree his
obligation to make support payments automatically terminated by operation of law
upon wife's remarriage" ( id. at p. 200) pursuant to Civil Code section 139, an
earlier version of what is now Family Code section 4337.  3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   In 1970,
Civil Code section 139 was repealed and reenacted as Civil Code section 4801,
subdivision (b). It was subsequently repealed and reenacted without substantial
change as Family Code section 4337.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The Court of Appeal held "[b]ecause the instant agreement expressly states
that its purpose is to make an integrated agreement to effect a final and
complete settlement of property and support rights, that except as therein
provided each party releases the other from all claims for support and
maintenance, that the parties intend to settle all aspects of their marital
rights and waive their right to modify the agreement, and because it is
expressly made binding on the heirs and representatives of the parties, we
conclude that the bargain for support and property division was inseparable and
integrated." ( Nicolaides, supra, 39 Cal. App. 3d at p. 200.) Because the
agreement was integrated, the Court of Appeal reviewed the agreement as a whole
and concluded " 'it was the definite intention of the parties that the payments
. . . should continue for the full 128 months agreed upon, no matter what
happened.' " ( Id. at p. 202.) Therefore, "the trial court was not free to add a
qualifying term to the provisions for support." ( Id. at p. 200.)

   In Glasser, supra, 181 Cal. App. 3d 149, Division Five of this district
recognized that Nicolaides, supra, 39 Cal. App. 3d 192, no  longer correctly
states the law because "[t]he import of integrated agreements has been
eliminated by the Legislature" in former Civil Code 4811, subdivision (b),
continued without substantive change as Family Code section 3590. Section 3590
provides, in part, "The provisions of an agreement for support of either party
shall be deemed to be separate and severable from the provisions of the
agreement relating to property." In light of this statute, "[t]he analysis
followed in . . . Nicolaides in which the agreement is scrutinized to find
intent that the spousal support was part of the consideration for the transfer
of property, is no longer appropriate to answer the question of whether the
parties 'otherwise agreed' under [section 4337], preventing termination of
support due to remarriage." ( Glasser, supra, 181 Cal. App. 3d at p. 152.)
Accordingly, the trial court erred in applying the Nicolaides "integrated
agreement" analysis to find an implied waiver of section 4337.

    5. A List of Terminating Factors Not Including Remarriage of the Supported
Spouse Does Not Waive the Statutory Termination of Support Upon Such Remarriage

   Finally, wife argues that Glasser, supra, 181 Cal. App. 3d 149, does not
apply when the parties' agreement contains a list of terminating factors not
including remarriage. 4 This argument, however, calling to mind the venerable
maxim expressio unius est exclusio alterius, is contrary to the express language
of section 4337.  5 If the parties wish to make a written agreement to waive the
remarriage provision of section 4337, they must at a minimum expressly state
that the supported spouse's remarriage will not terminate spousal support.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   Wife
cites In re Marriage of Bennett (1983) 144 Cal. App. 3d 1022 [193 Cal. Rptr.
113] in support of this argument. We agree with Glasser, supra, 181 Cal. App. 3d
149, that Bennett applies only in the limited situation of a former husband
seeking to end his support obligations by "circumventing the settlement
agreement" "through narrow definitions of the terms 'modification' and
'termination,' " rather than in situations involving the "remarriage" provision
of section 4337. (Glasser, at pp. 152-153.)
5   Indeed, the rule that expression of one thing excludes all others supports
our decision when applied to section 4337: By expressly stating the parties may
waive the statute's provisions by "written agreement," the Legislature
necessarily precluded the alternate forms of waiver urged by wife in this case.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The stipulated judgment in this case does not include the word "remarriage"
and does not mention section 4337. It does not state that terminating events it
does include (death or the date of March 1, 2003) are the only events that can
terminate spousal support, nor does it state spousal support is
"non-terminable," as opposed to "non-modifiable." Accordingly, the stipulated
judgment cannot possibly satisfy wife's burden of proving, by clear and
convincing evidence, a written agreement to waive the supporting spouse's
statutory right to cease spousal support upon remarriage of the supported
spouse. (See In re Marriage of Fell, supra, 55 Cal. App. 4th at p. 1065
[enforcement of statutory rights is favored and doubtful cases should be decided
against waiver].)

   DISPOSITION

    The February 23, 2001 order denying husband's application for an order
terminating spousal support and awarding attorney fees to wife is reversed. The
matter is remanded to the trial court with directions to find husband's spousal
support obligation terminated by operation of law  on March 24, 2000, to order
wife to reimburse husband for spousal support payments made after that date, and
to order wife to reimburse husband for payments of  attorney fees pursuant to
the February 23, 2001 order.  6 Wife's request for attorney fees on appeal is
denied. The parties shall bear their own costs on appeal.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   The trial
court, of course, retains discretion to order the reimbursement payments to be
spread over a reasonable period of time.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Johnson, Acting P. J., and Woods, J., concurred.


                              72 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             In re the Marriage of ELAINE TONG and RICHARD SAMSON.
               ELAINE TONG SAMSON, Respondent, v. RICHARD SAMSON,
                                   Appellant.

                                    B224899

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SECOND APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION FOUR

          197 Cal. App. 4th 23; 127 Cal. Rptr. 3d 857; 2011 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 867


                              July 5, 2011, Filed

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY: Modified by In re Marriage of Samson, 2011 Cal. App. LEXIS
922 (Cal. App. 2d Dist., July 18, 2011)

PRIOR-HISTORY:
   APPEAL from an order of the Superior Court of Los Angeles County, No.
BD482622, Elia Weinbach, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(2) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 61--Spousal Support?Allocation of
Severance Pay.--Where there was no evidence in the record that in 2008 either
party was aware that the ex-husband would be terminated or receive a lump-sum
severance pay a year later, the family court erred in accepting the ex-wife's
assumption that the lump-sum severance pay in its entirety was compensation
subject to the Ostler & Smith percentage in the month when it was received.

   [Kirkland et al., Cal. Family Law Practice and Procedure (2010) ch. 51, §
51.24; Cal. Forms of Pleading and Practice (2011) ch. 225, Dissolution of
Marriage: Spousal Support, § 225.94; 2 Witkin, Cal. Evidence (4th ed. 2000)
Demonstrative, Experimental, and Scientific Evidence, § 52; 2 Witkin & Epstein,
Cal. Criminal Law (3d ed. 2000) Crimes Against Public Peace and Welfare, § 209.]

COUNSEL: Hermes & Glavin, Adam R. Taylor; John L. Dodd & Associates and John L.
Dodd for Appellant.

Law Offices of Marjorie G. Fuller, Marjorie G. Fuller, Lisa R. Wiley; Law
Offices of Robert N. Kipper and Robert N. Kipper for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Epstein, P. J., with Willhite and Manella, JJ., concurring.

OPINION BY: Epstein

OPINION

    EPSTEIN, P. J.--This is an appeal from an order denying appellant Richard
Samson's motion for modification of temporary spousal support. We reverse to the
extent that the family court incorrectly allocated Richard's1 severance pay to a
single month for purposes of a provision in the parties' stipulated support
order requiring Richard to pay respondent Elaine Tong Samson 35 percent of his
monthly compensation in excess of $25,000. This percentage-based component of
the stipulated order, modeled after In re Marriage of Ostler & Smith (1990) 223
Cal.App.3d 33 [272 Cal. Rptr. 560] (Ostler & Smith), was intended to apply to
Richard's variable monthly income from commissions, not to a one-time lump-sum
severance pay. We affirm in all other respects.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   We follow
the common practice in family law cases of referring to the parties by their
first names for the sake of clarity.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL SUMMARY

   The parties were married in 1985 and separated in 2007. Elaine filed a
petition for dissolution and sought temporary spousal support in March 2008.
Richard, a mutual funds wholesaler, argued that spousal support should be based
on his base salary with an Ostler & Smith adjustment  for sales commissions he
received above his base salary. In May 2008, the court ordered Richard to pay
Elaine $15,031 per month and 35 percent of "all his compensation in excess of
$45,000 during that month." In June 2008, Richard  sought a modification due to
the decrease of his monthly commissions. Based on terms proposed by Richard, the
parties stipulated that he would pay Elaine $9,059 per month and 35 percent of
"all his compensation in excess of $25,000 for each month."

   In June 2009, Richard was advised that he would be laid off from his job of
28 years. He was terminated effective July 10, 2009, and received a severance
package of $309,700.81 in September 2009. In March 2011, Richard filed an order
to show cause (OSC) seeking clarification of the effect of severance pay on the
support order, as well as a termination of temporary spousal support based on
Elaine's cohabitation with a gentleman. The family court denied the OSC. Richard
was charged with various arrearages, including $99,645.28 out of the severance
pay. This timely appeal followed.2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   An order
regarding payment of temporary spousal support is directly appealable. (See In
re Marriage of Skelley (1976) 18 Cal.3d 365, 368 [134 Cal. Rptr. 197, 556 P.2d
297].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

DISCUSSION

I

   Richard asked the family court to treat his severance pay as income to be
spread over 13 months. His request was based on In re Marriage of Stephenson
(1995) 39 Cal.App.4th 71, 75, 82 [46 Cal. Rptr. 2d 8] (Stephenson), where the
family court treated $52,000 in severance pay the husband received upon his
early retirement as the equivalent of eight and one-half months of salary.
Elaine distinguished Stephenson on procedural grounds because the husband in
that case brought an OSC before he retired and thus sought a prospective
modification of spousal support. (Id. at p. 75.) She argued that, since Richard
brought the OSC months after he was laid off, he was in effect seeking to
retroactively modify his spousal support obligation. The court agreed with
Elaine that Richard was seeking a retroactive modification of temporary spousal
support and denied the OSC because such a retroactive modification is
impermissible. (See Fam. Code,3 § 3603; In re Marriage of Murray (2002) 101
Cal.App.4th 581, 596 [124 Cal. Rptr. 2d 342] (Murray).) This was incorrect.
Richard did not seek to retroactively lower the base monthly support of $9,059
or the 35 percent assessment on his compensation in excess of $25,000 in any
given month. Rather, the parties disagreed whether Richard's lump-sum severance
pay was to be allocated to a single month for purposes of the percentage
assessment in the stipulated order.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   All
further statutory references are to the Family Code.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Richard's severance pay had five components: (1) a years-of-service component
limited to 12 months of salary, or $100,000; (2) a lump sum in  lieu of
commission limited to a six-month benefit of $152,853.48; (3) a lump-sum
qualitative compensation award component of $35,208.33; (4) a healthcare
component of $1,500; and (5) a master retirement plan equivalent component of
$3,422.28. The severance pay amounted to $294,984.10, but Richard was advised
that his final paycheck would include "final earnings and pay for any unused,
accrued vacation." He received $309,700.81 in September 2009. The severance pay
was thus a lump sum comprised of more than a single month's compensation. Elaine
argues at length that  Richard's severance pay was compensation, a point that
Richard does not contest. But Elaine assumes that because the severance pay is
compensation, it must be compensation for September 2009, the month in which it
was received. By its terms, the stipulated order envisions that Richard would
pay the additional 35 percentage assessment of spousal support based on his
compensation "for each month." The order provides no guidance on how lump-sum
compensation for several months should be treated.

   If an order is ambiguous, the reviewing court may examine the record for its
scope and effect and may look at the circumstances of its making. (In re
Marriage of Richardson (2002) 102 Cal.App.4th 941, 948?949 [126 Cal. Rptr. 2d
45].) Extrinsic evidence is allowed to determine the parties' intent when a
stipulated order is ambiguous. (In re Marriage of Trearse (1987) 195 Cal.App.3d
1189, 1192 [241 Cal. Rptr. 257].) Unless there are conflicts in the extrinsic
evidence, the interpretation of a stipulated support order is reviewed de novo.
(See City of Hope National Medical Center v. Genentech, Inc. (2008) 43 Cal.4th
375, 395 [75 Cal. Rptr. 3d 333, 181 P.3d 142].)

   Elaine claims that there is no evidence that the parties ascribed any
particular meaning to the word "compensation." Not so. The record is clear that
the percentage assessment was included in the original support order and in the
subsequent stipulated support order because Richard's monthly income was mostly
comprised of his sales commissions, which fluctuated from month to month.
Richard referred to this assessment as an "Ostler-Smith" percentage throughout
the proceedings, as did the family court in its order denying the OSC. There is
no evidence in the record that Elaine objected to this characterization. An
Ostler & Smith percentage is assessed "over and above guideline support" for
"any discretionary bonus actually received." (In re Marriage of Mosley (2008)
165 Cal.App.4th 1375, 1387 [82 Cal. Rptr. 3d 497].) It was originally justified
on the ground that future bonuses are not guaranteed, and it would be unfair to
require the obligor to file motions for modification every time a bonus is
reduced. (Ostler & Smith, supra, 223 Cal.App.3d at pp. 41-42.) The variable
income that the Ostler & Smith percentage was aimed at capturing in this case
was Richard's fluctuating monthly sales commissions. There is no evidence in the
record that in 2008 either party was aware Richard would be terminated or
receive a lump-sum severance pay a year later. The court therefore erred in
accepting  Elaine's assumption that the lump-sum severance pay in its entirety
was compensation subject to the Ostler & Smith percentage in the month when it
was received.

   Elaine argues that, because of its years-of-service component, the severance
pay was payment for past services rather than a replacement of future income.
While some early cases have made this distinction for purposes of characterizing
a severance pay as community or separate property, more recent cases have found
it unhelpful. (See In re Marriage of Frahm (1996) 45 Cal.App.4th 536, 538-541,
543-544 [53 Cal. Rptr. 2d 31], and cases cited in that decision.) Whether the
severance pay is community or separate property is irrelevant to its allocation
under the stipulated support order because the order does not depend on that
characterization. In addition, even the early cases, such as In re Marriage of
Lawson (1989) 208 Cal.App.3d 446, 454 [256 Cal. Rptr. 283], on which Elaine
relies, have recognized that although a severance amount may be based on years
of service, it is designed to replace lost wages. The bulk of Richard's
severance pay was apparently designed to compensate him for 12 months of lost
salary and six months of lost commissions. It did not represent a single month
of compensation and should not have been treated as such for purposes of the
Ostler & Smith percentage.

   On remand, the family court has discretion to allocate the severance pay. The
court is not limited to Richard's proposal to spread the severance pay over 13
months at the flat rate of $25,000 for the first 12 months and $9,700.81 for the
13th month. Rather, it may choose to allocate the severance pay according to its
terms. For instance, the severance pay in Stephenson consisted of one week of
pay for every year the husband worked for his employer, which the family court
estimated equaled eight and one-half months of salary. (Stephenson, supra, 39
Cal.App.4th at p. 75.) The appellate court held this was not an abuse of
discretion. (Id. at p. 82.) The lump-sum salary and commissions components that
comprise the bulk of Richard's severance pay include an allocation mechanism in
that they consist of 12 months of salary and six months of commissions. The
allocation of the remaining, much smaller, portion of the severance pay would
depend on the extent to which its components, as well as the additional payments
included in the severance package, were part of the monthly compensation that
the support order intended to capture and the months for which any such
compensation was due.

II

   Richard also appeals from the family court's refusal to prospectively modify
or terminate his temporary spousal support obligation based on  Elaine's
cohabitation and Richard's unemployment. An order regarding the modification of
spousal support is reviewed for abuse of discretion. (Stephenson, supra, 39
Cal.App.4th at p. 76.) We affirm for reasons somewhat different from the family
court's. (See RiverWatch v. County of San Diego Dept. of Environmental Health
(2009) 175 Cal.App.4th 768, 776 [96 Cal. Rptr. 3d 362].)

   Temporary spousal support is awarded under section 3600.4 It is based on the
supported spouse's needs and the other spouse's ability to pay. (In re Marriage
of Wittgrove (2004) 120 Cal.App.4th 1317, 1327 [16 Cal. Rptr. 3d 489] (Wittgrove
).) " 'Whereas permanent spousal support "provide[s] financial assistance, if
appropriate, as determined by the financial circumstances of the parties after
their dissolution and the division of their community property," temporary
spousal support "is utilized to maintain the living conditions and standards of
the parties in as close to the status quo position as possible pending trial and
the division of their assets and obligations." [Citations.]' [Citation.] The
court is not restricted by any set of statutory guidelines in fixing a temporary
spousal support amount. [Citation.]" (Ibid.) A change of circumstances is
required for the modification of support orders, including temporary ones. (See
In re Marriage of Biderman (1992) 5 Cal.App.4th 409, 412-413 [6 Cal. Rptr. 2d
791] [" 'Absent a change of circumstances, a motion for modification is nothing
more than an impermissible collateral attack on a prior final order' "]; see
also Murray, supra, 101 Cal.App.4th at p. 597, fn. 11  [noting without deciding
that the finality of temporary support orders requires modification based on
changed circumstances].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   Pending a
marriage dissolution or legal separation, the court may order one spouse "to pay
any amount that is necessary for the support of" the other, "consistent with the
requirements of subdivisions (i) and (m) of Section 4320 and Section 4325
[pertaining to a spouse's convictions for or history of domestic violence]." (§
3600.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Richard requested the immediate termination or substantial reduction of
spousal support due to Elaine's cohabitation with her friend. His request was
premised on the rebuttable presumption in section 4323, subdivision (a)(1), that
cohabitation diminishes the need for spousal support. The court denied the
request, finding that Elaine's need for support had not "substantially
diminished" since her friend's sole contribution to the household was $800 a
month for food. Section 4323 appears in part 3 of division 9 of the code (§ 4300
et seq.), governing permanent support. But even were its cohabitation
presumption applicable to a temporary support order, the presumption was
rebutted in this case. The contribution of $800 a month for food was not so
substantial in the context of this case as to justify the immediate termination
or significant reduction of the $9,059 in base spousal support that Richard was
to pay Elaine.

   Richard did not seek to modify or terminate spousal support based on his
unemployment because he relied on Stephenson. There, the appellate court held
that the family court's reduction of spousal support was premature in light of
its decision to spread the husband's severance pay over eight and one-half
months, during which the spouses' circumstances could change. (Stephenson, supra
, 39 Cal.App.4th at p. 81.) Richard requested only that the court set a date in
July 2010 to consider terminating his spousal support obligation. At the OSC
hearing in April 2010, the court declined to set such a date and directed the
parties to set hearing dates according to the court rules. But because its
written ruling allocated Richard's entire severance pay to September 2009 for
purposes of the Ostler & Smith percentage, the court concluded that it would not
be premature to consider whether Richard's unemployment justified a modification
of spousal support. The court was under the impression that it needed to
consider the factors listed in section 4320, and it refused to modify Richard's
support obligation because he had presented no evidence on these factors, even
though his unemployment amounted to a change of circumstances.

   The factors listed in section 4320 apply to permanent support orders.5 Of
these, the only factors relevant to temporary orders are the supported spouse's
needs and the supporting spouse's ability to pay. (See Wittgrove, supra, 120
Cal.App.4th at p. 1327.) To the extent the court required Richard to present
evidence on factors included in section 4320 but inapplicable to temporary
spousal support, it erred. " 'Ability to pay encompasses far more than the
income of the spouse from whom temporary support is sought; investments and
other assets may be used for ... temporary spousal support ... . [Citations.]'
[Citation.]" (120 Cal.App.4th at p. 1327.) While investments and other assets
may theoretically be available for purposes of temporary spousal support, the
support awarded in this case was based solely on Richard's income and the
parties had already stipulated once to its reduction based on the decrease in
his commissions.  Richard provided a declaration, stating that he was unemployed
and actively looking for a new job. We fail to see what additional evidence the
family court expected Richard to offer.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   Section
4320 begins, "In ordering spousal support under this part, the court shall
consider all of the following circumstances ... ." A Law Revision Commission
comment explains: "In the introductory clause, the reference to 'under this
part' has been added to make clear that the court is only required to consider
these factors when making an order for permanent spousal support." (Cal. Law
Revision Com. com., 29F West's Ann. Fam. Code (2004 ed.) foll. § 4320, p. 223.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   But because in his OSC Richard did not seek relief on the ground that he was
unemployed, the court was not required to consider this ground. (See Luri v.
Greenwald (2003) 107 Cal.App.4th 1119, 1126 [132 Cal. Rptr. 2d  680].)
Additionally, we cannot determine whether Richard had indeed established a
change in circumstances at the time he filed the OSC because that would depend
on how the family court chooses to allocate his severance pay on remand. We
therefore affirm the family court's denial of the portion of the OSC seeking
modification and termination of the temporary spousal support order.

DISPOSITION

   The order is affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded to the family
court with directions to reallocate Richard's severance pay as compensation for
purposes of the Ostler & Smith assessment. The parties are to bear their own
costs on appeal.

   Willhite, J., and Manella, J., concurred.

   On July 18, 2011, the opinion was modified to read as printed above.


                              73 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             In re the Marriage of MARION E. and DARRELL E. McGHEE.
              MARION E. McGHEE, Respondent, v. DARRELL E. McGHEE,
                                   Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 24134

           Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District,
                                  Division One

            131 Cal. App. 3d 408; 182 Cal. Rptr. 456; 1982 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1568


                                 April 30, 1982

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of San Diego County, No. D-125869, Thomas G.
Duffy, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1) Exemptions § 2--Property Exempt--Military Pension--Spousal Support
Exception.  --A former wife was entitled to use a writ of execution to levy on
her former husband's military pension, where the former wife did not receive her
pro rata share of the pension under an interlocutory judgment of dissolution
which, by agreement of the parties, provided that if she did not receive her
share of the pension, she was to be awarded spousal support in an amount
identical to the retirement benefits not received. The mechanism by which
support payments were ordered in the event of nonpayment of periodic community
property transfers was sufficient to satisfy the requirements of Code Civ.
Proc., § 690.18, subd. (a), exempting government pensions from execution except
with respect to spousal support payments, and did not violate the spirit of
federal law (42 U.S.C. §§ 659 and 662), which exempts alimony payments (but not
payments in compliance with any community property division) from the usual rule
that prohibits garnishment of military pensions.

(2a) (2b) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 73--Property Rights of Parties--
Support of Other Party--Termination of Order--Death or Remarriage of Party--
Agreement to Continue Support.  --A former wife was entitled to use a writ of
execution to levy on her former husband's military pension, where the former
wife did not receive her pro rata share of the pension, and where the
interlocutory judgment of dissolution, by agreement of the parties, provided
that if the former wife did not receive her share of the pension, she was to be
awarded spousal support in an amount identical to the retirement benefits not
received. The former husband's duty to support his former wife was not
terminated by reason of the former wife's remarriage, despite the provisions of
Civ. Code, § 4801, subd. (b), requiring a written agreement if spousal support
is to continue beyond the remarriage of the receiving spouse. The parties'
intent that spousal support continue notwithstanding the wife's remarriage was
clearly implied in the words of the interlocutory decree, the terms of which had
been agreed to by the parties. Thus, the interlocutory decree constituted
sufficient evidence of the parties' agreement to satisfy the requirements of
Civ. Code, § 4801, subd. (b).

(3) Frauds, Statute of § 1--Interpretatioon of Statutes.  --Statutes which
require a writing to make enforceable an agreement between parties, often
referred to generically as statutes of frauds, fulfill an important function in
sanctifying agreements and facilitating their proof. Nevertheless, such statutes
have not been broadly interpreted by California courts because of the inequities
which necessarily attend their enforcement. Although the agreement must be in
writing, the writing need only describe the terms of the agreement with
"reasonable certainty." Moreover, the agreement will not be held deficient for
failure to express that which is clearly implied when the writing is interpreted
in accordance with the intentions of the parties.

COUNSEL: Carmela F. Simoncini for Appellant.

Marshall Y. Hockett for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Wiener, J., with Cologne, Acting P. J., and Milkes, J., *
concurring.  * Assigned by the Chairperson of the Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: WIENER

OPINION

     Pursuant to the oral stipulation between Darrell E. McGhee and his wife
Marion, their interlocutory judgment of dissolution entered on June 21, 1978,
contained the following: "10.  Both parties waive their right to spousal support
from the other party except as to spousal support payments provided herein in
the event of non-payment of retirement benefits as provided herein.  [para. ]
There shall be no other spousal support other than provided in the following two
paragraphs.

   "11. Petitioner [Marion] is awarded 38.2% of Respondent's monthly military
retirement benefits, presently $ 675.00 per month and 38.2% of all increases in
said benefits.  Petitioner's share shall be paid to her by allotment to be
arranged by Respondent.  [para. ] In any month Petitioner does not receive her
said share of the retirement, Petitioner shall be  awarded spousal support for
said month in an amount identical to the retirement benefits not received by
her.

   ". . . .

   "13. The court shall have no jurisdiction to modify in any way the spousal
support provisions of this agreement."

   When Marion did not receive her pro rata share of the pension for the months
of February through May 1980, she obtained a writ of execution for $ 1,200. 1
Darrell responded by unsuccessfully moving to quash the writ claiming his
spousal support obligation ended when Marion remarried on November 10, 1978, and
asking repayment of about $ 4,200 representing his overpayments of support
through January 1980, plus reasonable attorney's fees and costs.  This appeal
followed.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   The ex
parte court order dated June 10, 1980, for issuance of the writ of execution is
based upon Marion's declaration showing $ 300 unpaid for each of the four months
involved.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   I

   Two issues Darrell raises may be disposed of readily.

   First, his claim that he is entitled to retroactive application of the
holding in McCarty v. McCarty (1981) 453 U.S. 210 [69 L.Ed.2d 589, 101 S.Ct.
2728] was decided adversely to his contention in In re Marriage of Sheldon
(1981) 124 Cal.App.3d 371, 380 [177 Cal.Rptr. 380] and In re Marriage of Mahone
(1981) 123 Cal.App.3d 17, 21-22 [176 Cal.Rptr. 274].

   Second, his assertion that Code of Civil Procedure section 690.18,
subdivision (a) 2 requires quashing of the writ of execution, ignores the
distinction between the court's power to issue a writ in the first instance and
the specie of property which the Legislature has declared exempt from levy. The
latter question, whether certain property falls within one of the stated
exemptions of Code of Civil Procedure sections 690.1 to  690.31, is raised after
levy through compliance with the procedures provided by Code of Civil Procedure
section 690.50.  Here, the record seems to indicate the writ, although issued,
was never used, or if used, the record fails to describe what specific property
was levied upon.  We will not speculate in order to assume the levy was upon
Darrell's military pension. Consequently, although we will proceed to discuss
whether the spousal support payments of the underlying judgment fall within the
exception of Code of Civil Procedure section 690.18, subdivision (a), we do so
only for the trial court upon remand on the premise this issue will soon be
presented when a levy upon the military pension is made.  Obviously, our
discussion on this point is unrelated to the question of whether the writ itself
should have been quashed.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   The
effect of Code of Civil Procedure sections 690 and 690.18, subdivision (a) is to
exempt all money received by any person as a pension from the United States
government except with regard to a judgment or order for child or spousal
support payments.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   II

     In challenging an attempted levy on his military pension, Darrell makes two
arguments.  He first contends that the mechanism  by which support payments are
ordered in the event of nonpayment of periodic community property transfers
violates the spirit of federal law which excepts alimony obligations from the
usual rule that prohibits the garnishment of military pensions. 3 (See 42 U.S.C.
§ 659.) Because we must construe the provisions of this federal statute strictly
in favor of the judgment debtor ( Roosevelt v. Roosevelt (1981) 117 Cal.App.3d
397, 404 [172 Cal.Rptr. 641]), Darrell argues we should look to the source of
the obligation for spousal support and not to the label it may be given.  He
claims changing what is clearly here a division of community property into a
spousal support order is contrary to the purpose of the federal law.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   42 United
States Code section 662(c) defines the alimony exception as: "periodic payments
of funds for the support and maintenance of the spouse (or former spouse) . . .
[but] does not include any payment or transfer of property or its value by an
individual to his spouse or former spouse in compliance with any community
property settlement, equitable distribution of property, or other division
between spouses or former spouses." (Italics added.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Family law practitioners were quick to discover that collection of a spouse's
pro rata share of a military pension frequently proved to be difficult unless
there was adequate security for that court-ordered obligation.  Voluntary
compliance with the court order seemed to be directly related to the property
which the spouse as judgment creditor could easily and effectively reach.
Because the exemption statute ( Code Civ. Proc., § 690.18, subd. (a)) contained
the means for solving this problem, it was quickly spotted and adopted by
creative lawyers.  Divided  pensions would be "supportive as the technique to
deal with recalcitrant military retirees. The failure of the retiree to comply
with the court-ordered division of his pension would trigger a spousal support
obligation for the identical sum in default, thereby giving the former spouse
access to property which would otherwise be exempt. (See 1978 Cal. Family L.Rep.
1081.)

   Except for his expressions of frustration directed to the creativity of
ingenious lawyers who developed this method of assuring compliance with the
court order, Darrell is unable to point to any statutory or policy consideration
in support of his argument.  Every family law case negotiated to settlement
involves a give-and-take process.  Why spousal support is waived in certain
cases and not in others remains part of the personal decisional choice which
each party must make in order to satisfactorily resolve his or her case.
Moreover, courts have recognized the close relationship between the amount of a
property division and the entitlement to spousal support. 4 (See, e.g., In re
Marriage of Sheldon, supra, 124 Cal.App.3d at p. 380.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   In re
Marriage of Maunder (1976) 57 Cal.App.3d 570 [127 Cal.Rptr. 707] is not to the
contrary.  Maunder involved a divorced spouse who was awarded a one-half
interest in her husband's military pension which she was unable to collect by
virtue of the garnishment limitations of Code of Civil Procedure section 690.18
and 42 United States Code sections 659 and 662.  She accordingly sought a
modification of the divorce decree to provide that in the event of nonpayment of
her awarded interest in the pension, she would be entitled to an identical sum
as spousal support. The court rejected the modification request, noting that a
subsequent change in her choice of remedies was insufficient grounds for a
modification. ( Id., at p. 573.) The court also added that a modification would
have been somewhat inequitable since the modifying court would have no
postdecree power to order an offsetting cancellation of the unpaid community
property award.  (Ibid.)

   The instant case is easily distinguishable.  First, it does not involve a
subsequent modification but rather a contingency anticipated by the parties in
the original decree.  Neither party is compelled to do anything different than
they bargained for.  Similarly, the decree itself implies a cancellation of the
community property award to the extent it is satisfied by spousal support
garnishments. No postdecree power of the court is involved.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Here, the agreement by the respective parties, providing for spousal support
in the event payments representing division of the property were not made, was
clearly a sensible and cost efficient way to deal with the problem of
collection. State courts should not be burdened in exemption  proceedings under
Code of Civil Procedure section 690.50 and be required to scrutinize every
spousal support order to determine the psychological or economic basis for its
genesis in order to establish whether its source falls within the spirit of the
federal legislation.  We  therefore conclude that a support order, valid on its
face, is enough to satisfy the exception provided by Code of Civil Procedure
section 690.18, subdivision (a), and 42 United States Code sections 659 and 662.

   III

     Darrell also argues that even if we treat the payments as legitimate
spousal support obligations, Marion's remarriage in 1978 terminated any duty he
had to support her since Civil Code section 4801, subdivision (b) requires a
written agreement if spousal support is to continue beyond the remarriage of the
receiving spouse. 5 Darrell claims he never agreed in writing to such a
provision.  Referring us to In re the Marriage of Nicolaides (1974) 39
Cal.App.3d 192, 202 [114 Cal.Rptr. 56] and Hilton v. McNitt (1957) 49 Cal.2d 79,
82 [315 P.2d 1], Darrell states it would have been simple enough for the parties
to have expressed themselves on this important issue when they were in court and
to have their statements on this subject carried over into the interlocutory
judgment.  Because the parties should know the difference between "modification"
and "termination," words of art among family lawyers, Darrell urges we should
not expand the meaning of the former to encompass the latter.  (See Stokes v.
Stokes (1971) 14 Cal.App.3d 470, 471 [92 Cal.Rptr. 468].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   Civil
Code section 4801, subdivision (b) provides: "Except as otherwise agreed by the
parties in writing, the obligation of any party under any order or judgment for
the support or maintenance of the other party shall terminate upon the death of
either party or the remarriage of the other party."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Although Darrell correctly states the general rule on this subject, we
believe this case falls within a carefully circumscribed exception to that rule.
Here, in light of the purpose the parties wished to accomplish (see ante, p.
413), their intention to have spousal support continue beyond Marion's
remarriage is obvious.

     Statutes which require a writing to make enforceable an agreement between
parties, often referred to generically as statutes of frauds, fulfill an
important function in sanctifying agreements and facilitating their proof.
Nevertheless, such statutes have not been broadly interpreted by California
courts because of the inequities which necessarily attend their enforcement.
(See Sunset-Sternau Food Co. v. Bonzi (1964) 60 Cal.2d 834, 838 [36 Cal.Rptr.
741, 389 P.2d 133]; see also 1  Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (8th ed. 1973)
Contracts, § 197, p. 180.) Although the agreement must be in writing, the
writing need only describe the terms of the agreement with "reasonable
certainty." (Rest., Contracts, § 207; Rivers v. Beadle (1960) 183 Cal.App.2d
691, 696 [7 Cal.Rptr. 170].) Moreover, "the agreement will not be held deficient
for the failure to express that which is clearly implied when the writing is
interpreted in accordance with the intentions of the parties." ( Hillman v. Koch
(1949) 92 Cal.App.2d 163, 168 [206 P.2d 434].)

     In the instant case, the purpose of the parties in providing for
alternative spousal support payments is evident.  Serving as a substitute for
unpaid property division payments, Darrell's and Marion's intent that the
spousal support continue notwithstanding Marion's remarriage is "clearly
implied" in the words of the interlocutory decree. By the very nature of their
bargain -- an agreed-upon security device to assure continued performance of an
order extending until the death of the military retiree -- remarriage could not
have been intended to terminate that support.

   We recognize that explicit exposition of the parties' intent is missing from
the interlocutory decree. Under most circumstances, implication of intent would
be impossible.  But the purpose and structure of this agreement makes it the
unusual situation.  We therefore hold that this writing constitutes sufficient
evidence of the  McGhees' agreement to satisfy the requirements of Civil Code
section 4801, subdivision (b).  Accordingly, should Darrell fail to honor the
court-ordered division of his military pension, Marion may use her writ of
execution to levy upon his military pension.

   Judgment affirmed.


                              74 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In re the Marriage of JAMES LYNN, JR., and PATRICIA LYNN.
          JAMES LYNN, JR., Appellant, v. PATRICIA SHIREY, Respondent.

                                 No.  F038161.

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FIFTH APPELLATE DISTRICT

          101 Cal. App. 4th 120; 123 Cal. Rptr. 2d 611; 2002 Cal. App.
            LEXIS 4501; 2002 Cal. Daily Op. Service 7408; 2002 Daily
                                Journal DAR 9320


                            August 13, 2002, Decided
                             August 13, 2002, Filed

PRIOR-HISTORY:     APPEAL from a judgment of the Superior Court of Fresno
County. Super. Ct. No. 0466828-1. James M. Petrucelli, Judge.

COUNSEL: Paul N. Dane for Appellant.

No appearance for Respondent.

JUDGES: (Opinion by Buckley, Acting P. J., with Cornell and Gomes, JJ.,
concurring.)

OPINION BY: Buckley

OPINION

     BUCKLEY, Acting P. J.

   James Lynn, Jr., appeals from an order directing him to pay spousal support
and attorney fees to his ex-wife, Patricia (Lynn) Shirey. 1 The amount of the
support order is identical to the amount of a property settlement James was
ordered to pay Patricia upon their divorce in 1994. However, this property
settlement obligation was subsequently discharged in James's bankruptcy in 1999.
Therefore he contends the support order has, in effect, improperly reinstated
the discharged property settlement under the guise of spousal support. While we
will conclude the court properly could have considered the discharged debt in
reassessing James's support obligation, we will reverse the support order
because the court failed to also consider the other statutory factors governing
its decision.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   We refer
to the parties by their given names for the sake of clarity only; we intend no
disrespect. (In re Marriage of Cheriton (2001) 92 Cal.App.4th 269, 280, fn. 1
[111 Cal. Rptr. 2d 755].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

   James and Patricia married in 1971 and separated over 20 years later in 1992.
James petitioned for dissolution, and a judgment was entered later that year as
to marital status only. The court reserved ruling on the issues of child
support, spousal support, and the distribution of community assets and
liabilities.

   The court considered the matter of child support in October of 1994. At that
time, the couple still had two minor children: a 15-year-old son (Jason) living
with James, and an 11-year-old son (Justin) living with Patricia. James was
earning $ 2,594 per month working as a driver in the waste disposal business;
Patricia was receiving unemployment benefits of $ 771 per month while enrolled
in a nursing program. Based on these figures, the court ordered James to pay
child support to Patricia for Justin, plus arrearages. The court reserved the
issue of spousal support.

   The court issued another order the following month in regard to the
distribution of the marital property. The net effect of the order was to require
James to make a property settlement or "equalizing payment" to Patricia in the
amount of $ 25,820.78. The court made no spousal support order.

   James did not make the payment. Instead, in January of 1999, he filed a
voluntary petition for bankruptcy under chapter 13 of the Bankruptcy Act. He
listed among his outstanding debts the unpaid property settlement due Patricia,
which, with the addition of interest, had grown to $ 36,664. This debt was
eventually discharged in the bankruptcy.

   On October 23, 2000, Patricia filed a motion for modification of spousal
support asking the court to order James to pay her the original amount of the
discharged property settlement ($ 25,820.78) in the form of support, at the rate
of $ 1,500 per month. She based the motion on section 3592 of the Family Code. 2
She also requested James be ordered to pay her $ 2,500 for her attorney fees.
James filed a declaration in opposition to the motion claiming, in general, that
the 1994 property settlement order had been inequitable.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Unless
noted otherwise, all further statutory citations refer to the Family Code.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   By this point, Patricia was earning $ 1,400 per month as a registered nurse,
and had monthly expenses, according to her declaration, of $ 2,250. Justin, who
was then 17 years old, was living with his father. James was earning about $
4,150 per month as a waste disposal driver, and reported his expenses were $
3,363 per month.

   At a hearing on December 19, 2000, the court ordered the parties to submit
their arguments in writing. In his written opposition, James argued once again
that the 1994 property settlement had been inequitable because many of the
assumptions upon which it was based turned out to be incorrect. He also noted
briefly that section 3592 applies only to the discharge in bankruptcy of
obligations under settlement agreements. Patricia, in her written arguments in
support of the motion, conceded this last point, but maintained she was entitled
to the same amount of support, $ 1,500 per month, based on the factors set out
in section 4320 for determining spousal support.

   On March 14, 2001, the court issued the following written order: "Pursuant to
Family Code § 3592, [James] pay [Patricia] the amount of $ 25,821.00 as and for
spousal support, at the rate of $ 1500.00 per month, commencing April 1, 2001
and on or before the 1st of each month until paid in full. The Court further
orders, [James] pay $ 2,000.00 as and for attorney fees, at the rate of $ 250
per month, commencing April 1, 2001 and on or before the 1st of each month until
paid in full. If any one payment is more than 10 days late then the entire
amount will become due and payable and interest will accrue at the legal rate."

    Notice of entry of the order was filed five days later on March 19.

   Also on March 19, Patricia obtained an order assigning $ 1,500 of James's
wages to her every month. On April 4, James filed an ex parte application to
stay the wage assignment order. He maintained the sum of the spousal support and
attorney fee orders, when added to his monthly mortgage payment ($ 1,200) and
his obligation to the bankruptcy trustee ($ 400), would exceed his take-home pay
without regard to any of his other living expenses. A hearing on the application
for stay was set for May 31, 2001.

   On May 15, 2001, James filed a timely notice of appeal from the court's
spousal support order. There is nothing in the record explaining what happened
at the May 31 hearing.

   DISCUSSION 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Patricia
has not filed a respondent's brief.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Property settlement payments ordered in dissolution proceedings to effect
the equitable division of community property, as opposed to payments for spousal
or child support, are dischargeable in bankruptcy. (In re Siragusa (9th Cir.
1994) 27 F.3d 406, 407 (Siragusa); 11 U.S.C. §§ 523(a)(5), 727.)

   "It is now firmly established in California law that certain types of debts
arising from a division of community property on dissolution are properly
dischargeable in bankruptcy. . . . '[A]n alimony judgment or a judgment which
can properly be construed as being for alimony is not affected by a discharge in
bankruptcy. However, it has been squarely held in California that, where the
parties have entered into a property settlement agreement whereby payments are
thereafter to be made to the wife, not for support but in settlement of property
rights, the discharge in bankruptcy of the husband discharges the debt.'
[Citations.]" (In re Marriage of Williams (1984) 157 Cal. App. 3d 1215,
1220-1221 [203 Cal. Rptr. 909] (Williams); see generally Hogoboom & King, Cal.
Practice Guide: Family Law (The Rutter Group 2002) PP 18:70 to 18:96, pp. 18-20
to 18-41 (rev. # 1 2000).)

   Further, the discharge of a debt in bankruptcy operates as an injunction
prohibiting a creditor thereafter from taking any action to collect or recover
the debt. (Siragusa, supra, 27 F.3d at p. 407; Williams, supra, 157 Cal. App. 3d
at p. 1224; 11 U.S.C. § 524.) Thus, for example, the court in a dissolution
action may not revive the wife's discharged property settlement debt by using it
as an offset against the husband's periodic payment of retirement benefits to
her. (Williams, supra, 157 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 1225, 1227.)

    However, the court may consider the discharge in bankruptcy of one spouse's
property settlement debt as a factor in determining whether to modify that
spouse's support obligation. (Siragusa, supra, 27 F.3d at p. 408.) In Siragusa,
the husband and wife in a divorce action brought in Nevada agreed to a division
of their marital property that required the husband to pay the wife $ 1.25
million in monthly installments to buy her share of a community medical
practice. This obligation was reduced to a judgment after the husband defaulted
on the payments. The husband filed for bankruptcy before the wife could enforce
the judgment, and his property settlement obligation was eventually discharged.
But the husband's obligation to pay spousal support was not discharged. Shortly
before the final support payment was due, the wife filed a motion in the divorce
court to modify, i.e., to increase and extend, the payments on the ground the
discharge of the husband's property settlement debt amounted to a "changed
circumstance." The state court granted the wife's motion, and the husband
appealed. (id. at p. 407.)

    The husband also filed a complaint in bankruptcy court claiming the
modification violated the standing injunction in 11 United States Code section
524 prohibiting the collection of debts that had been discharged in bankruptcy.
The bankruptcy court dismissed the complaint based on comity. The district court
affirmed the dismissal, as did the appellate court.

   The question then before the court was whether the support modification
request was indeed an attempt to collect a discharged debt in violation of the
federal bankruptcy law (a question that arguably would have been within the
exclusive jurisdiction of the bankruptcy court to decide). The court held it was
not.

   "Nothing in the record suggests that the divorce court was attempting to
reinstate the property settlement debt; the amount awarded in alimony is not a
substitute for the amount of the discharged property settlement. The alimony
modification merely takes into account the fact that Ms. Siragusa would no
longer receive the property settlement payments upon which the original alimony
was premised. The discharge altered both Ms. Siragusa's need and Dr. Siragusa's
ability to pay." (Siragusa, supra, 27 F.3d at p. 408.)

   Williams, supra, 157 Cal. App. 3d 1215, a decision by this court, involved a
similar sort of situation, and the application of Civil Code section 4812, the
predecessor to section 3592. The husband and wife in Williams entered into a
property settlement agreement 4 that required the wife to pay the husband $
3,048.99 to equalize the division of community property; to pay $ 3,864.59 in
community debts; and to turn over the husband's separate property to him. The
husband,  for his part, was required to pay the wife a portion of his monthly
retirement income, and to pay $ 9,426.37 in community debts. The wife failed to
comply with any of her obligations before filing for bankruptcy. The bankruptcy
discharged her property settlement obligation, as well as her share of the
community debts (which then fell to the husband to pay). In the meantime, the
husband had refused to pay over any part of his retirement income to the wife.
She obtained a writ of execution and levied against the husband's savings
account to recover the arrearages. He moved to vacate the levy on the ground he
was entitled to offset his arrearages against her now-discharged obligations to
him (the property settlement payment and her share of community debts). The
trial court granted the husband's motion, and the wife appealed. (Williams, at
p. 1218.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   Although
the decision generally refers to the trial court's orders with respect to the
division of property, it also says at one point: "At the time of the
interlocutory judgment, incorporating the property settlement agreed to by the
parties, wife had already . . . ." (Williams, supra, 157 Cal. App. 3d at p. 1222
, italics added.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    We held, in reliance on Civil Code section 4812, 5 that the husband could
not offset the wife's discharged property settlement debt to him against his
obligation to pay the wife a portion of his retirement income (which also was a
form of community property, not spousal support). After reviewing the
legislative history of the 1977 amendment to Civil Code section 4812, we said:

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   Civil
Code former section 4812 then provided: "In the event obligations for [property
settlement to a spouse or] support of a spouse are discharged in bankruptcy, the
court may make all proper orders for the support of such spouse, as the court
may deem just, having regard for the circumstances of the respective parties
[and the amount of any obligations under a property settlement agreement which
are discharged]." (Stats. 1977, ch. 332, § 2, p. 1287 [brackets identify
language added by 1977 amendment]; cf. Stats. 1969, ch. 1608, § 8, p. 3337.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   "Thus it is clear that the Legislature, in amending Civil Code section 4812,
intended to redress the inequities which could result from a discharge in
bankruptcy of community debts assigned to one spouse to the extent it was
possible to do so within the limitations imposed by the supremacy of the
bankruptcy law. It is possible to readjust the relative position of the spouses
by a modification of a spousal support order, taking into consideration the
amount of property obligations discharged by one spouse in bankruptcy. There is
nothing in the provisions of Civil Code section 4812 nor in the legislative
history behind it to suggest that the Legislature intended to or believed it
could go beyond the scope of that law to reach and modify final property
settlements, notwithstanding the inequities which result from discharges in
bankruptcy of the type here in question. [P] . . . [P]

    "We therefore conclude that in the present posture of this case the trial
court cannot offset its determination of a community debt owed by wife to
husband against periodic payments due wife in satisfaction of her community
interest in husband's retirement income. The . . . statutory authorization to
make an adjustment in spousal support is limited to a situation in which a
spousal support order is incorporated in the judgment of dissolution subject to
modification by the court. This is not such a case, and the trial court exceeded
its jurisdiction by ordering an offset which, in effect, modified a property
settlement without the consent of the parties." (Williams, supra, 157 Cal. App.
3d at pp. 1226-1227; see also In re Marriage of Cohen (1980) 105 Cal. App. 3d
836, 843 [164 Cal. Rptr. 672] [use of husband's discharged community debts to
offset wife's corresponding obligation would violate federal bankruptcy law].)

   In In re Marriage of Clements (1982) 134 Cal. App. 3d 737 [184 Cal. Rptr.
756] (Clements), by comparison, the judgment of dissolution did incorporate a
spousal support order. The husband's support obligation in that case took into
account the division of community debts between him and his ex-wife. However,
the wife's share of the debts was later discharged in bankruptcy, and her
creditors looked to the husband for payment. Then, when a community asset was
sold, the husband asked the court to order the wife to use her share of the
proceeds to pay her discharged debts. The family law court granted the request
and issued a temporary restraining order enjoining the wife from spending the
money in any other way. A few days later, the bankruptcy court dissolved the
restraining order, and the wife spent the money for other things.

   The family law court's order also included a provision permitting the husband
to offset any amount he spent to pay the wife's former debts against the amount
he paid her for support. The wife appealed from this part of the order. The
appellate court upheld it. It explained:

   "It is evident that the debts assigned to [wife] and the agreement to hold
[husband] harmless on these obligations were in settlement of property rights
and were effectively discharged by her bankruptcy. At issue is whether this
discharge prevents the state court from decreasing [wife's] spousal support
payment to compensate [husband] for assuming responsibility for these discharged
obligations. [P] . . . [P]

    "There are many factors deemed pertinent by the State of California in
establishing an adequate amount of spousal support. Indeed, a court can consider
everything having a legitimate bearing on present and prospective matters
relating to the lives of both parties. [Citations.] Some of the circumstances
that are applicable to the case at bar are the needs of the parties, the
abilities of the parties to meet such needs, property owned, obligations to be
met, as well as the ability to earn and actual earnings. [Citations.]

   "Proper grounds may always be presented for the purpose of modifying or
revoking an award of spousal support. [Citation.] But the applicant must show
the economic situation of the parties has changed since it is the economic
relation which is to be affected by the proposed modification. [Citations.] In
the instant case, the material change in the economic status of the parties was
that the spouse to whom the support had been awarded had significantly reduced
her indebtedness through bankruptcy which concomitantly increased the
obligations to be met by the nonbankrupt spouse. The fact that a spouse has
incurred indebtedness may indicate such a change in his ability to pay support
as to authorize a reduction in the amount of support payments. [Citations.]" (
Clements, supra, 134 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 743-746.)

   Notably, the court in Clements made no mention of Civil Code section 4812.
One possible explanation for this omission is that the statute permitted the
court, in deciding whether to modify a spousal support order, to consider the
discharge of one spouse's obligations under a settlement agreement. Nothing in
Clements indicates the judgment of dissolution in that case incorporated a
marital settlement agreement (MSA) between the parties.

   This same language referring to a settlement agreement was carried over into
section 3592. Civil Code section 4812 was repealed, and section 3592 was enacted
in its place, in 1992. (Stats. 1992, ch. 162, § 3, p. 464 and § 10, pp. 464,
564, operative Jan. 1, 1994.) Section 3592 provides: "If an obligation under an
agreement for settlement of property to a spouse or for support of a spouse is
discharged in bankruptcy, the court may make all proper orders for the support
of the spouse, as the court determines are just, having regard for the
circumstances of the parties and the amount of the obligations under the
agreement that are discharged." 6 (Italics added.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   We note
too that both former Civil Code section 4812 and former section 3592 appear by
their terms to apply only in the situation where a property settlement
obligation of the supporting spouse has been discharged in bankruptcy (which was
not the situation in either Williams or Clements, but was the case in Siragusa).
(But see Hogoboom & King, Cal. Practice Guide: Family Law, supra, PP 6:998 to
6:998.3, pp. 6-358.1 to 6-358.2 and PP 17:228 to 17:229, pp. 17-57 to 17-58.)
For reasons that will appear, we do not consider this question.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Section 3592 appears in division 9 of the Family Code (Support), part 1
(General Provisions), chapter 3 (Support Agreements), article 3 (Spousal Support
). Although the Family Code does not expressly define MSA's, several of its
provisions contemplate their existence, including section 3592. (Hogoboom &
King, Cal.  Practice Guide: Family Law, supra, P 9-4, pp. 9-1 to 9-2.) An MSA
commonly provides, among other things, for a division of community assets and
debts, and for child and spousal support. (Id., P 9-310, pp. 9-67 to 9-68.) It
usually is then merged into the judgment of dissolution, whereupon it ceases to
have any independent legal significance; the parties' rights and obligations are
governed by the judgment alone. (Id., P 9:443, p. 9-98.2.)

    A party to an MSA may waive the right to receive spousal support.

   "[There is no public policy] prohibition against a waiver of post-dissolution
spousal support. If the spouses separate by agreement, neither owes the other a
duty of support unless they otherwise agree [Fam. Code, § 4302]; and any right
to support after dissolution exists, if at all, only under the terms of the
judgment. Thus, a voluntary, knowing and intelligent waiver of support in a
marital settlement agreement will be enforced according to its terms.
[Citations.]" (Hogoboom & King, Cal.  Practice Guide: Family Law, supra, P
9:337, p. 9-76.) And, while a spousal support provision in a settlement
agreement is ordinarily subject to modification or termination by the court, it
is not if the agreement specifically so states. (§ 3591.) Thus, it appears
section 3592 is intended to protect a spouse from the harsh consequences of a
bargain whose basic assumptions about the allocation of community property have
been altered significantly by the bankruptcy of the other spouse. There is, in
other words, a reason to treat spousal support in the event of a bankruptcy
differently when it is based on a settlement agreement than when it is not.  7
We conclude, therefore, that section 3592 means what it says and so applies only
in the former situation. Since there was no settlement agreement in this case,
the statute does not apply here.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   On the
other hand, MSA's may not abridge the parents' mutual statutory child support
obligations or impinge on the court's jurisdiction to award child support.
(Hogoboom & King, Cal. Practice Guide: Family Law, supra, PP 9:17 to 9:19, pp.
9-5 to 9-6.) It seems to follow that section 4013, the child support equivalent
of section 3592, makes no mention of property settlement agreements. "If
obligations for support of a child are discharged in bankruptcy, the court may
make all proper orders for the support of the child that the court determines
are just." (§ 4013.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    This is not to say the court must disregard the discharge in bankruptcy of
James's property settlement debt to Patricia in determining his obligation to
pay spousal support. However, this is only one of many factors. Section 4320, as
it read at the time of the support hearing, stated in full:

   "In ordering spousal support under this part, the court shall consider all of
the following circumstances:

   "(a) The extent to which the earning capacity of each party is sufficient to
maintain the standard of living established during the marriage, taking into
account all of the following:

    "(1) The marketable skills of the supported party; the job market for those
skills; the time and expenses required for the supported party to acquire the
appropriate education or training to develop those skills; and the possible need
for retraining or education to acquire other, more marketable skills or
employment.

   "(2) The extent to which the supported party's present or future earning
capacity is impaired by periods of unemployment that were incurred during the
marriage to permit the supported party to devote time to domestic duties.

   "(b) The extent to which the supported party contributed to the attainment of
an education, training, a career position, or a license by the supporting party.

    "(c) The ability to pay of the supporting party, taking into account the
supporting party's earning capacity, earned and unearned income, assets, and
standard of living.

   "(d) The needs of each party based on the standard of living established
during the marriage.

   "(e) The obligations and assets, including the separate property, of each
party.

   "(f) The duration of the marriage.

   "(g) The ability of the supported party to engage in gainful employment
without unduly interfering with the interests of dependent children in the
custody of the party.

   "(h) The age and health of the parties, including, but not limited to,
consideration of emotional distress resulting from domestic violence perpetrated
against the supported party by the supporting party where the court finds
documented evidence of a history of domestic violence, as defined in Section
6211, against the supported party by the supporting party.

   "(i) The immediate and specific tax consequences to each party.

   "(j) The balance of the hardships to each party.

   "(k) The goal that the supported party shall be self-supporting within a
reasonable period of time. Except in the case of a marriage of long duration as
described in Section 4336, a 'reasonable period of time' for purposes of this
section generally shall be one-half the length of the marriage. However,
nothing in this section is intended to limit the court's discretion to order
support for a greater or lesser length of time, based on any of the other
factors listed in this section, Section 4336, and the circumstances of the
parties.

   "(l) Any other factors the court determines are just and equitable." (Stats.
1999, ch. 846, § 1.5, pp. 4826-4827.)

   Here, the trial court reached its decision based not on section 4320 but on
section 3592, which provides only that "the court may make all proper orders for
the support of the spouse, as the court determines are just, having regard for
the circumstances of the parties and the amount of the obligations under the
agreement that are discharged." We cannot say in this situation that "the
circumstances of the parties" encompassed all the factors set out in section
4320, or that the court necessarily considered them. 8

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -8   We reach
no conclusion about what factors are or ought to be included in "the
circumstances of the parties" when section 3592 does apply.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     "Spousal support is governed by statute. (See §§ 4300-4360.) In ordering
spousal support, the trial court must consider and weigh all of the
circumstances enumerated in the statute, to the extent they are relevant to the
case before it. . . .

   " 'In making its spousal support order, the trial court possesses broad
discretion so as to fairly exercise the weighing process contemplated by section
4320, with the goal of accomplishing substantial justice for the parties in the
case before it.' [Citation.] In balancing the applicable statutory factors, the
trial court has discretion to determine the appropriate weight to accord to
each. [Citation.] But the 'court may not be arbitrary; it must exercise its
discretion along legal lines, taking into consideration the applicable
circumstances of the parties set forth in [the statute], especially reasonable
needs and their financial abilities.' [Citation.] Furthermore,  the court does
not have discretion to ignore any relevant circumstance enumerated in the
statute. To the contrary, the trial judge must both recognize and apply each
applicable statutory factor in setting spousal support. [Citations.] Failure to
do so is reversible error. [Citations.]" (In re Marriage of Cheriton, supra, 92
Cal. App. 4th at pp. 302-304, fn. omitted.)

    It appears the court simply accepted Patricia's figure of $ 1,500 per month
for spousal support, which she requested (under § 3592) without any explanation
of how she arrived at this amount. In her subsequent written pleadings in
support of the request, she conceded section 3592 did not apply in this case but
she attempted to justify the figure nonetheless, based on some of the factors
listed in section 4320.

    The critical factor here seems to be James's ability to pay such a large
amount since, if his income and expense declaration is correct, he would be left
without any money to pay his basic living expenses. In her pleadings, Patricia
argues for example, that James's income is sufficient when combined with that of
his present wife. That, however, is not a factor the court may consider. (§
4323, subd. (b); In re Marriage of Serna (2000) 85 Cal.App.4th 482, 487 [102
Cal. Rptr. 2d 188].) Moreover, according to her income and expense declaration,
two of Patricia's adult children live with her but neither has any income.
However, the court may not award support for an adult child under the guise of
spousal support. (Serna, supra, 85 Cal. App. 4th at pp. 487-489.)

   These are only two examples. We cannot determine from the record whether the
court considered additional factors it should not have, and/or failed to
consider some others it was required to take into account under section 4320.
For instance, we note that James, according to his income and expense
declaration, was paying or was obligated to pay $ 400 per month to the
bankruptcy trustee against a debt with a balance (in November of 2000) of $
7,000. However, the record does not disclose whether, as seems possible, some
part of this payment was meant to be applied toward James's remaining property
settlement obligation after bankruptcy. Therefore, we conclude the court abused
its discretion in ordering James to pay spousal support in the amount of $ 1,500
per month.

   We reach the same conclusion with regard to the court's order directing James
to pay Patricia's attorney fees. "Trial courts enjoy broad discretion in
awarding attorneys' fees in marital proceedings. [Citation.] The exercise of
that discretion is guided by statute." (In re Marriage of Cheriton, supra, 92
Cal. App.  4th at p. 314.) As relevant here, section 2032 provides:

   "(a) The court may make an award of attorney's fees and costs under Section
2030 or 2031 where the making of the award, and the amount of the award, are
just and reasonable under the relative circumstances of the respective parties.

   "(b) In determining what is just and reasonable under the relative
circumstances, the court shall take into consideration the need for the award to
enable each party, to the extent practical, to have sufficient financial
resources to present the party's case adequately, taking into consideration, to
the extent relevant, the circumstances of the respective parties described in
Section 4320. . . ."

    Here again, it appears the court failed to consider the appropriate
statutory factors in determining the amount James should be required to pay each
month (although it reduced the total from $ 2,500 to $ 2,000). " 'It is well
established in California that, although the trial court has considerable
discretion in fashioning a need-based fee award [citation], the record must
reflect that the trial court actually exercised that discretion, and considered
the statutory factors in exercising that discretion.' [Citation.]" (In re
Marriage of Cheriton, supra, 92 Cal. App. 4th at p. 315, italics added.) For the
reasons we have explained, the record in the present case does not leave us any
room to conclude the court exercised its discretion as the law requires.

   DISPOSITION

   The judgment is reversed and the matter remanded to allow the trial court to
consider all statutory factors under sections 4320 and 2032, stating on the
record the bases for its decision. 9 Costs are awarded to appellant.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -9   James may
not, of course, relitigate the court's determination in 1994 that he owed
Patricia $ 25,820.78 to equalize the division of community property. But what is
at issue here is not the amount of that obligation but the effect of its
discharge in bankruptcy on his duty to pay spousal support. We do not believe
the principle of res judicata precludes the court from considering subsequent
events affecting the property division in deciding what would be a "just and
equitable" amount of spousal support. (§ 4320, subd. (l).)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Cornell, J., and Gomes, J., concurred.


                              75 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             In re the Marriage of NANCY and JEFFREY FACTER. NANCY
               FACTER, Respondent, v. JEFFREY FACTER, Appellant.

                                    A134191

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FIRST APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION ONE

          212 Cal. App. 4th 967; 152 Cal. Rptr. 3d 79; 2013 Cal. App.
                                    LEXIS 20


                        January 14, 2013, Opinion Filed

PRIOR-HISTORY:
   Superior Court of Marin County, No. FL-110213, Verna A. Adams, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(3) Dissolution of Marriage § 77--Spousal Support--Premarital Waiver--
Unconscionable--Severability.--A spousal support waiver in a 1994 premarital
agreement was unconscionable because a significant  inequality of bargaining
power was suggested by the great disparity in the parties' incomes and assets at
the time they entered into the agreement and by the fact that the husband
drafted the agreement and said the spousal support waiver could not be
negotiated. Further, at the time he sought enforcement, the husband had
self-reported separate property in excess of $10 million and earnings of $1
million per year, while the wife had amassed no separate property during the
marriage and had no income at all. The unconscionable provision should have been
severed from a valid waiver of community property rights.

   [Kirkland et al., Cal. Family Law Practice and Procedure (2012) ch. 50, §
50.05; Cal. Forms of Pleading and Practice (2012) ch. 225, Dissolution of
Marriage: Spousal Support, § 225.33.]

COUNSEL: Garrett C. Dailey for Appellant.

Law Office of Lance A. Russell, Lance A. Russell; and Bernard N. Wolf for
Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Dondero, J., with Margulies, Acting P. J., and Banke, J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: Dondero, J.

OPINION

    DONDERO, J.--In 1994, Jeffrey and Nancy Facter1 executed a premarital
agreement providing, among other things, that none of the property acquired
during the marriage would be deemed community property. Sixteen years later the
parties separated and divorce proceedings were initiated. After contested
proceedings, the trial court declared the premarital agreement invalid in its
entirety. Jeffrey appeals, contending the trial court erred in nullifying the
contract instead of severing any illegal terms and preserving the balance of the
agreement. We agree and reverse.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   For
clarity, "we refer to the parties by their first names, as a convenience to the
reader. We do not intend this informality to reflect a lack of respect." (In re
Marriage of Balcof (2006) 141 Cal.App.4th 1509, 1513, fn. 2 [47 Cal.Rptr.3d 183]
.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

FACTUAL BACKGROUND AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY

I. Background and Pretrial Proceedings

   The parties entered into the premarital agreement (the Agreement) on November
7, 1994. The Agreement itself consists of four pages and has three sections
entitled "Property Rights," "Child Support," and "Other Provisions." Attached to
the Agreement are two exhibits setting forth Jeffrey's separate property (then
totaling approximately $3 million), and his earnings of between $475,000 and
$700,000 in each of the prior five years. Paragraph No. 1, under the Property
Rights section, states that none of the property acquired during the marriage
would be community property.2 This section also purports to limit Jeffrey's
postmarital financial obligations  to Nancy. Paragraph No. 2 of the Agreement
sets forth the property she is to receive from Jeffrey in the event of permanent
separation or divorce. In it, he promised to give her $100,000, plus an
additional $100,000 if the marriage lasted at least 15 years and he was a
partner at his law firm for at least seven years.3 She is also to receive: (1)
"One half of any sum earned from the sale of the marital residence ... after the
return to [Jeffrey] of the downpayment [sic] that he made ... and less any
expenses, fees and taxes incurred in connection with that sale," (2) all of that
home's furnishing, and (3) a Jaguar automobile. The Child Support section seeks
to limit his future child support obligations. The parties married the day after
they signed the Agreement. The marriage produced a son, who was born in March
1996.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   The
Agreement begins as follows: "In consideration of their sharing a home, and of
their marriage, and of the promises contained in this agreement, Jeffrey Facter
('H[']) and Nancy Riter ('W') agree as follows: [¶] ... [¶] 1. None of the
property acquired during their marriage shall be community property."
3   It appears the payment here would be $200,000 total as the marriage lasted
16 years and Jeffrey was a partner at his law firm for more than seven years
during the marriage.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   On December 5, 2010, the parties separated.

   On February 4, 2011, Jeffrey filed a response to Nancy's petition for
dissolution of marriage. In the response, he requested a confirmation of the
property rights as set forth in the Agreement.

   On April 13, 2011, Nancy filed a motion for temporary support and fees. In a
declaration accompanying the motion, she stated Jeffrey had told her he did not
believe he had to pay her any spousal support.4 He also said his  obligation to
pay child support was limited by the terms of the Agreement. She reported that
during the entirety of their marriage she never worked outside the home, as
Jeffrey's income allowed them "to live a life completely free of any financial
stress or worry." She expressed concern that Jeffrey would rely on the Agreement
in opposing her motion, and reserved the right to assert the unenforceability of
the entire contract. Her attorney also filed a declaration, stating, in part,
his view that the enforceability of the Agreement's property provisions were not
presently before the court. He affirmed, however, that his client was not
waiving her right to challenge the Agreement. He also claimed the Agreement's
provisions regarding child support were invalid, and argued that the document
did not contain a waiver of spousal support.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   The right
to spousal support is statutory. Family Code section 4330, subdivision (a),
provides: "In a judgment of dissolution of marriage or legal separation of the
parties, the court may order a party to pay for the support of the other party
an amount, for a period of time, that the court determines is just and
reasonable, based on the standard of living established during the marriage,
taking into consideration the circumstances as provided in Chapter 2 (commencing
with Section 4320)."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Also on April 13, 2011, Jeffrey filed a memorandum of points and authorities
in response to Nancy's motion for temporary support and fees. He asserted the
Agreement contains a waiver of spousal support that was "contemplated and
mutually agreed to." He relied, in part, on language contained in Paragraph No.
6 in the Child Support section, which provides that nothing in his conditional
commitment to continue to pay the mortgage, taxes, and insurance on the marital
home "shall give rise to any other obligations to pay for the housing of
[Nancy], spousal support, or additional sums for child support." (Italics
added.) He also relied on a provision in Paragraph No. 3 of the Property Rights
section, which states, in part, that the assets enumerated in Paragraph No. 2
(noted above) would "constitute [Nancy's] sole right to property acquired during
the marriage  and to support ... ." (Original italics & boldface.)

   On June 6, 2011, the trial court filed its temporary orders for spousal and
child support, attorney fees, and costs. The issue of the validity of the
Agreement was ordered bifurcated for early resolution.

   On August 4, 2011, Jeffrey filed a "notice of limitation of claims at trial."
In this pleading, he conceded the Agreement's provisions relating to child
support were unenforceable.5 Backing away from his earlier position, he also
indicated that he would not assert the Agreement as a bar to spousal support  or
to payment of Nancy's attorney fees.6 Finally, he stated he would not rely on a
provision in Paragraph No. 2 as grounds for reimbursement of money spent on
improvements made to the marital home.7 He warned he would seek sanctions if
Nancy were to attempt to litigate the issues he was conceding.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   The
Agreement purports to limit Jeffrey's monthly support payments to $900 per
child, regardless of timeshare percentage, and also states that his child
support obligations are nonmodifiable. A child's rights to future support cannot
be barred by contractual agreement between parents. (Krog v. Krog (1948) 32
Cal.2d 812, 817 [198 P.2d 510].)
6   The Agreement contains a provision stating that each party shall pay his or
her own attorney fees, costs, and legal expenses incurred in connection with any
issue regarding the dissolution of the marriage or any litigation over the
Agreement.
7   As noted above, Paragraph No. 2 of the Agreement states that in the event of
permanent separation or divorce Nancy would receive a specified lump sum as well
as half the profits from the sale of the marital home, less Jeffrey's
downpayment and "any expenses, fees and taxes incurred in connection with that
sale." (Italics added.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   On August 17, 2011, Jeffrey filed his trial brief. He again conceded the
Agreement was unenforceable with respect to child support and attorney fees. He
also clarified that although he had drafted the Agreement with the intent to
provide for a waiver of spousal support, he would not seek to enforce that
waiver. His stated intention in making these concessions in his August 4, 2011
pleading was to avoid trial on the validity of the remainder of the Agreement.
As that effort had proved unsuccessful, he focused his arguments on Paragraph
No. 1, the provision stating that none of the property acquired during the
marriage would be deemed community property. He further argued that the
severability clause in the Agreement required the property provisions of the
contract to be honored, notwithstanding the admittedly invalid provisions
concerning child support and attorney fees.

   On August 18, 2011, Jeffrey filed a motion in limine in which he claimed the
issues of the spousal support waiver, child support, and attorney fees were
"irrelevant" because they had been removed "from the case."

   The trial on the bifurcated issue of the validity of the Agreement was heard
on August 22 and 23, 2011.

II. The Trial

A. Nancy Facter

   Nancy testified that she met Jeffrey in 1990. At that time, she had a
part-time job at Nordstrom's and Jeffrey was working at a law firm. As their
relationship progressed, Jeffrey gave her financial support including buying her
a used car and giving her money to take a real estate licensing course. When she
stopped working shortly before their marriage, he paid all the living expenses
for her and for her two children from a prior marriage. He never asked to be
reimbursed for any of these expenses. They decided to  purchase a home together
in the spring of 1994,  prior to their marriage. Both of their names are on the
title to the property.8

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -8   The deed
to the home reflects that the parties hold the property as joint tenants.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Jeffrey wanted to have a child but Nancy told him she would not do so outside
of marriage. Around the time they purchased their home, he told her he was
afraid of marriage because he had worked hard all his life, had earned a lot of
money, and wanted all that he had earned prior to marriage to be protected. He
asked if she would sign a prenuptial agreement. She said she understood that he
needed to protect his prior earnings, but told him she would not enter into a
marriage unless the union was a "partnership" without separate finances. He
assented and said he would prepare an agreement. When he gave her the draft of
the Agreement he told her to take it to a family law attorney who would explain
it to her, but advised her that absolutely no changes could be made to the
document. He did not discuss any of its provisions with her.

   Nancy showed the draft Agreement to an attorney in San Francisco whose name
she could not recall, as well as an attorney in San Rafael named Charlotte
Huggins. Huggins took a few minutes to review the document and told her the
child support section was contrary to California law because any decisions
regarding child support would be determined by the court. She advised Nancy that
the Agreement did not contain a waiver of spousal support or attorney fees. She
also noted that if the marital home was sold in the event of a divorce, Jeffrey
would receive a refund of his downpayment, as well as any expenses relating to
the sale of the house. After that, they would split the profits from the sale.
She also told Nancy any earnings or funds that were put into joint accounts
would be considered joint funds. Nancy paid Huggins a fee and never saw her
again. The entire meeting took less than 30 minutes.

   Nancy and Jeffrey signed the Agreement just before their wedding. They never
discussed the Agreement's terms.9 She signed it because she believed it
protected her interests in that if the marriage failed she would receive spousal
support and half of the value of the marital home, and would have a joint
interest in the money he had earned during marriage because she understood all
his earnings would be held jointly. Had she known Jeffrey would claim all his
earnings during marriage were his sole and separate property, she would not have
signed the Agreement. She also would not have signed it if she had known he was
going to claim it entitled him to reimbursement for the almost $2 million spent
on remodeling the marital home.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -9   In his
trial brief, Jeffrey accused Nancy of having committed fraud when she signed the
Agreement because she failed to disclose her knowledge that it contained some
unenforceable provisions. He claimed evidence of Nancy's alleged fraudulent
intent both impugned her credibility and proved she signed the Agreement
voluntarily.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Nancy testified the parties agreed their marriage would be "very traditional"
in that she would be a stay-at-home mom, take care of the house, and support him
in his career. Jeffrey told Nancy he made more than enough money to provide for
the family and she would never have to worry about money again. During the
marriage, he controlled their finances. Whenever she asked him if he was keeping
any of his earnings as separate property he would deny doing so. He always said
his money was "our money." They also had several joint accounts.

   On cross-examination, Nancy admitted she read the entire Agreement before she
signed it. With respect to her understanding of Paragraph No. 1, she testified
she was advised that any earnings held jointly would be owned jointly. Since the
parties had agreed Jeffrey's income would be held jointly during marriage, she
understood that she would have a joint interest in all of his earnings. She
acknowledged they did not have a written agreement that he would deposit all of
his earnings into joint accounts. She testified her attorneys did not tell her
the Agreement's integration clause would make any oral promises unenforceable.10
She agreed no undue influence was placed on her to sign the Agreement. She also
knew the Agreement could only be modified in writing, and that it contained a
severability clause, which she also read and understood.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -10   The
integration clause provides: "This agreement is fully integrated and sets forth
the entire understanding of the parties. Neither party has made any
representation to, or relied upon any representation by, the other party except
those representations set forth in this agreement."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

B. Charlotte Huggins

   Attorney Charlotte Huggins testified she had no recollection of having
consulted with Nancy, and had no notes or files from 1994. If a client had asked
her to review a prenuptial agreement in 1994, she would have gone over the
document with the client and explained the legal meaning of its provisions. As
to whether she would have advised a client to refrain from telling his or her
prospective spouse that any part of the agreement was legally invalid, Huggins
testified she had no recollection of what she would have done in 1994.

C. Jeffrey Facter

   Jeffrey graduated from Harvard Law School and has been a partner at his
current law firm since 1989. His areas of concentration are securities and
corporate governance litigation. When the couple first met, Nancy was selling
shoes at Nordstrom's. She did not like that job and wanted to get a real estate
license. He paid for her to take a course and she passed the exam and  obtained
her license. She later decided she did not want to be a real estate agent.
During this time, she was involved in divorce litigation with her prior husband.
For a layperson, she was very savvy about the laws on community property,
support, and support arrearages. She also knew about things like DissoMaster,
which he had never heard of before.11

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -11   Nancy
testified that her previous marriage had lasted for eight years. When she got
divorced, she and her former husband went through the court system. During the
proceedings, there were disputes regarding support and attorney fees.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Before they married, they purchased a home in Mill Valley. Title to the house
was taken in joint tenancy, though Nancy did not contribute any money towards
the purchase. When they discussed getting married, Jeffrey explained to her that
he had worked hard to get where he was in his career and could not go forward
with a marriage unless his earnings would be legally his. He also told her he
did not want to have any continuing financial obligations to her if their
marriage ended. However, he reassured her that as long as they were married she
could spend his earnings as she chose. He would not have any rules about
spending and would not be watching her. When she assented, he was relieved and
told her he would write something up. He thus had two goals in drafting a
prenuptial agreement: "First, I needed an agreement that the earnings during the
marriage would be legally mine." He wanted Nancy to promise that all property
acquired during the marriage, including profit distributions from his firm and
investment  earnings, would not be community property. He sought to convey this
concept in Paragraph No. 1 of the Agreement. Secondly, he wanted to preclude any
postmarital payments to Nancy, apart from those set forth in the Agreement.

   When he drafted the Agreement, Jeffrey had no family law expertise and he did
not consult with a family law attorney. He also did not do any legal research on
family law because he wanted only a very basic agreement that would cover his
two primary issues. He thought the language of the Agreement was simple and
straightforward, and he assumed if anything was amiss Nancy's attorney would
bring it to his attention. When the trial judge asked Jeffrey whether he would
have entered into the marriage had he known he would later have to abandon the
spousal support waiver, he answered, "I would not have, your Honor. The spousal
support waiver was hugely important to me. Not as important as my earnings
during the marriage, but this sort of open-ended paying money to someone who
walked out on me, or may walk out on me, that was a nightmare to me. And I would
not have done that."

   After Jeffrey drafted the Agreement, he gave it to Nancy and told her to get
independent legal advice from a family law attorney. He denied telling her the
document could not be modified, but he did tell her two aspects of it  could not
be altered. Specifically, Paragraph No. 1 was nonnegotiable. Paragraph No. 2,
while negotiable, would set forth all that Nancy would receive in lieu of
community property and spousal support in the event the marriage failed. He
denied promising her at that time that he would put all of his earnings into
joint accounts. He also denied telling her the only purpose of the Agreement was
to protect his existing separate property. He understood it is not necessary to
have a prenuptial agreement to protect property that is separately owned prior
to marriage. Instead, such agreements are used to clarify whether earnings
acquired during marriage are going to remain separate property. She never
indicated to him that she did not believe the Agreement was binding.

   Jeffrey affirmed that, with his assent, Nancy never worked for compensation
during the marriage. He told her he would take care of her financially for as
long as they were together. For the first four years of their marriage, the
parties had separate bank accounts. Beginning in 1998, they opened a few joint
accounts. One of the accounts was used to pay for the home remodeling project.
They made it a joint account so that Nancy would be able to write checks to the
contractors.12 They also opened a joint checking account to cover day-to-day
household expenses. Around 2007, Nancy started pressuring him to put more assets
into joint accounts. This was when she first said she wanted to feel more like
an economic partner in the marriage. They talked it over and he agreed to put
everything he earned into joint accounts. She took over paying all of their
bills. In his mind, all his earnings were still his separate property, but he
put the money into joint accounts because it was important to her that she run
the household finances.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -12   At
trial, Jeffrey denied asserting that the word "expenses" in Paragraph No. 2 of
the Agreement entitled him to recoup the costs of improvements made to the
marital home. However, he believed reimbursement would be authorized under
Paragraph No. 1 because the improvements had not been funded with community
property.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

III. The Trial Court's Ruling

   On October 14, 2011, the trial court orally announced its tentative decision,
declaring  the spousal support waiver to be unconscionable and finding the
Agreement inseverable and unenforceable in its entirety.

   On October 28, 2011, Jeffrey filed his objections to the trial court's
tentative decision.

   On November 28, 2011, the trial court filed its statement of decision,
affirming its tentative ruling. This appeal followed.

DISCUSSION

   On appeal, Jeffrey contends the allegedly invalid spousal support waiver
provided no legal basis for the trial court's refusal to enforce the
property-related provisions of the Agreement. Although we disagree in some
respects with the court's analysis, we agree the Agreement contains an invalid,
unconscionable waiver of spousal support. We concur with Jeffrey, however, that
the court erred in refusing to sever the Agreement's invalid provisions from the
balance of the contract.

The Spousal Support Waiver

A. The Agreement Contains a Waiver of Spousal Support

   We first address Jeffrey's claim that the trial court erred in presuming the
Agreement contains a waiver of spousal support. His argument is based on the
assertion that there is no waiver because the document does not contain a "
legally effective waiver of spousal support." (Italics added.) He also asserts
the court predicated its ruling on "an impermissible application of the doctrine
of judicial estoppel" because, by the time of trial, he had reversed his earlier
position and decided he would no longer seek to enforce the waiver against
Nancy. His arguments lack merit.

   We first observe that the trial court's duty was to interpret the Agreement
itself, not Jeffrey's 180-degree turn away from his prior position. "The
interpretation of a written instrument is essentially a judicial function to be
exercised according to the generally accepted canons of interpretation so that
the purposes of the instrument may be given effect." (In re Marriage of Smith
(2007) 148 Cal.App.4th 1115, 1120 [56 Cal.Rptr.3d 341].) In interpreting a
written agreement, we "look first to the language of the contract ... to
ascertain its plain meaning or the meaning a layperson would ordinarily attach
to it." (Waller v. Truck Ins. Exchange, Inc. (1995) 11 Cal.4th 1, 18 [44
Cal.Rptr.2d 370, 900 P.2d 619].) "A contract must be so interpreted as to give
effect to the mutual intention of the parties as it existed at the time of
contracting, so far as the same is ascertainable and lawful." (Civ. Code, § 1636
.) The intent is to be inferred, if possible, solely from the written provisions
of the contract. (Civ. Code, § 1639.) Language in a contract must be interpreted
as a whole and in the circumstances of the case, and cannot be deemed ambiguous
in the abstract. (Bank of the West v. Superior Court (1992) 2 Cal.4th 1254,
1264-1265 [10 Cal.Rptr.2d 538, 833 P.2d 545]; see Civ. Code, §§ 1641, 1647.)

   As noted above, Paragraph No. 2 spells out what Nancy is to receive in the
event of divorce, including cash and half the profits from the sale of the
marital home. Paragraph No. 3 contains the spousal support waiver: "The
provisions of paragraph 2, supra, constitute [Nancy's] sole right to property
acquired during the marriage and to support, and replace or supersede any
entitlement to such property that [Nancy] might otherwise have under law."
(Italics added.) Jeffrey contends his use of the word "support" rather than
"spousal support" created "some ambiguity as to the meaning of 'support.' "
Relying on In re Marriage of Vomacka (1984) 36 Cal.3d 459, 469 [204 Cal.Rptr.
568, 683 P.2d 248] ["where there is an ambiguity in the language of a marital
property agreement it must be decided in favor of the right to spousal support
."], he further asserts that opinion "precludes finding that there is a waiver
of spousal support in the Agreement."13 However, as he admits, he not only
"intended to achieve a waiver of spousal support" when he drafted the Agreement,
he initially asserted this waiver in opposition to Nancy's motion for temporary
spousal support.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -13   In any
event, Vomacka is inapposite. That case concerned the interpretation of a
stipulated separation agreement that was incorporated into the parties'
interlocutory judgment of dissolution of marriage. Thus, it did not concern
waivers of spousal support in premarital agreements.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Even if the word "support" as it appears in Paragraph No. 3 is ambiguous, we
would interpret it as referencing spousal support. In general, an ambiguous or
uncertain provision of a contract "must be interpreted in the sense in which the
promisor believed, at the time of making it, that the promisee understood it." (
Civ. Code, § 1649.) " '[W]here the language of the contract is ambiguous, it is
the duty of the court to resolve the ambiguity by taking into account all the
facts, circumstances and conditions surrounding the execution of the contract.'
" (Frankel v. Board of Dental Examiners (1996) 46 Cal.App.4th 534, 544 [54
Cal.Rptr.2d 128], quoting Floystrup v. City of Berkeley Rent Stabilization Bd.
(1990) 219 Cal.App.3d 1309, 1318 [268 Cal.Rptr. 898].) If extrinsic evidence is
admitted to interpret an ambiguous contract but that evidence is undisputed and
the parties draw conflicting inferences, a reviewing court independently draws
inferences and interprets the contract. (City of El Cajon v. El Cajon Police
Officers' Assn. (1996) 49 Cal.App.4th 64, 71 [56 Cal.Rptr.2d 723]; Richeson v.
Helal (2007) 158 Cal.App.4th 268, 276 [70 Cal.Rptr.3d 18]; Frankel, supra, at p.
546.)

   The only other meaning that could be ascribed to the word "support" in
Paragraph No. 3 would be that it references child support. However, the
Agreement specifically addresses child support in another section.14 Moreover,
Paragraph No. 3 appears under the heading "Property Rights," which clearly is
intended to define the property rights as between Jeffrey and Nancy. Paragraph
No. 2, which is cross-referenced in Paragraph No. 3, pertains  entirely to
Nancy's property rights. Thus, we have little difficulty in concluding the word
"support" in Paragraph No. 3 represents a waiver of spousal support.15

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -14   As noted
previously, spousal support is also referenced in Paragraph No. 6, which is
contained in the section on child support.
15   Candidly, the language on this point in the Agreement is less than ideal.
We note a much more straightforward waiver is found in the case of In re
Marriage of Pendleton and Fireman (2000) 24 Cal.4th 39, 41 [99 Cal. Rptr. 2d
278, 5 P.3d 839] (Pendleton): " '[B]oth parties now and forever waive, in the
event of a dissolution of the marriage, all rights to any type of spousal
support or child support from the other ... .' "
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

B. Spousal Support Waivers Executed in 1994 Are Not Illegal

   Jeffrey asserts the trial court erred in concluding the spousal support
waiver was illegal as a matter of law when the Agreement was executed in 1994.
We agree the court's analysis on this point is flawed.

   The trial court found that when the Agreement was signed, "the spousal
support waiver was illegal" per In re Marriage of Higgason (1973) 10 Cal.3d 476
[110 Cal.Rptr. 897, 516 P.2d 289] (Higgason) "and dicta" in In re Marriage of
Dawley (1976) 17 Cal.3d 342 [131 Cal.Rptr. 3, 551 P.2d 323] (Dawley).16 Our
Supreme Court has described Higgason as follows: "At issue in Higgason was an
agreement in which both husband and wife waived all interest in the property of
the other party as well as the right to support. The court concluded that a
purported waiver was invalid as against public policy insofar as the agreement
sought to alter the wife's statutory obligation to support the husband during
marriage. The court also held that the agreement did not preclude exercise of
the court's discretionary power to award postdissolution support. [Citation.]
Although the basis for the latter holding is not made clear in the opinion, it
appears to be that married persons assume, by means of the marriage contract, an
obligation for support that continues throughout the lifetime of the parties
regardless of whether they live together or apart, and any agreement to waive
that obligation is also unenforceable." (Pendleton, supra, 24 Cal.4th 39, 46.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -16   In
Dawley, the parties had agreed before marriage that the earnings and property
acquired during marriage would be held as separate property. The high court
concluded Higgason had erred in stating that premarital agreements must be made
in contemplation that the marriage will continue throughout the lifetime of the
parties. (Dawley, supra, 17 Cal.3d 342, 352.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In Pendleton, our Supreme Court essentially overruled Higgason and held that
spousal support waivers in premarital agreements are not invalid per se. (
Pendleton, supra, 24 Cal.4th 39, 53.) The court noted that the Uniform
Premarital Agreement Act (Fam. Code, § 1600 et seq.; UPAA) was enacted in
California in 1985 (12 years after Higgason was decided), and that its
provisions expressly apply to premarital agreements. (Pendleton, supra, at pp.
43, fn. 3, & 44; Fam. Code, § 1610 et seq.)17 The premarital agreement at  issue
in Pendleton was executed in 1991 (Pendleton, supra, at p. 41), three years
before Nancy and Jeffrey entered into the Agreement. Thus, under the trial
court's reasoning, the Supreme Court should have held the waiver of spousal
support contained therein was illegal under Higgason. Instead, the Supreme Court
held that waivers of spousal support are not invalid per se:18 "[W]hen entered
into voluntarily by parties who are aware of the effect of the agreement, a
premarital waiver of spousal support does not offend contemporary public policy.
Such agreements are, therefore, permitted under section 1612, subdivision (a)(7)
, which authorizes the parties to contract in a premarital agreement regarding
'[a]ny other matter, including their personal rights and obligations, not in
violation of public policy or a statute imposing a criminal penalty.' " (
Pendleton, supra, at p. 53, italics added.) Thus, the trial court in the present
case erred in relying on Higgason as the basis for invalidating the Agreement's
spousal support waiver.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -17   All
further statutory references are to the Family Code except as otherwise
indicated.
18   We note the trial court's statement of decision also references Pendleton.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

C. Whether the Spousal Support Waiver Is Unconscionable

   We turn to whether the Agreement's spousal support waiver is unconscionable.
We apply a de novo standard of review. (See former § 1615, subd. (b) ["An issue
of unconscionability of a premarital agreement shall be decided by the court as
a matter of law."].) The trial court  found the spousal support waiver to be
unconscionable under section 1612, subdivision (c), and Pendleton.19 We observe
the appellate court in In re Marriage of Howell (2011) 195 Cal.App.4th 1062 [126
Cal.Rptr.3d 539] (Howell) issued an opinion on May 24, 2011, holding that the
2002 amendment to section 1612, subdivision (c), does not apply retroactively.20
(Howell, supra, at p. 1077.) As noted, the trial in the instant case was held in
August 2011 and the statement of decision was filed on November 28, 2011.
Accordingly, per Howell, the court's reliance on section 1612, subdivision (c),
was misplaced.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -19   The
trial court's statement of decision references both section 1612, subdivision
(c), and section 1615, subdivision (c). It appears the court intended to rely on
current section 1612, subdivision (c) only, as former section 1615 does not
contain a subdivision (c), and subdivision (c) of current section 1615 pertains
to voluntariness, not to unconscionability.
20   Section 1612, subdivision (c), currently provides: "Any provision in a
premarital agreement regarding spousal support, including, but not limited to, a
waiver of it, is not enforceable if the party against whom enforcement of the
spousal support provision is sought was not represented by independent counsel
at the time the agreement containing the provision was signed, or if the
provision regarding spousal support is unconscionable at the time of
enforcement. An otherwise unenforceable provision in a premarital agreement
regarding spousal support may not become enforceable solely because the party
against whom enforcement is sought was represented by independent counsel."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   We note the Supreme Court in Pendleton did not set a precise standard for
when a spousal waiver is deemed unconscionable.21 However, the opinion is
instructive: "We need not decide here whether circumstances existing at the time
enforcement of a waiver of spousal support is sought might make enforcement
unjust. It is enough to conclude here that no public policy is violated by
permitting enforcement of a waiver of spousal support executed by intelligent,
well-educated persons, each of whom appears to be self-sufficient in property
and earning ability, and both of whom have the advice of counsel regarding their
rights and obligations as marital partners at the time they execute the waiver.
Such a waiver does not violate public policy and is not per se unenforceable ...
." (Pendleton, supra, 24 Cal.4th 39, 53-54, fn. omitted, italics added.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -21   Former
section 1615 (pertaining to unenforceable premarital agreements) applies to
premarital agreements as a whole and does not specifically reference spousal
support waivers. Accordingly, we rely primarily on case law in evaluating
whether the waiver in the Agreement is unconscionable. (See Pendleton, supra, 24
Cal.4th 39, 48-49 ["The most reasonable understanding of the Legislature's
purpose when it omitted [the UPAA's spousal support language from section 1612's
list of permissible objects of a premarital agreement] is that it was satisfied
with the evolution of the common law governing premarital waivers of spousal
support and intended to permit that evolution to continue."].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In Pendleton, the wife, who held a master's degree and was an aspiring
writer, sought spousal support in spite of a waiver of such support contained in
the parties' premarital agreement. At the time the dissolution petition was
filed, each party had a net worth of approximately $2.5 million. (Pendleton,
supra, 24 Cal.4th 39, 42.) Our Supreme Court found the waiver to be valid,
observing that the premarital agreement contained an acknowledgement that "each
party had been represented by independent counsel in the negotiation and
preparation of the agreement, that counsel had advised each of the meaning and
legal consequences of the agreement, and that  each party had read and
understood the agreement and its legal consequences. Their respective counsel
certified that this had been done and that their clients understood the meaning
and legal consequences of the agreement and executed it freely and voluntarily."
(Id. at p. 41.)

   Similarly, in Howell, the parties had comparable net incomes when they
executed their premarital agreement in 1999. (Howell, supra, 195 Cal.App.4th
1062, 1065.) The trial court had ruled that the wife failed to prove the
agreement was unconscionable, finding the parties had made " 'fair, reasonable
and full' " (id. at p. 1069) disclosures of property within the premarital
agreement. Additionally, the trial court in that case had found there was not a
great disparity in the income of the parties and their respective assets at the
time they entered into the premarital agreement, which established there was not
"any significant inequality of bargaining power." (Id. at p. 1080.) The
appellate court affirmed the trial court's conclusion that the spousal support
waiver contained in the agreement was not unconscionable.22

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -22   The
waiver provided: " 'The parties mutually waive any right to receive future
spousal support, maintenance or alimony from the other in the event of a
Dissolution of Marriage or Legal Separation.' " (Howell, supra, 195 Cal.App.4th
1062, 1066-1067.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Unlike the wife in Pendleton, Nancy was not a "well-educated person,
self-sufficient in property and earning capacity," at the time that she entered
the Agreement. Rather, she was a recently unemployed high school graduate with
two minor children, living rent free in the home Jeffrey had financed for them.
In contrast, Jeffrey was an accomplished attorney, a graduate of Harvard Law
school who earned roughly half a million dollars a year and had $3 million of
separate property at the time of the marriage, including a home in Tiburon.
Nancy had no property of her own. Thus, unlike circumstances in Howell, here
there was a great disparity in the parties' respective incomes and assets at the
time they entered into the Agreement. This factor also suggests a "significant
inequality of bargaining power" (Howell, supra, 195 Cal.App.4th 1062, 1080), an
inference that is further supported by the fact that Jeffrey not only drafted
the Agreement himself but also told that her the spousal support waiver could
not be negotiated.

   The Supreme Court in Pendleton also suggested that circumstances existing at
the time of the enforcement of a spousal support waiver "might make enforcement
unjust." (Pendleton, supra, 24 Cal.4th 39, 53.)23 The marriage in the present
case lasted 16 years, during which Nancy, with Jeffrey's assent, did not pursue
her education or seek gainful employment. Instead, she devoted her efforts to
child rearing and maintaining the family home, while Jeffrey continued to
successfully pursue a financially rewarding career. Without reasonable spousal
support, the evidence supports  the conclusion that Nancy will never come close
to replicating the marital standard of living. As noted above, under Paragraph
No. 2 of the Agreement, she will receive a cash payment of $200,000, half of
which Jeffrey has the option of paying in undefined increments over a five-year
period. In addition, she will receive half of the net proceeds from the sale of
the marital home (an amount that cannot be determined at this time), along with
the home's furniture and a Jaguar automobile. Compared to what she is likely to
receive in court-ordered  spousal support, these assets are manifestly
inadequate.24 Given that Jeffrey's self-reported separate property is now in
excess of $10 million and his earnings $1 million per year, whereas Nancy
amassed no separate property during the marriage and has no income at all, we
have little difficulty in concluding that the Agreement's spousal support waiver
is presently unconscionable.25

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -23   The
appellate court in Howell held that former section 1615, subdivision (a)(2),
requires unconscionability to be evaluated solely at the time of the waiver's
execution as section 1612, subdivision (c), was not intended to apply
retroactively and the later statute specifies that unconscionability of a
spousal support waiver is to be evaluated at the time of enforcement. (Howell,
supra, 195 Cal.App.4th 1062, 1078, fn. 11.) We observe, this holding was based
primarily on the revised statute's requirement that a party be represented by
counsel, not on the provision allowing for evaluation of unconscionability at
the time the waiver is to be enforced. (Id. at p. 1077.)
24   On June 6, 2011, the trial court ordered monthly temporary guideline
spousal support in the amount of $21,757 per month, along with temporary child
support of $5,983 per month.
25   We note Jeffrey arguably forfeited this issue when he stated in his "notice
of limitation of claims at trial" that he would not claim that the Agreement
waived spousal support.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

D. Whether the Spousal Support Waiver Renders the Agreement Unenforceable

   Jeffrey claims the trial court erred in concluding that the unconscionable
spousal support waiver renders the entire Agreement unenforceable. We agree.

   Because the agreement was executed in 1994, we apply the version of section
1615 that was in effect at that time. Former section 1615, subdivision (a),
provides: "A premarital agreement is not enforceable if the party against whom
enforcement is sought proves either of the following: [¶] (1) That party did not
execute the agreement voluntarily. [¶] (2) The agreement was unconscionable when
it was executed and, before execution of the agreement, all of the following
applied to that party: [¶] (A) That party was not provided a fair and reasonable
disclosure of the property or financial obligations of the other party. [¶] (B)
That party did not voluntarily and expressly waive, in writing, any right to
disclosure of the property or financial obligations of the other party beyond
the disclosure provided. [¶] (C) That party did not have, or reasonably could
not have had, an adequate knowledge of the property or financial obligations of
the other party." (Italics added.)

   As Jeffrey correctly notes, unconscionability upon execution does not,
standing alone, render a premarital agreement unenforceable under former section
1615. To render an agreement unenforceable, the contesting spouse also must have
lacked actual or constructive knowledge of the assets and obligations of the
other party, unless that spouse waived knowledge of such assets and obligations.
Pursuant to former section 1615, "a premarital agreement will be enforced unless
the party resisting enforcement of the agreement can demonstrate either (1) that
he or she did not enter into the contract voluntarily, or (2) that the contract
was unconscionable when entered into and that he or she did not have actual or
constructive knowledge of the assets and obligations of the other party and did
not voluntarily waive knowledge of  such assets and obligations." (In re
Marriage of Bonds (2000) 24 Cal.4th 1, 15 [99 Cal.Rptr.2d 252, 5 P.3d 815] (
Bonds); see former § 1615, subd. (a)(2).)

    Nancy does not claim she entered into the Agreement involuntarily.
Accordingly, former section 1615, subdivision (a)(2), applies and the trial
court had to find both unconscionability and an absence of fair and reasonable
disclosure of Jeffrey's premarital assets in order to deem the entire Agreement
unenforceable. The trial court concluded that Jeffrey violated this provision by
failing to list the jointly held marital home as his separate property.26 We do
not view this circumstance as constituting a failure to provide fair and
reasonable disclosure. In the first place, it would have been rather odd to list
a home held in joint tenancy as one's separate property. In any event, the
Agreement specifically discloses the existence of the home in Paragraph No. 2,
including the fact that Jeffrey had paid the downpayment, and that he would be
entitled to reimbursement of that payment. There is nothing in the record to
suggest Nancy was unaware of these facts, and she does not claim that Jeffrey
failed to disclose any other asset. Thus, there was no evidence that she lacked
"an adequate knowledge" of Jeffrey's property and financial obligations within
the meaning of former section 1615, subdivision (a)(2)(C). Accordingly, as
Jeffrey's property interests were fully disclosed to her, the dual requirements
of former section 1615, subdivision (a)(2), have not been satisfied and the
agreement as a whole is not unenforceable.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -26   To the
extent the trial court's decision was based on Jeffrey's claim that Paragraph
No. 1 entitles him to reimbursement for the approximately $1.8 million the
parties spent on remodeling the home, we note that issue is not before us.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

E. Severance

   Jeffrey claims the trial court erred in refusing to sever the Agreement's
invalid provisions from those affecting the parties' property rights,
particularly from the provision stating that none of the property acquired
during the marriage would be community property. As noted above, the Agreement
contains a severability clause: "If any clause or provision of this agreement
should be determined to be wholly or partly unenforceable, that determination
shall not affect the enforceability of the other clauses and provisions of this
agreement." In general, severability clauses "evidence the parties' intent that,
to the extent possible, the valid provisions of the contracts be given effect,
even if some provision is found to be invalid or unlawful." (Baeza v. Superior
Court (2011) 201 Cal.App.4th 1214, 1230 [135 Cal.Rptr.3d 557].)

   We review the trial court's ruling on severability under an abuse of
discretion standard: " 'If a contract is capable of severance, the decision
whether to sever the illegal portions and enforce the remainder is a
discretionary decision for the trial court to make based on equitable
considerations. [Citation.]' [Citation.]" (Fair v. Bakhtiari (2011) 195
Cal.App.4th 1135, 1157 [125 Cal.Rptr.3d 765] (Bakhtiari).) "In deciding whether
severance is available, [our Supreme Court has] explained '[t]he overarching
inquiry is whether " 'the interests of justice ... would be furthered' " by
severance.' [Citation.] 'Courts are to look to the various purposes of the
contract. If the central purpose of the contract is tainted with illegality,
then the contract as a whole cannot be enforced. If the illegality is collateral
to the main purpose of the contract, and the illegal provision can be extirpated
from the contract by means of severance or restriction, then such severance and
restriction are appropriate.' [Citations.]" (Marathon Entertainment, Inc. v.
Blasi (2008) 42 Cal.4th 974, 996 [70 Cal.Rptr.3d 727, 174 P.3d 741] (Marathon).)

    Civil Code section 1598 provides: "Where a contract has but a single object,
and such object is unlawful, whether in whole or in part, or wholly impossible
of performance, or so vaguely expressed as to be wholly unascertainable, the
entire contract is void." (Italics added.) This section must be read in
conjunction with Civil Code section 1599, which provides: "Where a contract has
several distinct objects, of which one at least is lawful, and one at least is
unlawful, in whole or in part, the contract is void as to the latter and valid
as to the rest." (Italics added.) Here, the Agreement had three primary objects:
(1) to waive community property rights, (2) to limit Nancy's postdissolution
right to support, and (3) to limit Jeffrey's child support obligations. As we
have seen, the later two objects are invalid in that they are either
unconscionable or contrary to established law. This leaves the waiver of
community property rights, which, based on Jeffrey's testimony, was the central
purpose of the contract.

   "By its terms, [Civil Code section 1599] applies even--indeed, only--when the
parties have contracted, in part, for something illegal. Notwithstanding any
such illegality, it preserves and enforces any lawful portion of a parties'
contract that feasibly may be severed." (Marathon, supra, 42 Cal.4th 974, 991.)
"Civil Code section 1599 grants courts the power, not the duty, to sever
contracts in order to avoid an inequitable windfall or preserve a contractual
relationship where doing so would not condone illegality." (Id. at p. 992.)
Here, the trial court concluded the property rights section was inseverable from
the rest of the Agreement, finding that "The purported waiver of spousal support
is inextricably wrapped up in the property rights section of [the Agreement] and
in the child support section of the document. It is a package, all
interrelated." It also found the Agreement's attorney fee waiver to be illegal
and inseverable from the balance of the contract. We conclude the court abused
its discretion in failing to sever the  invalid provisions pertaining to spousal
support, child support, and attorney fees from the property rights section of
the Agreement.27

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -27   In a
footnote in his opening brief, Jeffrey claims the trial court's "unsupported
conclusion that the attorney fee waiver was not enforceable with respect to
non-child-related fees was erroneous," citing to In re Marriage of Joseph (1990)
217 Cal.App.3d 1277 [266 Cal.Rptr. 548]. We note in his "notice of limitation of
claims at trial," he specifically stated he would "not allege that [the
paragraph containing the fee waiver] is a bar to awards of attorney fees to
petitioner." This concession was reiterated in his closing argument below. As he
has explicitly conceded the issue, we are not inclined to address it in this
opinion. It is axiomatic that "A party is not permitted to change his position
and adopt a new and different theory on appeal. To permit him to do so would not
only be unfair to the trial court, but manifestly unjust to the opposing
litigant." (Ernst v. Searle (1933) 218 Cal. 233, 240-241 [22 P.2d 715]; accord,
In re Marriage of Karlin (1972) 24 Cal.App.3d 25, 33 [101 Cal.Rptr. 240],
disapproved on other grounds in In re Marriage of Brown (1976) 15 Cal.3d 838,
851, fn. 14 [126 Cal.Rptr. 633, 544 P.2d 561].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   We first observe "California cases take a very liberal view of severability,
enforcing valid parts of an apparently indivisible contract where the interests
of justice or the policy of the law would be furthered." (Adair v. Stockton
Unified School Dist. (2008) 162 Cal.App.4th 1436, 1450 [77 Cal.Rptr.3d 62].)
"The purpose of severing or restricting illegal terms rather than voiding the
entire agreement is twofold: ' "to prevent parties from gaining undeserved
benefit or suffering undeserved detriment ... particularly when there has been
full or partial performance of the contract [and,] more generally, ... to
conserve a contractual relationship if to do so would not be condoning an
illegal scheme. [Citations.] ... [Citation.]" ' [Citation.]" (Bakhtiari, supra,
195 Cal.App.4th 1135, 1157.)

   Here, the trial court relied heavily on Civil Code section 1670.5, which
provides: "(a) If the court as a matter of law finds the contract or any clause
of the contract to have been unconscionable at the time it was made the court
may refuse to enforce the contract, or it may enforce the remainder of the
contract without the unconscionable clause, or it may so limit the application
of any unconscionable clause as to avoid any unconscionable result. [¶] (b) When
it is claimed or appears to the court that the contract or any clause thereof
may be unconscionable the parties shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to
present evidence as to its commercial setting, purpose, and effect to aid the
court in making the determination." (Italics added.) As shown by the language of
subdivision (b), this statute is intended to apply to contracts in a "commercial
setting" and not to post-UPAA premarital agreements.

   Our Supreme Court has contrasted premarital agreements with commercial
contracts: "A commercial contract most frequently constitutes a private
regulatory agreement intended to ensure the successful outcome of the  business
between the contracting parties--in essence, to guide their relationship so that
the object of the contract may be achieved. Normally, the execution of the
contract ushers in the applicability of the regulatory scheme contemplated by
the contract and the endeavor that is the object of the contract. As for a
premarital agreement (or clause of such an agreement) providing solely for the
division of property upon marital dissolution, the parties generally enter into
the agreement anticipating that it never will be invoked, and the agreement, far
from regulating the relationship of the contracting parties and providing the
method for attaining their joint objectives, exists to provide for eventualities
that will arise only if the relationship founders, possibly in the distant
future under greatly changed and unforeseeable circumstances." (Bonds, supra, 24
Cal.4th 1, 24-25.)

   Our research has disclosed no reported appellate decisions in which a court
has relied on Civil Code section 1670.5 in deciding whether to limit the
enforcement of a prenuptial agreement that contains an unconscionable provision.
In fact, our Supreme Court has suggested the authors of the UPAA believed
statutes like Civil Code section 1670.5 are inconsistent with the purposes
served by prenuptial agreements. (Bonds, supra, 24 Cal.4th 1, 19, fn. 7.) Code
of Civil Procedure section 1859 states that "when a general and [a] particular
provision are inconsistent, the latter is paramount to the former. So a
particular intent will control a general one that is inconsistent with it."
Here, the applicable provision, former section 1615 of the Family Code,
specifically applies to premarital agreements and is inconsistent with Civil
Code section 1670.5 because, as we have already explained, such agreements are
unenforceable under Family Code former section 1615 only if they are
unconscionable and there is an inadequate property disclosure. Accordingly, the
trial court erred in relying on Civil Code section 1670.5 as grounds for
refusing to enforce the property rights portion of the Agreement.

   It is well established that parties may lawfully waive their rights to
community property. In the context of the present case, we find the Supreme
Court's opinion in Dawley to be instructive. In  that case, the court noted it
had upheld a waiver of property rights in Higgason, even while holding the
spousal support waiver to be void against public policy: "Although our opinion
in Higgason asserted that a valid antenuptial agreement must be made in
contemplation of a marriage lasting until death, we did not attempt to determine
what the parties actually contemplated at the time of the execution of the
agreement. Instead, the opinion proceeds directly to examine the terms of the
contract. Upholding the husband's waiver of property rights, we stated that
'Insofar as an antenuptial agreement relates to the disposition of the property
of the respective parties, and does not seek to alter support obligations
imposed by law, it will be upheld. [Citations.] Accordingly, the provisions
relating to property rights in the antenuptial agreement entered into between
the husband and the wife herein are valid.' [Citation.] Relying,  however, on
decisions invalidating a wife's waiver of support rights because it promoted
divorce, we held the same principle barred enforcement of the husband's waiver
of support rights." (Dawley, supra, 17 Cal.3d 342, 351.) The Dawley court then
turned to cases preceding Higgason, observing no decision had struck down a
contract that "merely provided that the earnings and accumulations of each
spouse will be held as separate property." (Ibid.)

   Nancy contends Paragraph No. 1 is ambiguous, unintelligible and unenforceable
because "it does not state therein, or anywhere else in the Agreement, what
property acquired during marriage will be if it is not community property." To
the contrary, this provision effectively constitutes a waiver of community
property rights.28 If the property acquired during marriage is not community
property, it must be the separate property of the acquiring spouse. There is no
other plausible alternative. Further, unlike Nancy, we see nothing in the
language of this provision that would suggest it does not apply equally to both
parties.29 We also do not agree that the document is fatally ambiguous because
it does not address property held in joint tenancy. The status of the marital
home, the parties' primary joint asset, has yet to be addressed in these
proceedings and we express no opinion on that issue.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -28   There is
no evidence Nancy was surprised by anything contained in the relatively succinct
provisions in the property rights section of the Agreement. She read the
document before signing it, consulted with attorneys of her own choosing, never
communicated any lack of understanding about its terms before or during the
marriage, was not under duress, and voluntarily agreed to the terms in the
agreement without any evidence of fraud or deceit by Jeffrey. Further, she had
some understanding of principles governing family law in that she had been
through divorce proceedings before.
29   Paragraph No. 3 states, in part, that both parties "waive, relinquish and
release any claim that each may have to the separate property of the other
except as provided ... ."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Nancy also relies on Yoo v. Robi (2005) 126 Cal.App.4th 1089 [24 Cal.Rptr.3d
740] and Chiba v. Greenwald (2007) 156 Cal.App.4th 71 [67 Cal.Rptr.3d 86] in
arguing the trial court did not abuse its discretion in deciding the document
was inseverable. Both cases involve commercial contracts and the California
Talent Agencies Act, not premarital agreements. Thus, the two decisions were
driven by public policy considerations that are absent from the present case.
For example, in Yoo the appellate court upheld the lower court's refusal to
sever the invalid contractual provisions, holding that "the public policy
underlying the [Talent Agencies Act] is best effectuated by denying all
recovery, even for activities which did not  require a talent agency license." (
Yoo, supra, at p. 1105.) Needless to say, the Agreement at issue here does not
involve the Talent Agencies Act or any other public policy that would thwart the
parties' reasonable expectations regarding the characterization of property
acquired during the marriage. In sum, we conclude the offending provisions of
the Agreement are severable from those found in the  property rights section.
While Paragraph No. 3 contains the invalid spousal support waiver, it easily can
be excised from the property rights section.30

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -30   Unlike
the trial court, we do not believe the Agreement must be rewritten in order to
be salvaged. Paragraph No. 3 can easily be modified as follows: "The provisions
of paragraph 2, supra, constitute W's sole right to property acquired during the
marriage and to support, and replace or supersede any entitlement to such
property that W might otherwise have under law. H and W waive, relinquish and
release any claim that each may have to the separate property of the other
except as provided in paragraph 2, supra." The entire invalid Child Support
section can be easily deleted, as well as Paragraph No. 20, which contains the
invalid attorney fee waiver.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Further, we find the trial court abused its discretion when it found
equitable considerations overcame the general rule in favor of promoting
severance. It appears the primary reason for the court's decision was its
conclusion that it is "inescapable that [Jeffrey] intended to award the joint
tenancy house to himself as his separate property." Nothing in the Agreement
supports this "inescapable" conclusion. The provision in question specifically
states that Nancy is to receive half the net proceeds from the sale of the
marital residence.

   We also disagree with the trial court's assumption that total invalidation of
the Agreement is nevertheless equitable as Jeffrey will not be deprived of all
the assets he accumulated during the marriage, but is only required to give
Nancy half (an amount likely to approach several million dollars). In our view,
this represents an inequitable windfall to Nancy that clearly was not
contemplated by the parties when they entered into the Agreement. Even Nancy
testified that she believed she would only be entitled to share in Jeffrey's
earnings to the extent they were placed in joint accounts. Thus, the Agreement,
standing alone, gave Nancy no cause to expect that she would be entitled to any
of Jeffrey's marital earnings in the event of a divorce. Further, the trial
court's result causes Jeffrey to suffer an undeserved detriment in that he
clearly intended for his earnings and accumulations during marriage to remain
his separate property and, in drafting the Agreement, he did nothing to hide
this intention from Nancy.

   We also question the trial court's reliance on its perception that the
Agreement, as a whole, is "disingenuous, one-sided, and unfair." In the context
of prenuptial agreements, fairness, for better or worse, is not the touchstone.
Instead, the focus is on disclosure of assets. As the Supreme Court noted in
Bonds, in drafting the UPAA, "it was settled that the party against whom
enforcement of a premarital agreement was sought only could raise the issue of
unconscionability, that is, the substantive unfairness of an agreement, if he or
she also could demonstrate lack of disclosure of assets, lack of waiver of
disclosure, and lack of imputed knowledge of assets. The  language adopted [in
section 1615] was intended to enhance the enforceability of premarital
agreements and to convey the sense that an agreement voluntarily entered into
would be enforced without regard to the apparent unfairness of its terms, as
long as the objecting party knew or should have known of the other party's
assets, ..." (Bonds, supra, 24 Cal.4th 1, 16-17, original italics omitted,
italics added.)

   In sum, we conclude the court abused its discretion in concluding the
Property Rights section is incapable of being severed from the Agreement: " 'A
discretionary order that is based on the application of improper criteria or
incorrect legal assumptions is not an exercise of informed discretion, and is
subject to reversal even though there may be substantial evidence to support
that order.' [Citation.]" (Jacob A. v. C.H. (2011) 196 Cal.App.4th 1591, 1599
[127 Cal.Rptr.3d 611].)

DISPOSITION

   The judgment is reversed and the matter is remanded to the trial court with
orders to enter a new judgment not inconsistent with this opinion. The parties
are to bear their own costs on appeal.

   Margulies, Acting P. J., and Banke, J., concurred.


                              76 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In re the Marriage of MICHAEL and PAMELA HOWELL.  MICHAEL
                HOWELL, Appellant, v. PAMELA HOWELL, Respondent.

                                    D056693

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FOURTH APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION ONE

            195 Cal. App. 4th 1062; 126 Cal. Rptr. 3d 539; 2011 Cal.
                                 App. LEXIS 631


                              May 24, 2011, Filed

PRIOR-HISTORY:
   APPEAL from orders of the Superior Court of San Diego County, No. D509228,
Gonzalo P. Curiel, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES

(4) Dissolution of Marriage § 78--Spousal Support--Waiver--Independent Counsel--
Retroactive Statutory Application.--A waiver of spousal support in a 1999
agreement was valid and enforceable, even though independent counsel had not
represented the party against whom enforcement was sought, because Fam. Code, §
1612, subd. (c), enacted in 2002, did not apply and there was substantial
evidence that the agreement was entered into voluntarily, with full
understanding and ample time to consult legal counsel, and was not
unconscionable. The Legislature did not intend Fam. Code, § 1612, subd. (c), to
apply retroactively.

   [Kirkland et al., Cal. Family Law Practice and Procedure (2010) ch. 50, §
50.05; 11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (10th ed. 2005) Community Property, § 26.]

COUNSEL: Leigh Galyon and Stephen Temko for Appellant.

Patrick L. McCrary and Matthew M. Kremer for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Benke, Acting P. J., with Haller and McDonald, JJ.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: Benke

OPINION

    BENKE, Acting P. J.--Our Legislature in 2002 amended Family Code 1 section
1612  to invalidate any provision in a premarital agreement regarding spousal
support, including, but not limited to, a waiver of such support if (i) the
party against whom enforcement of the spousal support provision is sought was
not represented by independent counsel at the time the agreement containing the
provision was signed or (ii) that provision is unconscionable at the time of
enforcement. (§ 1612, subd. (c).)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   All
further statutory references are to the Family Code.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The issue before us--which has yet to be decided in this state--is whether
subdivision (c) of section 1612 applies to a premarital agreement executed
before its enactment. The trial court ruled the amendment applied retroactively
and invalidated a provision in the parties' 1999 agreement waiving their right
to receive "future spousal support, maintenance or alimony" from the other party
in the event of a dissolution of the marriage or legal separation. In making its
ruling, the trial court found that the party against whom enforcement was sought
had entered into and executed the agreement voluntarily, that the premarital
agreement was not unconscionable and that other than the spousal support waiver
provision, the premarital agreement was fully enforceable.

   As we explain, we conclude the trial court erred in ruling the 2002 amendment
to section 1612 applied to a premarital agreement executed before the
amendment's enactment. We also conclude there is substantial evidence in the
record to support the trial court's findings that the spouse  against whom
enforcement was sought voluntarily entered into that agreement and that the
premarital agreement was not unconscionable. Based on the law that existed at
the time the parties executed their agreement, we conclude the parties' waiver
of spousal support in their premarital agreement was valid and enforceable.

FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

   The facts are mainly derived from the trial court's September 1, 2009 order
entered after a bifurcated trial on the issue of the validity of the parties'
premarital agreement. We adopt those facts, as supplemented appropriately.

   Respondent Pamela Howell (Pamela) (at the time of trial) was 44 years old and
worked as a tax assistant/bookkeeper. She was married to appellant Michael
Howell (Michael), a letter carrier with the United States Postal Service.

   Pamela and Michael began dating in 1997. They became engaged in 1998 and were
married in mid-May 1999. They separated in late March 2008.

1. Michael's Testimony

   Michael testified that he told Pamela he wanted a premarital agreement a year
and a half before they married. He was already twice divorced and was happy in
his relationship with Pamela without marriage. However, because Pamela wanted to
get married, Michael agreed to do so if she agreed to execute a premarital
agreement. Pamela knew that Michael and one of his former wives had also entered
into a premarital agreement.

   Michael contacted his attorney in May or June 1998, almost a year before the
wedding, about preparing an agreement. Pamela provided Michael with a schedule
of her assets and liabilities. At that time, Michael and Pamela had similar net
incomes; although Michael annually earned about $14,000 more than Pamela,
Michael was paying $400 in child support each  month to a former wife, plus half
of the daycare and uncovered medical expenses, combined with health insurance,
union dues and mandatory retirement contributions.

   Michael gave Pamela the premarital agreement in early December 1998. He told
Pamela to take her time reading it and to consult an attorney. Pamela responded
that she discussed the agreement with her mother and several friends and
concluded it was unnecessary because Michael had "nothing" to protect. Pamela
had a copy of the premarital agreement from early December 1998 until it was
signed on January 30, 1999.

2. Pamela's Testimony

   Pamela testified that Michael waited until the wedding was fully planned and
paid for by Pamela and her family to discuss his desire for a premarital
agreement. They argued several times over the need for a premarital agreement
and Michael threatened to call off the wedding unless she signed the agreement.
A few days after Michael brought up the issue of a premarital agreement, he
presented Pamela with an agreement prepared by his attorney. Pamela had the
agreement for about three days before she signed it and she did not completely
understand what it provided and what rights she was waiving, including the
spousal support waiver.

   Pamela did not have money to hire her own attorney because of the expenses
from the wedding and Michael did not offer to pay for her to consult an
attorney. She signed the premarital agreement because canceling the wedding
would have been a great embarrassment to her and her family. Thus, on January
30, 1999, the parties executed a premarital agreement.

3. Key Terms of the Parties' Premarital Agreement

   The premarital agreement signed by the parties provided, among other terms,
Michael was previously married twice and had one daughter; Pamela was never
married and had no children; and at the time of the agreement, Michael worked as
a letter carrier for the United States Postal Service and earned $38,000
annually and Pamela worked as a "processor" at a mortgage company and made
$24,000 annually.

   Of significance here, paragraph 5 of the agreement provided: "Pamela has been
advised to obtain legal counsel. Pamela has decided not to obtain such advice of
independent legal counsel and believes that without the assistance of counsel
she can fully protect her legal rights regarding the [premarital] agreement.
Laura H. Miller is solely Michael's attorney and as such, is representing the
interests of Michael and not those of Pamela."

   The parties in their agreement disclosed their interests in all real and
personal property and all debts for which they were separately liable. In
paragraphs 9 and 10 of the premarital agreement, the parties represented they
were of "sound mind and body and have a clear understanding of the terms and the
basis for the terms of this contract," they "freely and in good faith choose to
enter into this marriage contract and fully intend it to be legally binding upon
themselves," and they are "voluntarily entering into this Agreement without
coercion, duress, or influence by any person."

   Of prime importance in this case, section IV, paragraph H of the premarital
agreement provided: "The parties mutually waive any right to receive future
spousal support, maintenance or alimony from the other in the event of a
Dissolution of Marriage or Legal Separation."

 4. The Trial Court's Findings and Ruling

   At the conclusion of the bifurcated trial, the trial court found that the
parties' spousal support waiver contained in their premarital agreement was
unenforceable based on the retroactive application of the 2002 amendment to
section 1612, and the finding that Pamela lacked independent counsel at the time
she executed the agreement.

   The court also found Pamela voluntarily entered into the premarital
agreement: "The facts establish that the premarital agreement was prepared by
Michael's attorney and that Pamela was not represented by independent legal
counsel at the time the Agreement was prepared and executed. Meanwhile, the
agreement states that 'Pamela has been advised to obtain legal counsel. Pamela
has decided not to obtain such advice of independent legal counsel and believes
that without the assistance of counsel she can fully protect her legal rights
regarding the prenuptial agreement.' [Citation.] The court finds that Pamela was
capable of understanding the admonition to obtain her own independent attorney,
that she had sufficient time to retain counsel and that, at a minimum, she could
have inquired as to the cost of having an independent attorney review the
agreement.

   "While Pamela reports that she did not understand the spousal support waiver,
the Court has stricken the waiver based on retroactive application of the 2002
amendment to [section] 1612. The court finds that Pamela had a full
understanding of the terms [of the] premarital agreement, other than the spousal
support waiver. The premarital agreement was twelve pages long, was not
particularly complex, involved a small estate, made full disclosure, and
basically sought to maintain separate the parties' separate property interests.
[Citation.]

   "The evidence shows ... Pamela had [sufficient] time to consider the
premarital agreement, was fluent in the English language, was employed in the
field of bookkeeping which involves keeping track of finances, and was advised
to obtain an independent attorney. [¶] ... [¶]

   "The parties disagree as to when the agreement was prepared and presented to
Pamela. Michael testified that he provided the agreement to Pamela on December
2, 1998 and told her to take her time reading it and to obtain an attorney.
Pamela testified that two weeks before she signed the agreement on January 30,
1999, Michael told her that he wanted the parties to sign a [premarital]
agreement.

   "Under either of the parties' claims, Pamela had at least 14 days prior to
the wedding. Under the 2002 amendment of [section] 1615[, subdivision] (c)
[(discussed post)], it is mandatory that a party is given at least seven days to
consider a premarital agreement. Here, Pamela had seven additional days to
consider the agreement than that provided under the 2002 amendment. The court
finds that Pamela had sufficient time to consider the [premarital] agreement and
that this factor does not provide support for the contention that Pamela did not
voluntarily enter the agreement. [2] [¶] ... [¶]

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   As
discussed post, the trial court in its September 1, 2009 order also ruled that
the 2002 amendment to section 1615 did not apply retroactively "based upon
constitutional considerations" and its finding that "retroactive application
would impair vested rights of Michael without due process of law." Although
neither party in this appeal has challenged that ruling, we address it to the
extent it is relevant to our discussion of whether the 2002 amendment to section
1612 applies to the premarital agreement executed by the parties in 1999.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    "The court finds that the premarital agreement was not executed under
duress, fraud, or undue influence and the parties did not lack capacity to enter
into the Agreement. [¶] Pamela testified that most of the preparation for the
wedding had been contracted and completed at the time that the agreement was
presented and that canceling the wedding would have created great embarrassment
for her and the family. The court finds that the evidence shows that a
significant amount of preparation had been undertaken and that financial
consequences would have been suffered if the wedding was canceled in January
1999. However, the court further finds that, at a minimum, the premarital
agreement was provided to Pamela more than four months before the wedding date.
In fact, given Pamela's cooperation in providing financial disclosure
information for the premarital agreement, the Court finds that Pamela knew of
the premarital agreement no later than December 1998, five months before the
wedding. The amount of time between the presentation of the premarital agreement
and the wedding diminished the coercive force of the normal desire to avoid
social embarrassment or humiliation. [Citation.]

   "Moreover, a related question is whether Pamela became aware of Michael's
insistence on a premarital agreement at the time the parties became engaged.
While Pamela testified she learned of the premarital agreement in January 1999,
Michael testified he raised [that issue] a year and a half prior to the wedding
and around the time that the parties first discussed marriage. Inasmuch as
Michael had been divorced twice before, it was reasonable for Michael to raise
the premarital agreement at the time that he was contemplating his third
marriage. Under this version of the facts, Pamela learned of Michael's
insistence on an agreement before any wedding plans and before any possible
embarrassment in postponing or canceling the wedding. Ultimately, given the
totality of the circumstances, any coercive effect created by possible
embarrassment to Pamela or her family did not render the agreement involuntary.

   "The evidence established that Pamela had the mental capacity to enter into a
premarital agreement and there is no evidence that Pamela signed the agreement
as a result of trick or deception. [¶] ... [¶]

   "... [T]here was a full disclosure of property with Pamela aware of separate
property [(e.g., a house and retirement)] that was held by Michael. In addition,
there was not a great disparity in the income of the parties and their
respective assets so as to establish any significant inequality of bargaining
power."

   The court also ruled that Pamela failed to prove the agreement was
unconscionable. Specifically, it found the parties made disclosures of property
within the premarital agreement and that the level of disclosure of assets and
liabilities "was fair, reasonable and full. As such, it is unnecessary to
consider the procedural elements or substantive elements of unconscionability
where Pamela has not identified any assets or debts that Michael failed to
disclose in his disclosures" attached to their agreement.

   The court subsequently entered an order on November 24, 2009, requiring
Michael to pay Pamela $1,015 per month as spousal support for the period of July
1, 2008, through August 2009. Beginning in September 2009 and continuing each
month thereafter, Michael was ordered to pay Pamela spousal support of $1,659
per  month until further order of the court. The court also found under section
2030 that there was a disparity of income and assets in Michael's favor and
ordered him to pay $10,000 to Pamela for legal fees and costs. 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Michael
has not challenged on appeal this finding or the requirement he pay $10,000 to
Pamela for attorney fees and costs.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

DISCUSSION

I

Whether Subdivision (c) of Section 1612 Applies to a Premarital Agreement
Executed Before Subdivision (c)'s Enactment

A. Section 1612 and Standard of Review

   In January 1999, the month the parties executed their premarital agreement,
section 1612 (hereinafter, former section 1612) provided:

   "(a) Parties to a premarital agreement may contract with respect to all of
the following:

   "(1) The rights and obligations of each of the parties in any of the property
of either or both of them whenever and wherever acquired or located.

   "(2) The right to buy, sell, use, transfer, exchange, abandon, lease,
consume, expend, assign, create a security interest in, mortgage, encumber,
dispose of, or otherwise manage and control property.

   "(3) The disposition of property upon separation, marital dissolution, death,
or the occurrence or nonoccurrence of any other event.

   "(4) The making of a will, trust, or other arrangement to carry out the
provisions of the agreement.

   "(5) The ownership rights in and disposition of the death benefit from a life
insurance policy.

   "(6) The choice of law governing the construction of the agreement.

   "(7) Any other matter, including their personal rights and obligations, not
in violation of public policy or a statute imposing a criminal penalty.

   "(b) The right of a child to support may not be adversely affected by a
premarital agreement." (Stats. 1992, ch. 162, § 10, p. 464, operative Jan. 1,
1994.)

   Thus, under former section 1612, when Michael and Pamela signed their
premarital agreement and married there was no statutory requirement that a
spouse be independently represented by counsel in order to waive spousal support
. However, under subdivision (a)(7) of section 1612, a court could consider
whether the subject matter of a premarital agreement violated public policy. 4

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   As noted
in footnote 2 ante, when the Legislature in 2002 amended section 1612 it also
amended section 1615. Subdivision (c) of section 1615 now provides: "(c) For the
purposes of subdivision (a), it shall be deemed that a premarital agreement was
not executed voluntarily unless the court finds in writing or on the record all
of the following: [¶] (1) The party against whom enforcement is sought was
represented by independent legal counsel at the time of signing the agreement
or, after being advised to seek independent legal counsel, expressly waived, in
a separate writing, representation by independent legal counsel. [¶] (2) The
party against whom enforcement is sought had not less than seven calendar days
between the time that party was first presented with the agreement and advised
to seek independent legal counsel and the time the agreement was signed. [¶] (3)
The party against whom enforcement is sought, if unrepresented by legal counsel,
was fully informed of the terms and basic effect of the agreement as well as the
rights and obligations he or she was giving up by signing the agreement, and was
proficient in the language in which the explanation of the party's rights was
conducted and in which the agreement was written. The explanation of the rights
and obligations relinquished shall be memorialized in writing and delivered to
the party prior to signing the agreement. The unrepresented party shall, on or
before the signing of the premarital agreement, execute a document declaring
that he or she received the information required by this paragraph and
indicating who provided that information. [¶] (4) The agreement and the writings
executed pursuant to paragraphs (1) and (3) were not executed under duress,
fraud, or undue influence, and the parties did not lack capacity to enter into
the agreement. [¶] (5) Any other factors the court deems relevant." (Italics
added.) Subdivision (a) of section 1615 provides in relevant part that a
"premarital agreement is not enforceable if the party against whom enforcement
is sought proves either of the following: [¶] (1) That party did not execute the
agreement voluntarily. [¶] (2) The agreement was unconscionable when it was
executed ... ." As we also noted ante, although the trial court ruled
subdivision (c) of section 1612 applied retroactively to invalidate the parties'
spousal support waiver provision in section IV, paragraph H of their premarital
agreement, it ruled subdivision (c) of section 1615 did not retroactively apply
to invalidate the entire agreement on the basis it was involuntarily executed by
Pamela.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In 2002, the Legislature enacted subdivision (c) of section 1612, which
provides:  "(c) Any provision in a premarital agreement regarding spousal
support, including, but not limited to, a waiver of it, is not enforceable if
the party against whom enforcement of the spousal support provision is sought
was not represented by independent counsel at the time the agreement containing
the provision was signed, or if the provision regarding spousal support is
unconscionable at the time of enforcement. An otherwise unenforceable provision
in a premarital agreement regarding spousal support may not become enforceable
solely because the party against whom enforcement is sought was represented by
independent counsel."

   The question presented in this appeal is whether subdivision (c) of section
1612 applies to a premarital agreement executed before its enactment. In
resolving this issue, we apply a de novo standard of review. (Bullard v.
California State Automobile Assn. (2005) 129 Cal.App.4th 211, 217 [28 Cal. Rptr.
3d 225].)

B. Whether Subdivision (c) of Section 1612 Clarified or Changed Existing Law

   As a threshold issue, we must decide whether subdivision (c) of section 1612
clarified or changed existing law. "A statute that merely clarifies, rather than
changes, existing law is properly applied to transactions predating its
enactment. [Citation.] However, a statute might not apply retroactively when it
substantially changes the legal consequences of past actions, or upsets
expectations based in prior law." (Carter v. California Dept. of Veterans
Affairs (2006) 38 Cal.4th 914, 922 [44 Cal. Rptr. 3d 223, 135 P.3d 637] (Carter
); see also Western Security Bank v. Superior Court (1997) 15 Cal.4th 232, 243
[62 Cal. Rptr. 2d 243, 933 P.2d 507] (Western Security Bank) ["[A] statute that
merely clarifies, rather than changes, existing law does not  operate
retrospectively even if applied to transactions predating its enactment"
"because the true meaning of the statute remains the same."].) We thus turn to
an analysis of the law before the enactment of subdivision (c) of section 1612.

   Our Supreme Court in In re Marriage of Pendleton & Fireman (2000) 24 Cal.4th
39, 54 [99 Cal. Rptr. 2d 278, 5 P.3d 839] (Pendleton) addressed whether
enforcement of a waiver of spousal support in a premarital agreement violated
public policy. 5 In ruling such a waiver was not a per se  violation, the court
found outdated the policy that premarital waivers of spousal support in a
premarital agreement promotes dissolution. (24 Cal.4th at p. 49.) "[W]hen
entered into voluntarily by parties who are aware of the effect of the
agreement, a premarital waiver of spousal support does not offend contemporary
public policy. Such agreements are, therefore, permitted under section 1612,
subdivision (a)(7) ... ." (Id. at p. 53.) Of significance to the issue before
us, the court in a footnote in Pendleton noted that the "Legislature may, of
course, limit the right to enter into premarital waivers of spousal support
and/or specify the circumstances in which enforcement should be denied." (Id. at
p. 53, fn. 12, italics added.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   The
provision at issue in Pendleton provided, inter alia: "'[B]oth parties now and
forever waive, in the event of a dissolution of the marriage, all rights to any
type of spousal support ... from the other ... .' " (Pendleton, supra, 24
Cal.4th at p. 41.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   As the legislative history shows (discussed post), in response to Pendleton
the Legislature in 2002 amended section 1612 to include subdivision (c), which
in fact limited the right of parties to enter into premarital waivers (e.g., the
independent counsel requirement) and specified the circumstances in which
enforcement could be denied (e.g., the spousal support waiver is unconscionable
at the time of enforcement). Thus, the addition of subdivision (c) to section
1612 in 2002 did not merely clarify existing law, but rather substantially
changed it. (See Carter, supra, 38 Cal.4th at p. 922.)

   Indeed, before its enactment, there was no requirement that a party have
independent counsel at the time of executing the premarital agreement in order
for a waiver of spousal support to be enforceable. Instead, as Pendleton
recognized, there was a shift in public policy towards enforcement of such
provisions. Our Legislature responded by enacting subdivision (c) of section
1612.

   Pamela argues that subdivision (c) of section 1612 merely clarified existing
law based on the reference in Pendleton that both parties in that case were
represented by independent counsel. (See Pendleton, supra, 24 Cal.4th at pp.
53-54.) Specifically, the court there noted: "We need not decide here whether
circumstances existing at the time enforcement of a waiver of  spousal support
is sought might make enforcement unjust. It is enough to conclude here that no
public policy is violated by permitting enforcement of a waiver of spousal
support executed by intelligent, well-educated persons, each of whom appears to
be self-sufficient in property and earning ability, and both of whom have the
advice of counsel regarding their rights and obligations as marital partners at
the time they execute the waiver. Such a waiver does not violate public policy
and is not per se unenforceable ... ." (Ibid., fn. omitted, italics added.)

   Although the above language is couched in terms of public policy, the factors
listed by the court--including that each party to the premarital agreement was
represented by counsel--are equally, if not more, applicable to the issue not
decided in Pendleton, to wit: whether the circumstances existing at the time of
enforcement of the spousal support waiver provision made enforcement "unjust." (
Pendleton, supra, 24 Cal.4th at p. 53.) In any event, the reference to both
parties having advice of counsel in Pendleton was one of several factors the
court deemed relevant to enforcement of a spousal support waiver, but unlike
subdivision (c) of section 1612 enacted in 2002,  was not isolated as a
condition to enforcement.

   In addition, in a companion case to Pendleton our Supreme Court in In re
Marriage of Bonds (2000) 24 Cal.4th 1, 6 [99 Cal. Rptr. 2d 252, 5 P.3d 815] (
Bonds) held the Court of Appeal erred in determining that because one of the
parties to a premarital agreement was not represented by independent counsel
when the party entered into the agreement, the voluntariness of that agreement
was subjected to "strict scrutiny." The court in Bonds instead concluded that
the "circumstance that one of the parties was not represented by independent
counsel is only one of several factors that must be considered in determining
whether a premarital agreement was entered into voluntarily." (Ibid.) Thus,
Bonds also supports the conclusion that subdivision (c) of section 1612
substantially changed existing law.

   We conclude the enactment of subdivision (c) of section 1612 constituted a
material change in the law regarding the enforceability of a spousal support
waiver in a premarital agreement and was not merely the result of a legislative
attempt to clarify the true meaning of a statute. (See Williams v. Garcetti
(1993) 5 Cal.4th 561, 568 [20 Cal. Rptr. 2d 341, 853 P.2d 507]; see also In re
Marriage of Reuling (1994) 23 Cal.App.4th 1428, 1440 [28 Cal. Rptr. 2d 726] ["A
statute that creates new obligations by raising a standard of care and imposing,
for the first time, a specific penalty for breach of the new standard,
constitutes more than a simple clarification of existing law; it manifests an
intent to change it."].)

C. Whether the Legislature Intended Subdivision (c) of Section 1612 to Apply
Retroactively

   The next issue is whether the Legislature intended the material change in the
enforceability of a spousal support waiver to apply retroactively. "California
continues to adhere to the time-honored principle ... that in the absence of an
express retroactivity provision, a statute will not be applied retroactively
unless it is very clear from extrinsic sources that the Legislature ... must
have intended a retroactive application." (Evangelatos v. Superior Court (1988)
44 Cal.3d 1188, 1208-1209 [246 Cal. Rptr. 629, 753 P.2d 585]; see also Strauss
v. Horton (2009) 46 Cal.4th 364, 470 [93 Cal. Rptr. 3d 591, 207 P.3d 48] (
Strauss) [" '[I]n the absence of a clear legislative intent to the contrary
statutory enactments apply prospectively.' "].)

   Here, there is nothing on the "face of the enactment" (Cabral v. Martins
(2009) 177 Cal.App.4th 471, 484 [99 Cal. Rptr. 3d 394]) of subdivision (c) of
section 1612 regarding legislative intent, much less "clear" intent (Strauss,
supra, 46 Cal.4th at p. 470) to suggest subdivision (c) was intended to be
retroactive. We thus look to its legislative history.

   Our review of the legislative history shows the Legislature did not intend
subdivision (c) of section 1612 to apply retroactively. In response to Pendleton
and Bonds, Senator Kuehl in January 2001 introduced Senate Bill No. 78
(2001-2002 Reg. Sess.), which originally precluded a party from waiving under
any circumstances spousal support in a premarital agreement. (Sen. Bill No. 78
(2001-2002 Reg. Sess.) as introduced Jan. 11, 2001, p. 2, would have modified
subd. (b) of § 1612 to provide: "The right of a child or a spouse to support may
not be adversely affected by a premarital agreement.") Senate Bill No. 78
appears to have been based in part on Assembly Judiciary Committee memoranda
prepared by Donna Hershkowitz for  Senator Kuehl, which analyzed Bonds and
Pendleton and concluded that Pendleton was incorrect in determining that spousal
support waivers in California were permissible and enforceable under certain
circumstances. (See Assem. Com. on Judiciary, Mem. on Sen. Bill No. 78
(2001-2002 Reg. Sess.) Oct. 10, 2000, pp. 1-4; Assem. Com. on Judiciary, Mem. on
Sen. Bill No. 78 (2001-2002 Reg. Sess.) Oct. 23, 2000, p. 1.)

   A May 1, 2001 amendment to Senate Bill No. 78 (2001-2002 Reg. Sess.) removed
the blanket prohibition against a waiver of spousal support in a premarital
agreement if the party against whom enforcement is sought was  represented by
"independent counsel" at the time the agreement was executed. (Sen. Bill. No. 78
(2001-2002 Reg. Sess.) as amended May 1, 2001, p. 2, italics omitted.) Senate
Bill No. 78 was amended in June 2001 to allow a party to set aside a waiver of
spousal support if the provision was unconscionable at the time of enforcement.
(Sen. Bill No. 78 (2001-2002 Reg. Sess.) as amended June 21, 2001.) 6

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   Senate
Bill No. 78 was amended one last time in July 2001. (Sen. Bill No. 78 (2001-2002
Reg. Sess.) as amended July 17, 2001.) This amendment made nonsubstantive
grammatical changes to subdivision (c) of section 1612, and it was this version
of the bill that was signed by the Governor in September 2001.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   As relevant to our discussion here, a Senate Judiciary Committee analysis of
the original version of Senate Bill No. 78 (2001-2002 Reg. Sess.) (which
prevented the parties from waiving spousal support in a premarital agreement)
noted that those opposed to the bill were concerned "over the possible
retroactivity of a prohibition on spousal support waivers ... ." (Sen. Com. on
Judiciary, Analysis of Sen. Bill No. 78 (2001-2002 Reg. Sess.) as introduced
Jan. 11, 2001, p. 10.) The Senate Judiciary Committee report went on to note
that Senate Bill No. 78 "contains no provision for retroactive application," and
cited the general rule that "laws operate prospectively unless retroactive
application is provided for specifically, or unless the new legislation
clarifies existing law." (Id. at p. 11.) 7 Thus, the legislative history of
Senate Bill No. 78 supports the conclusion that the Legislature did not intend
subdivision (c) of section 1612 to apply retroactively. 8

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   This
legislative history provides yet another cogent argument that the Legislature's
enactment of subdivision (c) of section 1612 in 2002 was not merely to clarify
existing law. (See Western Security Bank, supra, 15 Cal.4th at p. 244 [in
determining whether a statute clarified or changed the law, the courts give "due
consideration" to the Legislature's intent in enacting that statute]; In re
Marriage of Fellows (2006) 39 Cal.4th 179, 184 [46 Cal. Rptr. 3d 49, 138 P.3d
200] (Fellows) ["The Legislature's declaration of an existing statute's meaning,
while not dispositive, is a factor entitled to consideration."], citing McClung
v. Employment Development Dept. (2004) 34 Cal.4th 467, 473 [20 Cal. Rptr. 3d
428, 99 P.3d 1015].) Along these same lines, the Senate Judiciary Committee
report notes that the original version of Senate Bill No. 78 (2001-2002 Reg.
Sess.) was designed to "legislatively confirm that waivers of spousal support in
premarital agreements are void as against public policy," in contravention of
the holding in Pendleton. (Sen. Com. on Judiciary, Analysis of Sen. Bill No. 78
(2001-2002 Reg. Sess.) as introduced Jan. 11, 2001, p. 5.) Finally, the 2001
Summary Digest explains that Senate Bill No. 78 changed existing law, which
before the bill allowed parties to a premarital agreement to "contract with
respect to any matter not in violation of public policy or a statute imposing a
criminal penalty," by imposing the "independent counsel" requirement in
subdivision (c) of section 1612. (Legis. Counsel's Dig., Sen. Bill No. 78
(2001-2002 Reg. Sess.) Summary Dig., p. 115.)
8   Although Michael relied on this legislative history of subdivision (c) of
section 1612 in his opening brief, Pamela did not address or otherwise respond
to it in her respondent's brief.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Our Supreme Court's 2006 decision in Fellows is not inconsistent with our
decision here. Before 2002, courts applied the equitable doctrine of laches to
bar the recovery of arrearages in support actions. In 2002, the Legislature
enacted former section 4502, subdivision (c) (Stats. 2002, ch. 304, § 1, now
codified at Fam. Code, § 291, subd. (d); see Stats. 2006, ch. 86, § 4),
expressly limiting the defense of laches in actions to enforce child, family or
spousal support to "any portion of the judgment owed to the state." The issue in
Fellows was whether former section 4502, subdivision (c) applied retroactively,
regardless of when the arrearages accrued. (Fellows, supra, 39 Cal.4th at pp.
186-187.)

   Relying on subdivision (c) of section 4, 9 the court concluded that
amendments to the Family Code generally apply retroactively unless otherwise
provided by law. (Fellows, supra, 39 Cal.4th at p. 186.) As such, the court
concluded the Legislature intended to give former section 4502, subdivision (c)
retroactive effect.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -9   Section 4
provides: "(a) As used in this section: [¶] (1) 'New law' means either of the
following, as the case may be: [¶] (A) The act that enacted this code. [¶] (B)
The act that makes a change in this code, whether effectuated by amendment,
addition, or repeal of a provision of this code. [¶] (2) 'Old law' means the
applicable law in effect before the operative date of the new law. [¶] (3)
'Operative date' means the operative date of the new law. [¶] (b) This section
governs the application of the new law except to the extent otherwise expressly
provided in the new law. [¶] (c) Subject to the limitations provided in this
section, the new law applies on the operative date to all matters governed by
the new law, regardless of whether an event occurred or circumstance existed
before, on, or after the operative date, including, but not limited to,
commencement of a proceeding, making of an order, or taking of an action. [¶]
(d) If a document or paper is filed before the operative date, the contents,
execution, and notice thereof are governed by the old law and not by the new
law; but subsequent proceedings taken after the operative date concerning the
document or paper, including an objection or response, a hearing, an order, or
other matter relating thereto is governed by the new law and not by the old law.
[¶] (e) If an order is made before the operative date, or an action on an order
is taken before the operative date, the validity of the order or action is
governed by the old law and not by the new law. Nothing in this subdivision
precludes proceedings after the operative date to modify an order made, or alter
a course of action commenced, before the operative date to the extent
proceedings for modification of an order or alteration of a course of action of
that type are otherwise provided in the new law. [¶] (f) No person is liable for
an action taken before the operative date that was proper at the time the action
was taken, even though the action would be improper if taken on or after the
operative date, and the person has no duty, as a result of the enactment of the
new law, to take any step to alter the course of action or its consequences. [¶]
(g) If the new law does not apply to a matter that occurred before the operative
date, the old law continues to govern the matter notwithstanding its repeal or
amendment by the new law. [¶] (h) If a party shows, and the court determines,
that application of a particular provision of the new law or of the old law in
the manner required by this section or by the new law would substantially
interfere with the effective conduct of the proceedings or the rights of the
parties or other interested persons in connection with an event that occurred or
circumstance that existed before the operative date, the court may,
notwithstanding this section or the new law, apply either the new law or the old
law to the extent reasonably necessary to mitigate the substantial
interference."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The court in Fellows also concluded that the exceptions to subdivision (c) of
section 4 found in subdivisions (f) and (g) of that statute were inapplicable. (
Fellows, supra, 39 Cal.4th at p. 187.) The court reasoned subdivision (c) of
former section 4502 did not place any new duties on the obligor spouse because:
"[b]oth before and after its enactment,  [the obligor spouse] had a duty to pay
his [or her] child support"; the "elimination of a laches defense did not create
some novel proof requirement"; and "success on a laches claim is always
uncertain because it is an equitable remedy that depends on 'the facts and
circumstances of the particular case.' [Citation.]" (39 Cal.4th at p. 188.)

   Here, unlike the situation in Fellows where there were no new duties imposed
on a spouse by the retroactive effect of a provision in the Family Code (e.g.,
former § 4502, subd. (c)), clearly if subdivision (c) of section 1612 were given
retroactive effect, a new duty would be imposed on Michael and Pamela based on
the requirement in section 1612, subdivision (c) that a party against whom
enforcement of a spousal support waiver is sought have independent counsel at
the time of executing the waiver provision. However, as Pendleton and Bonds
show, in 1999 when Michael and Pamela executed their premarital agreement, the
requirement of independent counsel was a factor in determining the
enforceability of a spousal support waiver provision, but was not a condition to
enforcement as required by the subsequent enactment of subdivision (c) of
section 1612 in 2002. We thus conclude the holding and reasoning in Fellows, and
its reliance on section 4, subdivision (c), are inapposite to the facts and
circumstances presented in the case before us. 10

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -10   See also
Bassett, California Community Property Law (2010 ed.) section 4.34 suggesting
that amendments to the premarital agreement statutes should be read as having
the same prospective applicability as the adoption of the Uniform Premarital
Agreement Act (§ 1600 et seq.), which, pursuant to section 1601, applies to any
premarital agreement executed on or after January 1, 1986, and reasoning that
the Supreme Court's decision in Fellows retroactively applying the Legislature's
2002 abolition of the defense of laches in support cases is not inconsistent
with this rule because the "formalities of contracts carry a degree of reliance
not applicable to an equitable defense against the obligations of parenthood."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In light of our decision that the Legislature did not intend subdivision (c)
of section 1612 to apply retroactively, we need not decide whether the
retroactive application of subdivision (c) impermissibly impaired a vested right
of Michael without due process of law. (See Fellows, supra, 39 Cal.4th at p. 189
, citing § 4, subd. (h).)

II

Enforceability of the Spousal Support Waiver in the Parties' Premarital
Agreement

   In light of our conclusion that subdivision (c) of section 1612 does not
apply to the parties' premarital agreement, we next must decide whether the
parties' waiver of spousal support in that agreement was valid and enforceable.
Although we apply a de novo standard of review to the issue of whether their
agreement was unconscionable when executed (see former § 1615, subd. (b)), 11 in
analyzing the factual  findings of the court supporting that decision and the
issue of voluntariness, we are bound by the substantial evidence standard of
review.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -11   Former
section 1615 provided in part: "(a) A premarital agreement is not enforceable if
the party against whom enforcement is sought proves either of the following: [¶]
(1) That party did not execute the agreement voluntarily. [¶] (2) The agreement
was unconscionable when it was executed and, before execution of the agreement,
all of the following applied to that party: [¶] (A) That party was not provided
a fair and reasonable disclosure of the property or financial obligations of the
other party. [¶] (B) That party did not voluntarily and expressly waive, in
writing, any right to disclosure of the property or financial obligations of the
other party beyond the disclosure provided. [¶] (C) That party did not have, or
reasonably could not have had, an adequate knowledge of the property or
financial obligations of the other party. [¶] (b) An issue of unconscionability
of a premarital agreement shall be decided by the court as a matter of law."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Under this standard of review, we determine from the entire record whether
there is substantial evidence, contradicted or uncontradicted, which supports
the trial court's factual determinations. (Ermoian v. Desert Hospital (2007) 152
Cal.App.4th 475, 501 [61 Cal. Rptr. 3d 754].) We consider this evidence "in the
light most favorable to the prevailing party, giving it the benefit of every
reasonable inference and resolving conflicts in support of the judgment." (
Employers Mutual Casualty Co. v. Philadelphia Indemnity Ins. Co. (2008) 169
Cal.App.4th 340, 347 [86 Cal. Rptr. 3d 383].)

   The trial court found pursuant to former section 1615 that Pamela voluntarily
entered into the premarital agreement. Although the facts establish that the
premarital agreement was prepared by Michael's legal counsel and that Pamela was
not represented by independent legal counsel at the time the agreement was
executed, the agreement itself notes that Pamela was advised to obtain legal
counsel but refrained from doing so because she believed she could fully protect
her rights without counsel. The evidence in the record also shows that Michael
recommended to Pamela that she hire her own attorney in connection with the
agreement.

   Moreover, the trial court found that Pamela was capable of understanding the
admonition in the agreement to obtain her own independent counsel, that she had
sufficient time to retain counsel and that, at a minimum, she could have
inquired as to the cost of having independent counsel review the agreement but
chose not do so.

   The evidence in the record also shows that Michael gave Pamela a copy of the
premarital agreement in early December 1998, that the parties did not execute
that agreement until January 30, 1999, and that even under Pamela's testimony,
she had two weeks to review the agreement before she signed it.

   Other than the spousal support waiver, which the trial court struck (based on
its erroneous determination that subd. (c) of § 1612 applied retroactively), the
court found that Pamela had a "full understanding" of the terms of the
premarital agreement. It noted that the agreement was only 12 pages long, was
not particularly complex, involved a small estate, made full disclosure and
basically sought to maintain separate the parties' separate property interests.
We conclude these findings are supported by the evidence in the record.

   The court also found that Pamela did not execute the premarital agreement
under duress, fraud or undue influence. Although most of the preparation for the
parties' wedding was contracted and completed at the time that the agreement was
presented and that canceling the wedding would have created great embarrassment
for Pamela and her family, the trial court found that Pamela knew of the
premarital agreement no later than December 1998, or five months before the
wedding. As a result, the trial court also found the time between the
presentation of that agreement by Michael and the parties' wedding was
sufficient to reduce any alleged "coercive force of the normal desire to avoid
social embarrassment or humiliation."

    Although Pamela claimed she learned of Michael's desire for a premarital
agreement in January 1999, the trial court found Michael actually discussed a
premarital agreement with Pamela about a year and a half before the wedding.
(See Fariba v. Dealer Services Corp. (2009) 178 Cal.App.4th 156, 170-171 [100
Cal. Rptr. 3d 219] ["Credibility is an issue of fact for the trier of fact to
resolve [citation], and the testimony of a single witness, even a party, is
sufficient to provide substantial evidence to support a factual finding
[citation]."].) The court noted that Michael was divorced twice before he
married Pamela. It also found it was reasonable for Michael to raise with Pamela
the issue of a premarital agreement when the couple was first  contemplating
marriage. Based on that finding, the court determined Pamela was aware that
Michael wanted such an agreement before Pamela made any wedding plans and before
Pamela and/or her family suffered any possible embarrassment in postponing or
canceling the wedding.

   Finally, the trial court found no evidence that Pamela signed the premarital
agreement as a result of "trick or deception." The lack of any such evidence in
the record also supports this finding.

   Relying on former section 1615, the trial court also found that Pamela failed
to prove the agreement was unconscionable at the time she signed it. 12
Specifically, it found the parties made disclosures of property within the
premarital agreement, that the level of disclosure of assets and liabilities
"was fair, reasonable and full" and that Pamela therefore was aware of Michael's
separate property (e.g., a house and retirement). In addition, the court found,
and the evidence in the record shows, that there was not a great disparity in
the income of the parties and their respective assets at the time they entered
into the agreement to establish any significant inequality of bargaining power.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -12   After
the 2002 amendment to section 1612, a spousal support provision in a premarital
agreement--including the waiver of such support--is deemed unenforceable if the
provision "is unconscionable at the time of enforcement." (§ 1612, subd. (c),
italics added.) However, under former section 1615, subdivision (a)(2), which we
apply here, unconscionability is determined at the time the premarital agreement
"was executed." (Italics added.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The evidence in the record also supports the trial court's finding that
Pamela was employed in the field of bookkeeping, which involves keeping track of
finances, and thus was capable of understanding the financial disclosures made
by Michael.

   In light of the trial court's findings, which are supported by ample evidence
in the record, and based on the law as it existed at the time the parties
executed their premarital agreement, we conclude on this record that Pamela,
despite not having independent counsel at the time she executed that agreement,
knowingly and voluntarily waived her right to spousal support in that agreement.
(See Pendleton, supra, 24 Cal.4th at p. 53 ["[W]hen entered into voluntarily by
parties who are aware of the effect of the agreement, a premarital waiver of
spousal support does not offend contemporary public policy."]; Bonds, supra, 24
Cal.4th at p. 6 [the "circumstance that one of the parties was not represented
by independent counsel is only one of several factors that must be considered in
determining whether a premarital agreement was entered into voluntarily."].)

DISPOSITION

   The portion of the trial court's September 1, 2009 order invalidating section
IV,  paragraph H of the parties' premarital agreement--the spousal support
waiver--is reversed. We also reverse that portion of the trial court's November
24, 2009 order requiring Michael to pay Pamela spousal support. Otherwise, we
affirm the remaining portions of both orders. Michael to recover his costs of
appeal.

   Haller, J., and McDonald, J., concurred.


                              77 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of ALAN C. and PERRI L. WITTGROVE.   ALAN
          C. WITTGROVE, Appellant, v. PERRI L. WITTGROVE, Respondent.

                                    D042899

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FOURTH APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION ONE

          120 Cal. App. 4th 1317; 16 Cal. Rptr. 3d 489; 2004 Cal. App.
            LEXIS 1239; 2004 Cal. Daily Op. Service 6847; 2004 Daily
                                Journal DAR 9300


                              May 13, 2004, Filed

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     The Publication Status of this Document has been Changed
by the Court from Unpublished to Published July 28, 2004.
Ordered published by In re Marriage of Wittgrove, 2004 Cal. LEXIS 6936 (Cal.,
July 28, 2004)

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of San Diego County, No. D473292, Michael T.
Smyth and Elizabeth Zumwalt Kutzner, Judges.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports

(2) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 41--Pendente Lite Orders--Child
Support--Amount--Adequacy or Excessiveness--Child's Best Interests.--Although
Fam. Code, § 4053, grants a court broad discretion in applying the principles in
implementing the statewide uniform guidelines for child support, the main
concern is the child's best interests. Fam. Code, § 4053, subd. (a), provides
that it is a parent's principal obligation to support his or her minor children
according to the parent's circumstances and station in life, and Fam. Code, §
4053, subd. (f), provides that the children should share in the standard of
living of both parents. Child support may therefore appropriately improve the
standard of living of the custodial household to improve the lives of the
children when the marital standard of living involved an elaborate upper class
lifestyle and the noncustodial spouse earned an extraordinarily high income.

   [10 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (9th ed. 1989) Parent and Child,§§ 261, 280C;
11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (9th ed. 1990) Husband and Wife, §§ 173, 174.]

COUNSEL: Sharron Voorhees for Appellant.

Law Offices of Bernard Wolf, Bernard Wolf; Seltzer, Caplan, McMahon & Vitek,
Gerald L. McMahon and Amanda L. Kramer for Respondent.

JUDGES: Huffman, Acting P. J., with Haller, and McDonald, JJ., concurring.

OPINION BY: HUFFMAN

OPINION

   HUFFMAN, Acting P. J.--Alan C. Wittgrove appeals from an order made March 25,
2003, and entered August 25, 2003, requiring him to pay to Perri L. Wittgrove 2
temporary child support of $ 13,488 per month for the parties' two minor
children and $ 30,000 per month in temporary spousal support. We affirm.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2    For
purposes of clarity and not out of disrepect, we refer to the parties by their
first names.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

   Alan, a general and bariatric surgeon, and Perri, an
obstetrician-gynecologist, separated in December 2001. During their over 15-year
3 marriage they had two children, a son and daughter, respectively aged 9 and 11
at the time Alan filed for dissolution of marriage on August 16, 2002. After
Perri filed her response, she filed an order to show cause (OSC) on October 31,
2002, requesting primary custody of the couple's two minor children, temporary
child and spousal support, and other relief concerning the marital property.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3
According to Alan's petition for dissolution, the parties had been married 15
years and three months at the time of their separation in December 2001. Perri's
response lists the length of marriage as 16 years, three months.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In support of the OSC, Perri filed a declaration explaining that the parties
had been doctors in the Navy at the time they were married, with Alan going
into private practice in 1986, and she in 1987. Perri had been the primary
caregiver of their children and primarily responsible for running the household
while Alan built up his practice. She had taken time off from her practice when
each child was born, had cut back her schedule and had taken on a partner in
2001 in response to Alan's complaints that she was working too much.

   With regard to child custody, visitation, and support, Perri stated that
since the separation she was the parent who cared for the children's day-to-day
needs and Alan saw the children at most two weekends per month from Friday
evening to Sunday evening. Perri requested guideline child support and that
unreimbursed medical and dental expenses for the children be shared with Alan on
a pro rata basis.

   With regard to temporary spousal support, Perri requested sufficient support
to meet the household expenses for her and the children, "consistent with the
lifestyle we enjoyed during the marriage." She noted that Alan's income in 2001
was $ 2,120,322 as compared to her income of $ 127,845. She also stated that
"[d]uring the marriage, we enjoyed a comfortable lifestyle, which included a
4,000 square-foot home with tennis court and pool, a live-in housekeeper, a
nanny, a gardener, and vacations to places such as Hawaii, Cancun, Telluride,
Cabo San Lucas, Israel, and Europe. We shopped wherever and whenever we wanted.
For example, for my clothing alone, we spent approximately $ 15,000 per year,
and our lifestyle included making donations of $ 40,000 to $ 50,000 per year to
various charities. In 2001, we donated over $ 65,000. We were also able to
invest approximately $ 200,000 to $ 300,000 per year for savings."

   Perri further noted that since their separation in December 2001, Alan had
been depositing between $ 15,000 to $ 20,000 per month into their household
account and had continued to pay their credit card bills, which were between $
10,000 and $ 15,000 per month. Because Alan had stopped paying the credit card
bills for her and the children the month before, Perri declared she had been
unable to meet the household expenses or invest money for savings as she did
during the marriage solely on Alan's $ 15,000 per month contribution and her
gross monthly salary of $ 11,000. Perri further noted she was now carrying a
substantial balance owing on her credit card for the first time in years.

   Perri's income and expense declaration submitted with the OSC showed
household expenses for her and the children were $ 38,388 per month and her
current net monthly disposable income was $ 7,271. The child support information
filed with the OSC alleged the children spent 85 percent of the time with Perri
and 15 percent of the time with Alan. Perri also lodged copies of the parties'
federal and state income tax returns for 2000 and 2001.

    In his lengthy responsive declaration, Alan stated he had no issue in
providing support to Perri to maintain their children at the standard of living
which they had provided them since birth, but did contest the spousal support
she sought because he felt she had purposely reduced her income to set the stage
for a support award upon separation and was understating what her true income
from her medical practice could be. Although he conceded his gross income in
2001 was $ 2,120,322 and $ 1,032,852 in 2002, Alan requested the court impute $
250,000 to Perri for the income she could easily earn if she applied her skills
and time to her practice, and objected to her statement of expenses to run the
household, claiming they were also twice the amount used to run the household
during their marriage. Alan also requested the court consider the "actual needs"
of the children when it determined the amount of temporary child support because
of his "extraordinarily high income."

   Regarding a parenting plan, Alan refuted that Perri was the sole caregiver of
the children, claiming he was the parent who interacted the most with the
children during the marriage. Since the separation, he had experienced
difficulty in communicating with the children because he had to go through Perri
regarding any visitation. It was Alan's hope that he could equally co-parent
with Perri "on a week-on week-off basis." He had purchased a 4,000 square foot
home five miles from the marital residence and within the children's school
district. He had help to care for the children when he was away at the office
and could easily be home by 4:30 or 5:00 p.m. each day. Alan did not want to be
reduced to only an "alternate weekend" father.

   In her reply declaration, Perri denied Alan's numerous personal attacks,
countering with many of her own disparaging remarks. Essentially, Perri
represented that while the Family Court Services (FCS) mediator had recommended
Alan have only 22 percent parenting time, she looked forward to him having
increased child-sharing time in the future. Perri also justified her reduction
in work hours and explained more fully her household expenses.

   On March 21, 2003, Alan filed an income and expense declaration showing $
78,438 net monthly disposable income and $ 20,137 a month in expenses. He also
filed a  memo showing $ 1,731,974 as his estimated net income for 2002 from his
former medical partnership and his current medical corporation. In addition,
Alan filed a five-year income analysis he had done for Perri, showing that she
could have made $ 22,189 per month in 2002 with a gross income of $ 266,263.

   Before the March 25, 2003 hearing on the OSC, Perri filed another income and
expense declaration that date, showing total monthly expenses remained at $
38,388 while her current monthly disposable income had dropped to $ 5,974
because her "income from [her] practice varies from month to month."

    At the hearing, after the parties noted for the record they were stipulating
to the appointment of appraisers for the marital residence and the parties'
medical practices, Perri's counsel requested the court confirm the FCS report
regarding child-share time and strike certain statements disparaging of Perri
made in Alan's declaration. Counsel also objected to the five-year income
analysis submitted by Alan as having no foundation and being inaccurate. Counsel
then argued that because Alan's salary had been nearly 10 times that of Perri's,
Alan earning approximately $ 2 million per year while Perri earned only about $
150,000 to $ 200,000 per year, and given the parties' lifestyle during the
marriage, $ 40,000 per month total for household expenses plus money for
savings, which was not included in those expenses, would be reasonable. Counsel
stressed that Perri was also now having to pay many of the credit card debts
that Alan had paid for in the past. Perri was requesting guideline child support
and sufficient spousal support to meet the household expenses consistent with
the marital lifestyle, which included the ability to save $ 16,000 to $ 25,000
per month.

   Alan's counsel then clarified that Alan's income for 2002 was approximately $
1.7 million, asked the court to strike certain paragraphs of Perri's declaration
that were disparaging to Alan, and argued strenuously for more child-sharing
time for Alan and more mediation time for the parties regarding child custody
issues. 4 As for support, Alan's counsel challenged the appropriateness of
certain items claimed by Perri as expenses, i.e., her credit card payments, home
improvements, and certain expenses that Perri was deducting from her business,
like the lease of one of her automobiles and accounting services. Counsel
asserted that because Perri's budget was thus at most about $ 23,300 per month
without such improper expenses, the deduction of her $ 7,271 net monthly
disposable income figure from her first income and expense statement would
render expenses of only $ 16,294 monthly which she could afford to pay.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4    The
court struck those portions in both Alan's and Perri's declarations referring to
so-called psychiatric analyses of the other party.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   With regard to child support, Alan's counsel argued the guideline amount was
rebuttable due to Alan's extraordinarily high income which would lead to an
amount that far exceeds the needs of the children. Counsel referred the court to
Perri's listing of the children's expenses, which came out to about $ 4,000 a
month. When counsel started pointing out that certain expenses listed for the
children were no longer expenses, the court sustained Perri's objection to this
as evidence for lack of foundation and without support in any of the
declarations or pleadings. Counsel then used Perri's income and expense
statement and the tax returns she  had filed to argue the court should impute an
income of $ 266,000 a year to her.

    After several other objections that Alan's counsel was misstating the
evidence, the court lost patience with the parties having set this matter for a
short cause and reminded them that "[t]he intention for temporary support is to
maintain the status quo." When Alan's counsel continued to point out that it was
important for the court to look at the children's needs, at what Perri's
expenses were without savings and capital improvements to the family residence,
the court asked the parties to give it "your bottom line request."

   Alan's counsel asked the court to award Perri $ 6,500 a month for the two
minor children and $ 10,000 a month for spousal support, arguing Perri was able
to support the children herself. Perri's counsel represented that to be on the
conservative side, running a support calculation based on $ 200,000 income for
Perri and Alan's income of $ 1.7 million, spousal support would be $ 34,264 and
the presumed child support would be $ 14,356 for a total of $ 48,620 in support.

   Although Perri's counsel acknowledged there is a "high-income-earner
exception to the application of child support guidelines," counsel argued Alan
had failed to meet his burden of showing that the formula amount is unjust and
inappropriate. Counsel also argued that a change from the current timeshare for
the children to a 50/50 timeshare as proposed by Alan would be too dramatic a
change for the interest of the children's stability and continuity of routine.
As to the reasonableness of Perri's stated expenses, counsel asked the court to
look at the $ 25,000 to $ 35,000 Alan had been providing Perri up to the last
month, which only allowed her to make ends meet, but did not permit her to save
as she had during the marriage. Counsel represented that Perri has had to cut
back and has been unable to meet her reasonable needs which were the standards
established during the couple's marriage. Counsel also asked for a contribution
for attorney fees and costs. Alan's counsel did not oppose an order that the
attorney fees for both parties be paid out of the sufficient community assets in
this case.

   The court ruled it would adopt the FCS recommendation regarding child custody
except for the amount of share time, which it was changing to give Alan 34
percent share time by its calculation. The court then stated "[I]t will be
father [(Alan)] with single, with one, 34 percent time share, wages of [$]
142,000 per month, itemized deductions of, with property tax expense of $ 700,
deductible interest of [$] 4677. Mother [(Perri)] with head of household of
three, wages of [$] 16,700 per month. That's using a [$] 200,000 a year number
... because it was represented to the Court that it was really a waste  of [its]
time to spend time on the question of whether that should have been lower or
higher--health insurance of $ 61 per month, it's a guideline child support of
[$] 13,488 per month."

   In making this temporary child support ruling, the court specifically found
that the guideline presumption under the Family Code had not been rebutted. When
Alan's counsel challenged this finding, the court explained that just "saying"
one had a high income was not enough to rebut the presumption under Family Code
section 4057. The court further clarified that it did not have "sufficient
evidence to make the determination that the amount determined under the formula
[guidelines] would exceed the needs of the children."

   With regard to spousal support, the family law judge then stated, "We don't
use a guideline spousal support in this state, at least in this court house, at
least I don't. If we did use a Santa Clara [one], we would in fact be at [$]
34,930 per month. The temporary spousal support order in this case [is] going to
be $ 30,000 per month. And I am looking at that as maintaining the status quo.
I'm not putting a lot of stock at this time in the ... claimed expenses. I agree
that some of them seem to not appropriately be considered for purposes of
temporary orders, but may come into play later when we deal with other aspects
of the case."

   The court then accepted the parties' earlier stipulation regarding residence
and medical practices' appraisals as part of the court's order and also ordered
each party's counsel be paid $ 20,000 in attorney fees from the community
assets. The effective date of support was set as January 1, 2003. The written
findings and order after hearing was filed on August 25, 2003.

DISCUSSION

   On appeal, Alan challenges only those portions of the court's order
concerning temporary child and spousal support. He specifically contends the
temporary child support order was based on incorrect information because the
trial court failed to exercise its discretion in determining Perri's correct
level of income that could be attributed to her, that the total order exceeded
the family's needs and the status quo, that the court also failed to discount
expenses not properly considered at this time, and that the court improperly
based its order on the Santa Clara temporary spousal support guidelines,
slightly adjusted. We find no abuse of discretion in the trial court's temporary
support order.

    Pending a marriage dissolution or legal separation action where there is an
issue of support of a minor child, the court may order either or both parents to
pay "any amount necessary for the support of the child" (Fam. Code, 5 §§ 3600,
4001), and may order either spouse to pay "any amount that is necessary" for the
other spouse's support, consistent with the requirements of sections 4320,
subdivisions (i) and (m), and 4325. 6 (§ 3600.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5    All
future statutory references are to the Family Code unless otherwise specified.
6    Sections 4320, subdivisions (i) and (m), and 4325 concern limitations in
the trial court's discretion to award temporary spousal support in domestic
violence situations not applicable here.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   With regard to child support, notwithstanding the language of section 3600
regarding "any amount necessary," courts are required "to adhere to the
statewide uniform guideline and may depart from the guideline only in the
special circumstances set forth in this article." (§ 4052.) As pertinent here,
the statutory formula for computing child support in section 4055 yields a
presumptively correct amount of support per child which may only be rebutted "by
admissible evidence showing that application of the formula would be unjust or
inappropriate in the particular case ... because ... the following factor[] is
found to be applicable by a preponderance of the evidence ... [¶] ... [¶] (3)
The parent being ordered to pay child support has an extraordinarily high income
and the amount determined under the formula would exceed the needs of the
children." (§ 4057, subd. (b)(3).) The parent who invokes this high income
exception to the guidelines has the burden of proving " 'application of the
formula would be unjust or inappropriate,' and the lower award would be
consistent with the child's best interests. [Citations.]" (In re Marriage of
Hubner (2001) 94 Cal.App.4th 175, 183 [114 Cal. Rptr. 2d 646] (Hubner).)

    Although section 4053 grants a court broad discretion in applying the
principles in implementing the statewide uniform guidelines for child support,
the main concern is the child's best interests. (§ 4053; see In re Marriage of
Cheriton (2001) 92 Cal.App.4th 269, 283 [111 Cal. Rptr. 2d 755] (Cheriton).) As
relevant to this case, section 4053, subdivision (a) provides that it is a
parent's principal obligation "to support his or her minor children according to
the parent's circumstances and station in life," and subdivision (f) provides
that the "[c]hildren should share in the standard of living of both parents.
Child support may therefore appropriately improve the standard of living of the
custodial household to improve the lives of the children." (See also Cheriton,
supra, 92 Cal.App.4th at p. 292.)

    We review child support awards under an abuse of discretion standard. (In re
Marriage of Chandler (1997) 60 Cal.App.4th 124, 128 [70 Cal. Rptr. 2d 109] (
Chandler).) "We cannot substitute our judgment for that of the trial court, but
only determine if any judge reasonably could have made such an order.
[Citation.] Our review of factual findings is limited to a determination of
whether there is any substantial evidence to support the trial court's
conclusions. [Citation.]" (Ibid.)

   We also review temporary spousal support orders under the abuse of discretion
standard. (In re Marriage of Winter (1992) 7 Cal.App.4th 1926, 1932 [10 Cal.
Rptr. 2d 225] (Winter).) Generally, temporary spousal support may be ordered in
"any amount" based on the party's need and the other party's ability to pay. (
Ibid.; see also In re Marriage of Dick (1993) 15 Cal.App.4th 144, 159 [18 Cal.
Rptr. 2d 743] (Dick).) "Whereas permanent spousal support 'provide[s] financial
assistance, if appropriate, as determined by the financial circumstances of the
parties after their dissolution and the division of their community property,'
temporary spousal support 'is utilized to maintain the living conditions and
standards of the parties in as close to the status quo position as possible
pending trial and the division of their assets and obligations.' [Citations.]" (
Winter, supra, 7 Cal.App.4th at p. 1932.) The court is not restricted by any set
of statutory guidelines in fixing a temporary spousal support amount. (Cheriton,
supra, 92 Cal.App.4th at p. 312.)

   Rather, in exercising its broad discretion, the court may properly consider
the "big picture" concerning the parties' assets and income available for
support in light of the marriage standard of living. (See Dick, supra, 15
Cal.App.4th at p. 165.) Subject only to the general "need" and "the ability to
pay," the amount of a temporary spousal support award lies within the court's
sound discretion, which will only be reversed on appeal on a showing of clear
abuse of discretion. (In re Marriage of Murray (2002) 101 Cal.App.4th 581, 594
[124 Cal. Rptr. 2d 342].) "Ability to pay encompasses far more than the income
of the spouse from whom temporary support is sought; investments and other
assets may be used for ... temporary spousal support ... . [Citations.]" (Dick,
supra, 15 Cal.App.4th at p. 159.) Trial courts may properly look to the parties'
accustomed marital lifestyle as the main basis for a temporary support order. (§
3600; Winter, supra, 7 Cal.App.4th at p. 1932.)

   Moreover, even if a court does not have its own local rules or guidelines
that provide "standardized temporary spousal support schedules" that mark
appropriate  awards for spousal support based solely on the parties' incomes
with adjustments for any child support, the use of such guidelines has been held
to be a valuable tool in an aid to calculating  Motemporary support. (Winter,
supra, 7 Cal.App.4th at p. 1933.) Further, even where standardized local
schedules have exceeded a party's stated living expenses because he or she has
cut back or is living frugally, courts have held the use of such guidelines for
temporary spousal support proper to maintain the marital lifestyle. 7 (Ibid.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7    Alan's
arguments at the time of oral argument based upon In re Marriage of Zywiciel
(2000) 83 Cal.App.4th 1078 [100 Cal. Rptr. 2d 242] (Zywiciel) are inapposite.
Zywiciel concerned the sufficiency of the evidence to support an award of
permanent spousal support which requires the trial court to consider all the
circumstances listed in section 4320. (83 Cal.App.4th at pp. 1081-1083.) The
award in Zywiciel was reversed because the court had merely relied on a
computer-generated figure used as a guideline for setting temporary spousal
support. (Id. at p. 1079.) Here, temporary and not permanent spousal support is
at issue and, as noted above, the use of guidelines for setting such temporary
support has been held to be proper. (Winter, supra, 7 Cal.App.4th at p. 1933.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Applying the above principles to this case, we conclude the trial court's
temporary child and spousal support orders were not an abuse of discretion. With
regard to the child support order, the court's finding that Alan had not met his
burden of rebutting the presumptively correct guideline amount is fully
supported by the lack of evidence in the record to show " 'application of the
formula would be unjust or inappropriate,' and the lower award would be
consistent with the child's best interests. [Citations.]" (Hubner, supra, 94
Cal.App.4th at p. 183.) In the absence of such evidence, we cannot say no judge
would have reasonably made the same order under the same circumstances. (
Chandler, supra, 60 Cal.App.4th at p. 128.) That being so, the court's use of
the guideline was proper and no abuse of discretion is shown.

   Nor can we find the court abused its broad discretion in setting the amount
of temporary spousal support. Contrary to Alan's assertion, the record does not
show the court improperly used the Santa Clara temporary spousal support
guidelines, slightly adjusted. The court merely stated what the amount would be
if those guidelines were used,  but noted that neither it nor the courts in San
Diego County generally used guidelines. The court clearly stated it was basing
its support order on maintaining the status quo, which is the benchmark for
temporary spousal support. (See Winter, supra, 7 Cal.App.4th at p. 1932.)
However, even if the court had used the Santa Clara temporary support guidelines
as a tool in setting the amount of temporary spousal support in this case, as
noted above, that use would have been proper (id. at p. 1933), and would not
have violated San Diego Superior Court Local Rules. 8

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -8    San
Diego Superior Court Local Rules, division V, Family Law, rule 5.65 specifically
provides that: "[t]he court will consider all relevant factors in setting
temporary spousal support, including guideline calculations based upon any
formula in other counties of this state."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Moreover, Alan's assertions that the child support guideline amount is wrong
and the temporary spousal amount is incorrect because the court failed to
properly impute additional income to Perri fails because he did not present any
competent evidence that Perri had both an ability and an opportunity to earn the
attributed income he sought to impute to her. (In re Marriage of Regnery (1989)
214 Cal. App. 3d 1367, 1372-1373 [263 Cal. Rptr. 243].) In addition, Alan's
argument that there is no evidence to support the court's use of $ 200,000 as
Perri's income is refuted by the record. Perri's counsel specifically offered
that amount to use conservatively as her income, which fluctuated monthly,
rather than continue to argue with Alan's counsel in the absence of his
producing evidence that more income should be attributed to Perri. Essentially
the admission of such amount as her income to be used in the child support
guidelines when her income and expense statement stated her income for the past
12 months had been only $ 76,314 and Alan's own "five-year income analysis"
stated Perri's income for 2002 was only $ 134,263, inured to Alan's benefit and
does not show an abuse of discretion. Nor has Alan shown on this record any
prejudicial error in the use of the $ 200,000 figure for calculating an amount
of temporary spousal support.

   In addition, Alan's specific claims the total order of temporary child and
spousal support was improper because it exceeded the family's needs and the
status quo, and the court failed to properly discount the expenses at this time
are without merit. Alan ignores the evidence in the record concerning the
parties' elaborate upper class lifestyle, which included substantial amounts of
money to invest and save each year, and the fact that a court is not limited by
a supported spouse's living expense needs when the parties' marital standard of
living included savings and investments. (See Cheriton, supra, 92 Cal.App.4th at
p. 312; Winter, supra, 7 Cal.App.4th at p. 1932.) Furthermore, "[w]hat
constitutes reasonable needs for a child varies with the circumstances of the
parties [and] the duty to support a child covers more than the mere necessities
of life if the parent can afford to pay more. [Citations.]" (Chandler, supra, 60
Cal.App.4th at p. 129.) As already noted above, when minor children are
involved, they should share in the standard of living of both parents and the
amount of support may appropriately "improve the standard of living of the
custodial household to improve the lives of the children." (§ 4053, subds. (a) &
(f); see also Cheriton, supra, 92 Cal.App.4th at p. 292.) The court utilized
these rules in this case and the amounts of temporary support awarded were well
within its wide discretion. No abuse of that discretion has been shown.

DISPOSITION

   The order is affirmed. Perri shall recover her costs on appeal.

   Haller, J., and McDonald, J., concurred.


                              78 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of JEANN A. and JOHN EDGAR STIMEL. JEANN
            A. STIMEL, Appellant, v. JOHN EDGAR STIMEL, Respondent.

                                  No. A071138.

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FIRST APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION THREE

           49 Cal. App. 4th 991; 57 Cal. Rptr. 2d 18; 1996 Cal. App.
          LEXIS 925; 96 Cal. Daily Op. Service 7240; 96 Daily Journal
                                   DAR 11929


                          September 27, 1996, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Contra Costa County. Super. Ct. No.
D92-02148. Family Law Referee Josanna Berkow.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports

(1a) (1b) (1c) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 66--Spousal Support--
Modification--Life Insurance on Husband Paid For by Wife--Change of
Circumstances Requirement--Authority of Court.  --In dissolution of marriage
proceedings in which the former wife sought an order directing her former
husband to apply for life insurance naming her as beneficiary and stipulated
that she would pay the insurance premiums herself, the trial court erred in
treating the motion as a request for modification of spousal support requiring a
showing of a material change in circumstances. Because the former wife sought no
additional financial contribution from her former spouse, to require a change in
circumstances in this situation would be both unfair and unfounded. Fam. Code, §
2010, which vests the trial court with jurisdiction "to inquire into and render
any judgment and make orders that are appropriate concerning . . ." certain
specified matters including spousal support, provided authority for the relief
sought. Fam. Code, § 4360, was not the proper basis on which to predicate
relief, since its provision for insurance relates to the issuance of a spousal
support award and contemplates that the insurance premiums will be paid by the
supporting spouse.

   [See 11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (9th ed. 1990) Husband and Wife, §§ 252,
256.]

(2) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 61--Spousal Support--What Constitutes:
Words, Phrases, and Maxims--Spousal Support.  --Fam. Code, § 4300, provides that
it is a person's duty to support his or her spouse. The term "support" is
defined as a source or means of living; subsistence, sustenance, maintenance, or
living. In a broad sense the term includes all such means of living as would
enable one to live in the degree of comfort suitable and becoming to his or her
station of life. It is said to include anything requisite to housing, feeding,
clothing, health, proper recreation, vacation, traveling expense, or other
proper cognate purposes; also, proper care, nursing, and medical attendance in
sickness, and suitable burial at death. "Support" may encompass payment of a
supported spouse's medical insurance premiums; mortgage payments on the family
residence; maintenance of life insurance on the supporting spouse's life; and
satisfaction of a supported spouse's attorney fees. Orders to pay overdue
community debts, or to pay the supported spouse's future debts, have also been
held to be a form of spousal support.

(3) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69--Spousal Support--Modification--
Change of Circumstances.  --A material change in circumstances is required
whenever a party seeks to either increase or decrease an existing spousal
support award. Otherwise, dissolution cases would have no finality and unhappy
former spouses could bring repeated actions for modification with no burden of
showing a justification to change the order.

COUNSEL: Nicolette Mandl and Robert A. Roth for Appellant.

Lorence L. Timm for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Corrigan, J., with Phelan, P. J., and Parrilli, J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: CORRIGAN

OPINION

     CORRIGAN, J.

   When a supported spouse seeks an order directing her former husband to apply
for life insurance naming her as beneficiary and stipulates that she will pay
the insurance premiums herself, is the motion a request for modification of
spousal support requiring a showing of a material change in circumstances? We
have determined the proper response is "no." Accordingly, we reverse and remand.

   FACTUAL BACKGROUND

   Following 31 years of marriage, John and Jeann Stimel separated in March
1992. John 1 was employed as an investigator for the Department of Motor
Vehicles earning $ 3,579 per month. He also received a monthly pension of $
2,420 from the Oakland Police Department retirement fund. Jeann was employed as
a secretary earning $ 2,554 per month. The couple had accumulated numerous
assets including a home, various investments and bank accounts, and cars. They
had no minor children.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Because
the parties bear the same surname, we use their given names to avoid confusion.
(Cf.  In re Marriage of Smith (1990) 225 Cal. App. 3d 469, 475, fn. 1 [274 Cal.
Rptr. 911].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Jeann filed a petition for dissolution, and the parties entered into an oral
stipulation on issues of property, support, and marital status. As part of the
agreement, Jeann was to receive half of John's monthly pension income.
Additionally, John agreed to pay spousal support of $ 300 per month. The
agreement specified that the amount of support was based on the parties' income
at the time and was subject to modification upon motion by either party, without
a showing of a change in circumstances. A final judgment of dissolution
incorporating the parties' agreement was entered nunc pro tunc as of December 2,
1992. In November 1993, the parties modified their agreement. Upon discovering
that John's police pension did not include survivor benefits, Jeann opted to
exchange her half of the pension for other assets.

   On August 5, 1994, Jeann moved to modify spousal support. Her monthly income
had decreased substantially. Following a job transfer, she experienced a $ 364
reduction in monthly salary. She no longer received income  from John's pension.
She used savings to meet expenses and had unpaid medical bills. John, whose own
income had increased by $ 703 per month, opposed the motion.

   Following a stipulation, the court issued a permanent spousal support award
of $ 900 per month with yearly adjustments based on the Consumer Price Index. By
its terms, the order continued "until death of either party or remarriage of
petitioner" and was "non-modifiable until retirement or involuntary loss of
employment."

   Approximately one month later, Jeann filed this motion for an injunctive
order directing John to apply for term life insurance in the sum of $ 150,000,
naming Jeann as beneficiary. The motion was filed under Family Code 2 section
4360, which authorizes the trial court, in conjunction with a spousal support
award, to require the obligor spouse to maintain life insurance for the benefit
of the supported spouse ". . . where it is just and reasonable . . . so that the
supported spouse will not be left without means of support in the event that the
spousal support is terminated by the death of the party required to make the
payment of support." (§ 4360, subd. (a).) In a signed declaration in support of
the motion, Jeann said, ". . . it is most unlikely that I will be able to earn
enough to support myself without continued support from [John]." Jeann claimed
that John had refused to obtain such insurance voluntarily. She said she herself
would pay for the cost of the insurance and any medical examination that might
be required.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   All
further statutory references are to the Family Code.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    John opposed the motion, arguing that Jeann's request was tantamount to a
motion to modify spousal support and failed to establish a change in
circumstances. The trial court agreed with John's assessment and denied the
motion on this procedural basis. The court noted that the matter of life
insurance had not previously been before the court and was not a factor in the
permanent spousal support award.

   DISCUSSION

     Jeann challenges the trial court's characterization of her motion as
tantamount to a motion to modify a spousal support award, requiring a change in
circumstances. She maintains that the requested order for life insurance is not
a form of support inasmuch as she, not John, will pay the insurance premiums.
She points out that the only burden on John would be making application for the
insurance and submitting to a physical examination. Jeann's argument is
persuasive.

     Section 4300 provides that it is a person's duty to support his or her
spouse. The term "support" is defined as "a source or means of living;
subsistence, sustenance, maintenance, or living. In a broad sense the term
includes all such means of living as would enable one to live in the degree of
comfort suitable and becoming to his station of life. It is said to include
anything requisite to housing, feeding, clothing, health, proper recreation,
vacation, traveling expense, or other proper cognate purposes; also, proper
care, nursing, and medical attendance in sickness, and suitable burial at
death." (Black's Law Dict. (6th ed. 1990) p. 1439, col. 2.)

   "Support" may encompass payment of a supported spouse's medical insurance
premiums ( In re Marriage of Benjamins (1994) 26 Cal. App. 4th 423, 430-431 [31
Cal. Rptr. 2d 313]); mortgage payments on the family residence ( In re Marriage
of Garcia (1990) 224 Cal. App. 3d 885 [274 Cal. Rptr. 194]); maintenance of life
insurance on the supporting spouse's life ( In re Marriage of O'Connell (1992) 8
Cal. App. 4th 565 [10 Cal. Rptr. 2d 334]); and satisfaction of a supported
spouse's attorney fees ( In re Gwinn (Bankr. 9th Cir. 1982) 20 Bankr. 233).

   "Orders to pay overdue community debts, or to pay the supported spouse's
future debts, have also been held to be a form of spousal support. [Citations.]
The rationale behind these rulings is to ensure an award will be adequate to
meet the supported spouse's living expense and not be depleted by creditor
demands. [Citation.]" (In re Marriage of Benjamins, supra, 26 Cal. App. 4th at
pp. 430-431.)

     Clearly, if Jeann were asking the trial court to direct that John obtain
and pay for life insurance, her request would properly be deemed a request for
additional support and she would have to establish a change in circumstances as
a prerequisite to such relief.    A material change in circumstances is required
whenever a party seeks to either increase or decrease an existing spousal
support award. (In re Marriage of Smith, supra, 225 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 482-495
.) "Otherwise, dissolution cases would have no finality and unhappy former
spouses could bring repeated actions for modification with no burden of showing
a justification to change the order." ( In re Marriage of Biderman (1992) 5 Cal.
App. 4th 409, 412-413 [6 Cal. Rptr. 2d 791].)

     Just as clearly, however, the fact that Jeann plans to pay the insurance
premiums herself distinguishes her request from one for additional support.
Although the purpose of her motion is to ensure ongoing income in the event of
John's death, the grant of her motion would impose no financial burden on John.
It would effect no change to the present level of support. Jeann's action is one
she wishes to undertake and pay for to ensure her own continued support. She
seeks no additional financial contribution from her  former spouse. To require a
change in circumstances in this situation is both unfair and unfounded.

   Accordingly, the trial court erred in treating Jeann's motion as a motion to
modify spousal support. This leaves us with yet another question. If the relief
sought is not a form of support, how is it properly characterized and under what
authority could it be granted?

    Jeann cites section 4360 as authority for her motion. However, as previously
noted, the provision for insurance under this statute relates to the issuance of
a spousal support award. It contemplates that the insurance premiums will be
paid by the supporting spouse. 3 Because Jeann's motion seeks to impose no
financial burden on John, it is not properly characterized as requiring
additional support from him. Thus, section 4360 is not the proper basis on which
to predicate relief.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   The
California Law Revision Commission Comment on section 4360 states in part: "[I]f
the support obligor is insurable, this section authorizes the court to order
that the support obligor obtain and maintain insurance and name the supported
spouse as beneficiary." (Cal. Law Revision Com. com., 29D West's Ann. Fam. Code
(1994 ed.) foll. § 4360, p. 699.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Section 2010, however, does provide a basis for relief. Section 2010 vests
the trial court with jurisdiction "to inquire into and render any judgment and
make orders that are appropriate concerning . . ." certain specified matters
including spousal support. (§ 2010, subd. (d), italics added.) 4 The power to
issue orders under section 2010 has been construed to include injunctive orders.
(See In re Marriage of Van Hook (1983) 147 Cal. App. 3d 970, 980-986 [195 Cal.
Rptr. 541] [discussing section 2010's predecessor, Civil Code former section
4351].) While the relief sought by Jeann is not support per se it certainly
concerns support in that insurance payments would ensure continuing financial
assistance upon John's death. Accordingly, we hold that the trial court has
authority under section 2010 to hear and decide Jeann's motion.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   The
jurisdiction over spousal support is statutorily extended "indefinitely" in
marriages of "long duration" like the one at bar, "except on written agreement
of the parties to the contrary or a court order terminating spousal support . .
. ." (§ 4336, subd. (a).)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    By our decision, we do not in any way pass judgment on the merits of Jeann's
motion. Resolution of that question remains within the sound discretion of the
trial court. We simply hold that Jeann need not establish changed circumstances,
because she is not seeking additional spousal support from John.

    DISPOSITION

   The June 22, 1995, order denying Jeann's motion is reversed, and the matter
is remanded for further consideration pursuant to section 2010. Each party is to
bear its own costs on appeal.

   Phelan, P. J., and Parrilli, J., concurred.


                              79 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of GUDRUN and HENRY J. RICHMOND.  GUDRUN
              RICHMOND, Appellant, v. HENRY J. RICHMOND, Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 46672

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                  Division One

            105 Cal. App. 3d 352; 164 Cal. Rptr. 381; 1980 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1782


                                 April 16, 1980

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of the City and County of San Francisco, No.
712544, Donald B. King, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 72--Support of Other Party--
Termination of Order--Reasonableness of Provisions.  --A spousal support order
may, in a proper case, be fashioned so as to encourage supportive self-reliance,
and to discourage delay in preparation for or in seeking, or refusal of,
available employment. However, present or future limitation or termination of
spousal support must in all cases be reasonable; it may not be arbitrary, or
based on speculation as to the supported spouse's future employment
qualifications or opportunities. A trial court should not terminate jurisdiction
to extend a future support order after a lengthy marriage, unless the record
clearly indicates that the supported spouse will be able to adequately meet his
or her financial needs at the time selected for termination of jurisdiction.

(2) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 72--Support of Other Party--
Termination of Order--Retention of Jurisdiction.  --In making its decision
concerning the retention of jurisdiction with respect to spousal support orders,
a trial court must rely only on the evidence in the record and the reasonable
inferences to be drawn therefrom. It must not engage in speculation. If the
record does not contain evidence of the supported spouse's ability to meet his
or her future needs, the court should not "burn its bridges" and fail to retain
jurisdiction. In making the determination, the court should consider practically
everything that has a legitimate bearing on the need for present and prospective
support, including the spouses' ability to earn and actual earnings.

(3) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 66--Support of Other Party--
Modification, Revocation, and Extension--Discretion of Trial Court.  --In
entering an order modifying spousal support provisions in an action to establish
a sister state divorce decree, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in
requiring the husband, whose monthly income from unemployment insurance,
interest, and dividends was around $ 575, to pay support of $ 200 per month, or
in providing for termination of support some three years after the time of the
order unless the wife should show good cause to extend it. The court could have
concluded from the record that it was probable the wife would be supportively
self-sufficient at the designated time, and reasonable that she, with better
access to relevant evidence, make a contrary showing. Similarly, no abuse
appeared with respect to the amount the husband was required to pay, in view of
the court's wide discretion on a motion to modify spousal support, to consider
practically everything which has a legitimate bearing on the present and
prospective matters relating to the lives of both parties.

COUNSEL: Diana Richmond for Appellant Wife, Rohde & Gamer and Daniel A. Gamer
for Appellant Husband.

JUDGES: Opinion by Elkington, J., with Racanelli, P. J., and Grodin J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: ELKINGTON

OPINION

     Plaintiff Gudrun Richmond (hereafter for convenience, Gudrun) appeals from
a portion of an order modifying downward, spousal support from Henry Richmond
(for convenience also, Henry), in an action she had commenced to establish a
State of New York divorce judgment.  The portion of the order at issue provided
the following: "Said obligation for spousal support shall continue through the
month of September 1981, at which time spousal support shall forever terminate
and the jurisdiction of this Court over the issue of spousal support shall
terminate, unless prior to September 30, 1981, Petitioner [Gudrun] makes a
showing of good cause to extend spousal support beyond that date."

   Henry cross-appeals from a portion of the order immediately preceding that
appealed by Gudrun.  It recites that: "Effective July 1, 1978, Respondent
[Henry] shall pay to Petitioner [Gudrun] as and for spousal support the sum of $
200.00 per month, payable on the first day of each month."

    The evidence before the California superior court, June 23, 1978, may
reasonably be condensed to the following:

   At the time of its dissolution in New York, January 21, 1976, the marriage of
the parties had endured 16 years, and Henry was ordered to pay spousal support
of $ 542 per month to Gudrun, who was unemployed. The marriage had been
childless, and Gudrun was then about 44 years old.  At the time of the superior
court hearing, June 23, 1978, Henry had been unemployed for about two months.
His income from unemployment insurance and interest and dividends totaled around
$ 575 per month.  His previous income had been "a gross of $ 2,297 per month."
Gudrun had been unemployed  throughout the marriage, but she had been able to
acquire an advanced education during it.  She held a master's degree in
education which she had earned with a "4.0" average.  She was also a "Ph.D
candidate," a degree which would be awarded her when she "finished the
dissertation," a project upon which she hadn't "been able to work . . . for
about a year or so." Her field was "German literature." She had sought
employment, but only "in my field." During the previous year she had held a
teaching fellowship the "net earnings [of which for a time] were $ 448" monthly.
And she had more recently been assigned a summer college course "starting the
19th, which is this week, and I got a call Friday before that they had to close
some of its own classes because of Proposition 13." But on the whole her current
income prospects appeared quite small, hardly in excess of a few thousand
dollars a year.

   Each of the parties contends that the superior court abused its discretion in
respect of that portion of the order from which her, or his, appeal is taken.
And each of them relies upon the state Supreme Court's recent case of In re
Marriage of Morrison (1978) 20 Cal.3d 437 [143 Cal.Rptr. 139, 573 P.2d 41].

   The superior court was here called upon to exercise its "careful and reasoned
judgment" in a most difficult and "delicate" field, thus to "effect substantial
justice" to the parties of a wrecked marriage whose income was not reasonably
calculated to support two households in the manner that it had supported one.
(See Morrison, 20 Cal.3d, at p. 450; In re Marriage of Brantner (1977) 67
Cal.App.3d 416, 422 [136 Cal.Rptr. 435].)

   Morrison declared a state policy "that all supported spouses [of dissolved
marriages] who were able to do so should seek employment." (20  Cal.3d, at p.
451.) "Limiting the duration of support so that both parties can develop their
own lives, free from obligations to each other, is a commendable [judicial]
goal." ( Id., p. 452.)  And a spousal support order may, in a proper case, be
fashioned so as to encourage such supportive self-reliance, and to discourage
delay in preparation for or in seeking, or refusal of, available employment.

   But present or future limitation, or termination, of spousal support must in
all cases be reasonable; it may not be arbitrary or based upon speculation as to
the supported spouse's future employment qualifications or opportunities.
Instead, the trial court will follow the rule that: "A trial court should not
terminate jurisdiction to extend a future support order after a lengthy
marriage, unless the record clearly indicates that the supported spouse will be
able to adequately meet his or her financial needs at the time selected for
termination of jurisdiction.   In making its decision concerning the retention
of jurisdiction, the court must rely only on the evidence in the record and the
reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom.  It must not engage in speculation.
If the record does not contain evidence of the supported spouse's ability to
meet his or her future needs, the court should not 'burn its bridges' and fail
to retain jurisdiction." (20 Cal.3d, at p. 453.) And in such a determination the
court should consider "'"practically everything that has a legitimate bearing"'"
upon the need for present and prospective support, including the spouses'
"'"ability to earn and actual earnings."'" ( Id., pp. 454, 455.)

     Under these criteria we observe no abuse by the trial court, of judicial
discretion.  It had postponed to the future, "prior to September 30, 1981," on
what will reasonably be deemed the better evidence of that day, determination of
the delicate question whether to continue, or terminate, spousal support. It
will be presumed that the court will then again consider, and apply, the
rationale and rule of Morrison.

   Nor do we observe discretionary abuse, as contended by Gudrun, in the
superior court's choice of future termination unless she shall prior to
September 30, 1981, make "a showing of good cause to extend spousal support
beyond that date." On the record  the court might have concluded it probable
that Gudrun would be supportively self-sufficient at the designated time, and
reasonable that she, with better access to relevant evidence, make a contrary
showing.  In such event the court will again be guided by Morrison.

    We accordingly find no merit in the appeal of Gudrun.

   A similar lack of merit is observed in the appeal of Henry, from the superior
court's order modifying Gudrun's spousal support from $ 542 to $ 200 per month.
Upon such a motion to modify spousal support the court has a wide discretion,
and may consider "'practically everything which has a legitimate bearing upon
the present and prospective matters relating to the lives of both parties.'" (
Hall v. Hall (1954) 42 Cal.2d 435, 442 [267 P.2d 249]; In re Marriage of Siegel
(1972) 26 Cal.App.3d 88, 92 [102 Cal.Rptr. 613].) Under this test we find the
modification order reasonable.

    The superior court's order filed July 27, 1978, and entered August 14, 1978,
is affirmed.


                              80 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of ABRAHAM and ANNETTE BENJAMINS. ABRAHAM
               BENJAMINS, Appellant, v. ANNETTE BENJAMINS et al.,
                                  Respondents.

                                  No. B078373.

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SECOND APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                DIVISION SEVEN.

           26 Cal. App. 4th 423; 31 Cal. Rptr. 2d 313; 1994 Cal. App.
          LEXIS 671; 94 Cal. Daily Op. Service 5075; 94 Daily Journal
                                    DAR 9303


                             June 29, 1994, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Los Angeles County, No. D090702, William A.
Allen, Temporary Judge.  *

*   Pursuant to California Constitution, article VI, section 21.

COUNSEL: David L. Sharp for Appellant.

Stephen A. Kolodny and Carole R. Azran for Respondents.

JUDGES: Lillie, P. J., and Woods Fred, J., concurred.

OPINION BY: JOHNSON, J.

OPINION

     In this appeal we are asked to decide whether a supporting spouse must
continue to pay a supported spouse's medical insurance premium after the
supported spouse's death pursuant to a marital settlement agreement which limits
the parties' right to modify its terms. We answer the question in the negative
and reverse the order of the trial court which denied reimbursement of amounts
paid for medical insurance covering periods after  the supported spouse's death.
We also reverse an award of attorney fees and costs the trial court imposed
against the supporting spouse as a sanction for filing the motion for
reimbursement.

   FACTS AND PROCEEDINGS BELOW

   Appellant, Abraham Benjamins, and Annette Benjamins separated in July 1983,
after a 10-year marriage. The marriage was terminated as to status in February
1987. Eventually the parties entered into a marital settlement agreement which
resolved the remaining issues between them. On August 30, 1990, the terms of the
settlement agreement were read into the record in open court. This agreement was
accepted by the court as the final judgment on January 17, 1991.

   Paragraphs five through seventeen of the agreement provide for equalizing
payments, security for these payments and spousal support payments in
progressively descending amounts as the equalizing payments are made. Appellant
was to pay Annette $1.5 million in three equal payments of $500,000. These
payments were due March 1, 1991, March 1, 1992, and September 1, 1993. In
addition, appellant was to pay Annette $9,000 per month as spousal support until
the first payment was made, $6,000 per month after the first payment and $4,000
per month after the second payment. After the final equalizing payment
appellant's obligation for spousal support would terminate.

   Paragraph 19 of the agreement required appellant to pay Annette's medical
insurance premiums. That provision provides: "Petitioner is ordered to pay the
Respondent the sum of Nine Thousand Eight Hundred Fifty-five Dollars ($9,855.00)
on or before December 1, 1990 and the additional sum of Thirteen Thousand One
Hundred Forty Dollars ($13,140.00) on or before September 1, 1991. Upon payment
of the aforementioned sums, which relate to the Respondent's medical insurance
premiums, the Petitioner shall have no further liability or obligation for the
Respondent's medical insurance."

   Paragraph 40 of the agreement is the nonmodification clause. This provision
states: "The Court finds that the parties agreed, and the Court orders, that
there shall be no modification of the terms, covenants and provisions of this
Judgment of Dissolution, except pursuant to a writing subsequently executed by
the parties."

   Appellant paid the $9,855 due December 1, 1990. This payment covered three
quarters of Annette's medical insurance premiums, or from December 1, 1990,
through August 30, 1991, when the next annual payment would be due.

     Annette died on April 11, 1991.  1 Respondent did not dispute appellant's
obligation for spousal support payments terminated by operation of law upon
Annette's death. ( Civ. Code, § 4801, subd. (b) [now Fam. Code, § 4337].)After
her death respondent withdrew a lien against appellant's real property which
provided security for future spousal support payments.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Prior to
her death Annette assigned all her rights and interest in the marital settlement
agreement to her daughter Simone Friedman. To avoid confusion, this opinion will
refer to Annette's assignee as "respondent."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In view of her death, appellant refused to make the $13,140 payment due
September 1, 1991, for the annual premium for Annette's medical insurance. In
response, respondent threatened to foreclose on remaining liens on appellant's
real property imposed as security for the equalizing payments. Appellant
ultimately paid the $13,140 and sought reimbursement in the trial court.

   Appellant filed a noticed motion for reimbursement of the advance payment of
$3,285 for the quarterly medical insurance premium covering June 1, 1991,
through August 30, 1991, as well as for the $13,140 payment which was to cover
the following year. Respondent opposed the motion. She claimed appellant's
obligation to pay these amounts was clear and unequivocal and, based on the
agreement's nonmodification clause, appellant was not entitled to relief.
Respondent also requested appellant be sanctioned for bringing a frivolous
motion.

   The trial court adopted respondent's argument the settlement agreement was
nonmodifiable and denied appellant's request for reimbursement. The trial court
also found appellant's motion was "frivolous" and imposed sanctions of $2,500
against appellant payable to counsel for respondent.

   Appellant challenges the court's ruling and award of sanctions.

   DISCUSSION

   I. Appellant's Obligation to Pay Annette's Medical Insurance Premiums
Terminated by Operation of Law on Her Death.

     Respondent acknowledges appellant's spousal support obligations terminated
by operation of law upon Annette's death. ( Civ. Code, § 4801, subd. (b) [now
Fam. Code, § 4337].) However, she contends appellant's obligation to pay the
specified amounts for Annette's medical insurance premiums was not similarly
extinguished because this obligation did not constitute spousal support.
Consequently, she argues, appellant is bound to pay this amount, and may not
terminate his obligation, because the parties  agreed the terms of the agreement
could not be modified except by a writing. Appellant counters, because health
insurance for a supported spouse is in the nature of spousal support, it should
similarly terminate upon the supported spouse's death. We find appellant's
argument persuasive.

     Unless a more specific statute otherwise provides, agreements between
spouses are construed under the statutory rules governing the interpretation of
contracts generally. ( Civ. Code, § 1635; In re Marriage of Garrity and Bishton
(1986) 181 Cal.App.3d 675, 683 [226 Cal.Rptr. 485]; Verner v. Verner (1978) 77
Cal.App.3d 718, 724 [143 Cal.Rptr. 826]; 2 Hogoboom & King, Cal. Practice Guide:
Family Law (The Rutter Group 1993) § 9.86, p. 9-25.) Thus, "[t]he interpretation
of the effect of a judgment is a question of law within the ambit of the
appellate court." ( John Siebel Associates v. Keele (1986) 188 Cal.App.3d 560,
565 [233 Cal.Rptr. 231].)



   Civil Code section 4801, subdivision (b) (now Fam. Code, § 4337) provides:
"Except as otherwise agreed by the parties in writing, the obligation of any
party under any order or judgment for the support and maintenance of the other
party shall terminate upon the death of either party or the remarriage of the
other party." (Italics added.)

   "Support" is broadly defined as "a source or means of living; subsistence,
sustenance, or living. In a broad sense the term includes all such means of
living as would enable one to live in the degree of comfort suitable and
becoming to his station of life. It is said to include anything requisite to
housing, feeding, clothing, health, proper recreation, vacation, traveling
expense, or other proper cognate purposes; also, proper care, nursing, and
medical attendance in sickness, and suitable burial at death." (Black's Law
Dict. (5th ed. 1979) p. 1291, col. 1, italics added.)

   The term "maintenance" similarly involves expansive concepts of means to
cover numerous types of living expenses, including health care: "The furnishing
by one person to another, for his support, of the means of living, or food,
clothing, shelter, etc., particularly where the legal relation of the parties is
such that one is bound to support the other, as between father and child,  or
husband and wife. . . . Term 'maintenance' means primarily food, clothing and
shelter, but it does include such items as reasonable and necessary
transportation or automobile expenses, medical and drug expenses, utilities and
household expenses." (Black's Law Dict., supra, p. 859, col. 2, italics added.)

   Thus, "support" and "maintenance" are merely general terms used to describe a
wide variety of various types of assistance designed to cover everyday living
expenses, including medical care.

      In our view the issue whether payment of medical insurance premiums
constitutes spousal support is not a close one. Its purpose is to guarantee
proper health care to facilitate a healthy and productive life. Medical
insurance coverage generally ensures a person will have access to the care
necessary to maintain his or her physical well being. In illness, proper medical
coverage provides the means to improve the quality of one's life or to enable
one to live in relative comfort. Medical insurance also ensures a person will
have access to adequate and immediate treatment in the event of accidents or
other medical emergencies. Next to food, clothing and shelter, the necessity for
proper medical care is at least as much a fundamental requisite of everyday
living as is transportation or education.

   We consequently conclude payment of medical insurance premiums to provide for
proper health care for a supported spouse necessarily is in the nature of
spousal support. (See also 1 Hogoboom & King, Cal. Practice Guide: Family Law,
supra, § 6:143.2, p. 6-238 [order to pay medical insurance properly part of
spousal support order].)

   In the context of this case, payment of the medical insurance premiums
constituted an important part of the support Annette received in order to
guarantee proper medical care. At the time the parties entered into the
stipulated agreement Annette was already gravely ill and in serious need of
continued medical coverage. Thus, appellant's payment of Annette's medical
insurance premiums ensured she would not have to use funds designated for daily
living expenses to pay for her medical coverage.

   Earlier decisions have construed payments for items far less personal than
health care, and far less obvious a type of payment designed to ensure the life
and comfort of the supported spouse, as additional spousal support. For example,
"support"  and "maintenance" can encompass such items as mortgage payments on
the family residence, whether paid to the supported spouse or directly to the
mortgagee. (In re Marriage of Epstein (1979) 24 Cal.3d 76, 85-86 [154 Cal.Rptr.
413, 592 P.2d 1165]; In re Marriage of Garcia (1990) 224 Cal.App.3d 885 [274
Cal.Rptr. 194].) Similarly, maintenance of life insurance on the supporting
spouse's life may constitute a valid spousal support substitute. (See, e.g., In
re Marriage of O'Connell (1992) 8 Cal.App.4th 565 [10 Cal.Rptr.2d 334].) Or, an
order directing payment of the supported spouse's attorney fees has also been
considered a form of spousal support where the award is based on the recipient's
need. ( In re Gwinn (Bankr. 9th Cir. 1982) 20 Bankr. 233.) 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   The
designation of certain payments as "spousal support" in marital settlement
agreements may have implications for personal income tax purposes or for
purposes of dischargeability in bankruptcy. However, in this case we are not
concerned with whether the obligation for medical insurance premiums should be
taxable to the supporting or supported spouse or whether or not the obligation
should be discharged in bankruptcy. In any event we note, even in these contexts
the parties' designation of payments under a marital settlement agreement do not
necessarily control their ultimate characterization. For example, if an
obligation can properly be construed as being for support, or in the nature of
support, it is a nondischargeable debt. (See 11 U.S.C. § 523(a)(5); Shaver v.
Shaver (9th Cir. 1984) 736 F.2d 1314; Smalley v. Smalley (1959) 176 Cal.App.2d
374 [1 Cal.Rptr. 440, 74 A.L.R.2d 756]; 1 Hogoboom & King, Cal. Practice Guide:
Family Law, supra, § 6.120.1, p. 6-212.)

   In the present appeal we need only determine whether the payments for medical
insurance premiums are a form of additional spousal support and, if so, whether
the obligation for such payments terminated at the supported spouse's death by
operation of Civil Code section 4801, subdivision (b) (now Fam. Code, § 4337).
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     Significantly, orders to pay overdue community debts, or to pay the
supported spouse's future debts, have also been held to be a form of spousal
support. (See Gay v. Gay (1905) 146 Cal. 237, 243 [79 P. 885]; In re Marriage of
Chala (1979) 92 Cal.App.3d 996 [155 Cal.Rptr. 605]; cf.  In re Marriage of Marx
(1979) 97 Cal.App.3d 552 [159 Cal.Rptr. 215].) The rationale behind these
rulings is to ensure an award will be adequate to meet the supported spouse's
living expense and not be depleted by creditor demands. (In re Marriage of Chala
, supra, 92 Cal.App.3d at p. 1001.)

   The medical insurance premium payments in this case have all the indicia of
payments in the nature of spousal support. First, the payments were designed to
pay Annette's future anticipated medical expenses. In addition, the agreement
required appellant to pay the medical insurance premiums during the periods
before full payment of the equalizing payments and while Annette received
spousal support payments. Thus, it appears the purpose of the timing and
duration of  the payments was to enable Annette to pay her current living
expenses without fear of losing her health insurance coverage in the event her
expenses exceeded her income during this period. The procedure of ordering
payment of a supported spouse's medical insurance premiums in conjunction with,
and for the same period as orders for spousal support payments, is apparently a
common practice in fashioning overall spousal support awards. (See, e.g., In re
Marriage of Lorenz (1983) 146 Cal.App.3d 464, 468-469 [194 Cal.Rptr. 237]; In re
Marriage of Harrison (1986) 179 Cal.App.3d 1216, 1229 [225 Cal.Rptr. 234]; In re
Marriage of Wilson (1988) 201 Cal.App.3d 913, 915 [247 Cal.Rptr. 522].)

   Finally, the very nature of health care insurance compels the conclusion
payment of medical insurance premiums constituted a form of spousal support. As
noted, health care is designed to improve the quality of the recipient's life
and promote the person's health and well being. And, in circumstances such as
those present in this case, health care can be as critical and  basic a
necessity of life as food, shelter and clothing.

   In sum, we conclude payment of a supported spouse's medical insurance premium
is in the nature of spousal support for purposes of determining  whether that
obligation ends as a matter of law on the supported spouse's death.

   As noted, Civil Code section 4801, subdivision (b) (now Fam. Code, § 4337)
provides an obligation for support and maintenance terminates upon the death of
the supported spouse unless otherwise agreed to by the parties. The parties'
agreement in the case at bar did not provide spousal support payments were to
continue notwithstanding the death of either party. For this reason, respondent
did not contest appellant's obligation for spousal support payments was
extinguished upon Annette's death.

   Because we hold payment of Annette's medical insurance premiums was also part
of the spousal support award in this case, appellant's obligation for those
payments terminated upon her death by operation of law as well. ( Civ. Code, §
4801, subd. (b) [now Fam. Code, § 4337]; Hilton v. McNitt (1957) 49 Cal.2d 79,
82 [315 P.2d 1] [unless agreement expressly provides  supported spouse was to
receive payments without regard to the parties' death or remarriage, support
obligations ceased at the obligor's death].) 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3
Alternatively, we note appellant would be absolved of this obligation in any
event under ordinary contract principles. "A settlement agreement is in the
nature of a contract and is therefore governed by the same legal principles
applicable to contracts generally." ( In re Marriage of Hasso (1991) 229
Cal.App.3d 1174, 1180 [280 Cal.Rptr. 919].)

   The purpose of paragraph 19 of the marital settlement agreement was to
provide medical insurance coverage for Annette for a specified time. However,
her untimely death frustrated the purpose of this provision. Obviously health
care coverage can only benefit the living. After death Annette had no further
use for medical treatment and was arguably uninsurable at that point in any
event. Consequently, payments for the purchase of medical insurance premiums for
Annette after her death was, if not impossible, impracticable.

   Thus, under general contract principles, appellant's obligation to perform
under the contract would be discharged due to impossibility, impracticability
and frustration of purpose. Performance under a contract is excused "[w]here,
after a contract is made, a party's performance is made impracticable without
his fault by the occurrence of an event the nonoccurrence of which was a basic
assumption on which the contract was made, his duty to render that performance
is discharged, unless the language or the circumstances indicate the contrary."
( Rest.2d Contracts, § 261; see also 1 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (9th ed.
1987) Contracts, § 772 et seq., p. 697 et seq. and cases cited.)

   As noted, nothing in the settlement agreement specified payments for
Annette's medical insurance premiums were to continue after her death.
Consequently, under general principles of contract law appellant's obligation
under this provision of the contract would be excused due to impossibility and
frustration of purpose.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

       Nevertheless, respondent argues relieving appellant of his obligation to
pay the amounts otherwise designated for Annette's medical insurance premiums
would constitute a modification of the agreement in violation of the clause
specifying the agreement could not be modified except by a writing.

    Civil Code section 4811, subdivision (b) (now Fam. Code, § 3591) provides
spousal support is modifiable "except to the extent that any written agreement .
. . specifically provides to the contrary." Termination and modification are
distinct concepts describing different ways to alter support obligations. In
this case, appellant did not seek to modify his obligation to pay Annette's
medical insurance premiums. Instead he sought a finding his obligation to
purchase medical insurance for Annette terminated by operation of law at her
death.  4

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   Query
whether the nonmodification clause in the marital settlement agreement in the
case at bar would have been sufficient to prevent modification in any event. In
In re Marriage of Hufford (1984) 152 Cal.App.3d 825 [199 Cal.Rptr. 726] we held
a virtually identically worded clause was inadequate to invoke the exception to
the statutory rule. (Id. at p. 834.) We found the language used only prevented
the parties from modifying the contract but imposed no restriction on a court's
ability to do so. (Id. at p. 835; see also In re Marriage of Sherman (1984) 162
Cal.App.3d 1132, 1137 [208 Cal.Rptr. 832] [specification of support payments
over designated term aided by "boiler plate" provisions making agreement
nonmodifiable generally inadequate to satisfy statutory exception to court's
power to modify spousal support award]; see also 3 Hogoboom & King, Cal.
Practice Guide: Family Law, supra, § 17.29, p. 17-22; 2 Adams & Sevitch, Cal.
Family Law Practice (8th ed. 1993) § N.100.10 et seq., p. N-60 et seq.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Although not cited by respondent, we are aware of authority which could be
construed as blurring the distinction between modification, revocation and
termination of spousal support by treating the terms interchangeably. ( In re
Marriage of Harris (1976) 65 Cal.App.3d 143, 152 [134 Cal.Rptr. 891]
[termination nothing more than modification to zero]; In re Marriage of Bennett
(1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 1022, 1026 [193 Cal.Rptr. 113] [same].) However we believe
doing so interjects unnecessary ambiguity and confusion into an area of law
already fraught with problems.

   Moreover, the Legislature has indicated an intent to treat modification and
termination of spousal support separately. Each is governed by different
statutes and the purpose and outcome of each statutory objective are vastly
different. ( Civ. Code, § 4801, subd. (b) [now Fam Code, § 4337]; Civ. Code, §
4811, subd. (b) [now Fam. Code, § 3590, 3591]; see also In re Marriage of
Glasser (1986) 181 Cal.App.3d 149, 152 [226 Cal.Rptr. 229] ["To say that a
termination due to [death] is nothing more than a modification flies in the face
of the clear legislative intent: . . .."].) We consequently reject an
interpretation of "modification" which would make it synonymous with
"termination." We believe such an interpretation would be in conflict with the
controlling statutes and contrary to good policy.

   In sum, appellant's obligation to pay Annette's medical insurance premiums
terminated by operation of law upon her death. Accordingly, appellant is
entitled to reimbursement  for medical insurance premiums paid for periods after
her death.

    II. The Award of Sanctions Must be Reversed.

     Respondent opposed appellant's motion for reimbursement. In her opposition
papers respondent requested the court to impose sanctions against appellant
under Civil Code section 4370.6 (now Fam. Code, § 271) for bringing a frivolous
motion. The court denied appellant's request for reimbursement and ordered
appellant to pay $2,500 to respondent's counsel as a sanction for bringing what
the court deemed a "frivolous" motion.

    Civil Code section 4370.6 provides in pertinent part: "(a) Notwithstanding
Sections 4370 and 4370.5, the court may base an award of attorneys' fees and
costs on the extent to which the conduct of each party or attorney furthers or
frustrates the policy of the law to promote settlement of litigation and, where
possible, to reduce the cost of litigation by encouraging cooperation between
the parties and attorneys. An award of attorney fees and costs pursuant to this
section is in the nature of a sanction. In making an award pursuant to this
section, the court shall take into consideration all evidence concerning the
parties' incomes, assets, and abilities. The court shall not impose a sanction
pursuant to this section that imposes an unreasonable financial burden upon the
party against whom the sanction is imposed. In order to obtain an award under
this section the party requesting an award of attorneys' fees and costs is not
required to demonstrate any financial need for the award. . .."

     "[A] motion for attorney fees and costs in a dissolution proceeding is left
to the sound discretion of the trial court. [Citations.] In the absence of a
clear showing of abuse, its determination will not be disturbed on appeal.
[Citations.] '[T]he trial court's order will be overturned only if, considering
all the evidence viewed most favorably in support of its order,  no judge could
reasonably make the order made. . ..' " ( In re Marriage of Sullivan (1984) 37
Cal.3d 762, 768-769 [209 Cal.Rptr. 354, 691 P.2d 1020].)

     There is no evidence indicating the award was based on financial need. (Cf.
In re Marriage of Hublou (1991) 231 Cal.App.3d 956, 964 [282 Cal.Rptr. 695]
[where the award is based primarily on the merits or demerits of a particular
litigation approach, the financial circumstances of the parties must be
considered nonetheless].) Instead, the transcript in the present case indicates
the trial court imposed sanctions based strictly on its view appellant's motion
was "frivolous."

   However, based on our conclusions it is clear appellant's motion was neither
frivolous nor without merit. The agreement did not expressly provide payments
for Annette's medical insurance premiums were to continue despite her death in
the interim. Thus, nothing in the contract compelled these  payments after her
death. Nor did appellant seek to modify the agreement's terms. Instead he
claimed his obligation terminated by operation of law at Annette's death.

   Based on this analysis of the law appellant sought reimbursement for payments
he made but which could no longer be used for their intended purpose. The merit
of appellant's argument should have been apparent because there was no express
language in the agreement providing payment of Annette's medical insurance
premiums were to continue despite her death.

   The record does not indicate the trial court relied on any alternative
rationale to support the sanction award. Thus, because of the obvious merit of
appellant's request, we conclude the trial court abused its discretion in
imposing sanctions against him on the basis his motion was frivolous.
Accordingly, we reverse the award of $2,500 imposed against appellant in this
case.

   DISPOSITION

   The order appealed from is reversed with directions to grant appellant's
motion for reimbursement for medical insurance premiums  paid for periods after
Annette's death. The order imposing sanctions against appellant in the amount of
$2,500 is also reversed. Appellant is awarded his costs on appeal.  5

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   Appellant
requests this court to impose sanctions against respondent for opposing his
motion for reimbursement. In support of his request he cites various statutory
provisions which authorize a court to award attorney fees reasonably necessary
to maintain or defend any proceeding subsequent to the judgment. ( Civ. Code, §
4370, subd. (a) [now Fam. Code, § 2030], 5120.160, subd. (b) [now Fam. Code, §
916].) However, the record before this court is inadequate to determine whether
and to what extent an award would be warranted. We therefore decline appellant's
request.

   We similarly reject respondent's request sanctions be imposed against
appellant for filing a frivolous appeal. ( In re Marriage of Flaherty (1982) 31
Cal.3d 637, 650 [183 Cal.Rptr. 508, 646 P.2d 179]; Code Civ. Proc., § 907; Cal.
Rules of Court, rule 26(a).) For the reasons stated in the opinion, appellant's
appeal clearly was not frivolous.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -




                              81 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              In re the Marriage of NANCY CLAIRE and THOMAS WALTER
          HOFFMEISTER.  THOMAS WALTER HOFFMEISTER, Appellant, v. NANCY
                         CLAIRE HOFFMEISTER, Respondent

                                  No. A016606

            Court of Appeal of California, First Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

           161 Cal. App. 3d 1163; 208 Cal. Rptr. 345; 1984 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2773


                               November 21, 1984

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of San Mateo County, No. 235504, Gerald E.
Ragan, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1a) (1b) Continuance § 4--Review--Proceeding for Modification of Spousal
Support--Continuance for Purpose of Reviewing New Evidence.  --In a hearing on a
motion for modification of a spousal support order, the trial court's failure to
grant a continuance to the ex-husband denied him a fair hearing and amounted to
reversible error. The wife's amended financial declaration, which was included
in a memorandum of points and authorities, was mailed to the husband only four
days prior to the hearing. To the extent it presented new factual and legal
issues it should have been served at least 15 days prior to the hearing (Code
Civ. Proc., § 1005) or a shorter time for service should have been sought (Code
Civ. Proc., § 1005). In addition, the husband had been denied an opportunity to
discover the basis of the increased expenses asserted in the declaration when
the wife had claimed the attorney-client privilege at her deposition. The court
declined to exercise its power to preclude the evidence, and there was no clear
statement by the court that it did not consider the amended declaration in
reaching its decision.

(2) Continuance § 1--Policy.  --There is no policy in the state of indulgence or
liberality in favor of parties seeking continuances. Such parties must make a
proper showing of good cause, in accordance with Cal. Rules of Court, rule 244,
Standards Jud. Admin., § 9, and the case law. Thus, continuances should be
granted sparingly, even grudgingly, and then only on a proper and adequate
showing of good cause.

(3) Continuance § 1--Discretion of Trial Court.  --In determining whether to
grant a continuance, the trial judge must exercise his discretion with due
regard to all interests involved, and the refusal of a continuance which has the
practical effect of denying the applicant a fair hearing is reversible error.

(4) Continuance § 2--Grounds--Surprise.  --Good cause for a continuance may be
established where a party has been surprised by unexpected testimony and
requires a postponement to enable him to meet it. Also, allowance of an
amendment to a pleading may make a continuance necessary.

(5a) (5b) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69--Support of Other Party--
Modification, Revocation, and Extension--Change of Conditions--Increased Ability
to Pay.  --In order to qualify for an increase in spousal support, the supported
spouse must demonstrate both that material circumstances have significantly
changed since the time of the last prior award and that the reasonable present
needs of the supported spouse are not being met. In a case in which the only
changed circumstance alleged relates to the supporting spouse's ability to pay,
the supported spouse can show that his or her need is not being satisfied by the
existing spousal support award by evidence that, although the supported spouse's
need has not increased, such need was never satisfied, or at least is not now
being satisfied, by the last previous award at the time it was made, and that
need has not decreased.

(6) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69--Support of Other Party--
Modification, Revocation, and Extension--Change of Conditions.  --A trial court
is without authority to modify an order for spousal support unless there has
been a material change in circumstances subsequent to the last prior order.

(7) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69--Support of Other Party--
Modification, Revocation, and Extension--Change of Conditions--Increased Ability
to Pay.  --The change of circumstances which authorizes a court to modify a
support order means a change in circumstances of the respective parties, that
is, a reduction or increase in the supporting spouse's ability to pay or an
increase or decrease in the supported spouse's needs, or both. Therefore, an
increase in the supporting spouse's ability to pay may be considered a change in
the circumstances of the respective parties sufficient, if there is also a
showing of need, to justify an increased spousal award.

(8) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69--Support of Other Party--
Modification, Revocation, and Extension--Change of Conditions.  --In general, a
change of circumstances may be anything that affects the financial status of
either party.

COUNSEL: James G. Luce, Diemer, Schneider & Luce and Diemer, Schneider, Jeffers
& Luce for Appellant.

Lisa L. Landey and Silverman, Ballard & Landey for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Kline, P. J., with Rouse, J., concurring.  Separate
concurring opinion by Smith, J.

OPINION BY: KLINE

OPINION

     Introduction/Issues

   Thomas W. Hoffmeister appeals the trial court's modification of a spousal
support order upon a motion by appellant's ex-wife Nancy C. Hoffmeister.  The
motion was based in large part upon an asserted change for the better in
appellant's ability to provide an increased level of support.  The appeal is
based upon contentions that relate to two issues: first, whether appellant was
denied a fair hearing and, second, whether the increase ordered in spousal
support was supported by the evidence.

   Facts

   The parties separated in September 1979 after nearly 23 years of marriage.
Final judgment of dissolution of marriage was entered on August 18, 1981.  The
court ordered payment by appellant of $ 1,500 per month spousal support to
continue until December 31, 1982, after which the court continued to retain
jurisdiction to modify its support order. 1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   In
respondent's declaration she points out that at the time the judgment was
entered she anticipated working toward her degree in interior design and
estimated that she would have graduated in December 1982.  However, she has
found herself unable to carry the maximum 17-unit load and has been carrying
instead a full-time load of 12 units and at the time of the motion for
modification of support order estimated that she would graduate no earlier than
June 1983.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    In November 1981, respondent moved the court to modify her spousal support
to extend its duration beyond December 31, 1982 and to increase the support
award to $ 3,250 per month.  By declaration filed with respondent's application
for modification, she alleged as a change in circumstances that appellant's
earnings and assets had dramatically increased and his expenses had decreased
since the last court order, 2 while the $ 1,500 per month spousal support
awarded to her was inadequate to meet her needs.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   At trial
it was established that appellant's gross monthly salary increased from $ 4,775
in December 1979 to $ 8,333 at the date of the hearing plus a large annual bonus
which he had received every year since 1971.  In October 1981 appellant received
a bonus of $ 36,500, plus options to purchase additional shares of stock in the
company that employs him, increased matching company contributions to a savings
plan, and use without any expense of a 1982 El Dorado Cadillac.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    After hearing, the trial court granted respondent's motion to modify the
spousal support order, increasing spousal support to $ 2,500 per month and
continuing such support until the remarriage of respondent, the death of either
party, or further order of the court.  The court invited appellant to petition
for modification after respondent completed her degree requirements and obtained
professional employment.

   In its statement of decision the court found a substantial change of
circumstances since the original order of March 13, 1980, which was signed and
filed on June 4, 1981.  The court stated that appellant had realized a "great
increase in income since the current order was made" and that appellant had the
ability to pay the increase in spousal support ordered, regardless of the amount
of bonus he receives.  The court also determined that respondent had a need for
the increase in support ordered and that such need was a continuing one.
Whereupon the court increased spousal support as indicated and ordered appellant
to contribute $ 1,500 toward respondent's attorney's fees.

   On February 17, 1982, appellant filed a "request for statement of decision
and petitioner's objections to proposed statement of decision." Without
responding specifically to that request, the court on February 24, 1982, entered
an order modifying the spousal support order and awarding respondent attorney's
fees and costs consistent with its earlier statement of decision.

   A timely appeal followed.

   Discussion

   I

   Whether the court denied appellant a fair hearing.

   The hearing on the motion for modification was originally set for December
15, 1981.  It was continued at appellant's request to allow him to conduct
discovery. At her deposition, respondent admitted that expenses listed in her
financial declaration had not actually been incurred, but were projected
expenses necessary to meet her needs.  She answered questions relating to her
actual and projected expenses; however, when asked why she was seeking spousal
support of $ 3,250 per month when she had claimed monthly expenses of only $
2,416, respondent's counsel objected on the curious ground that the question
called for a legal conclusion and on the equally unusual theory that the subject
of the query was protected by the attorney-client privilege.

    Appellant filed responsive points and authorities in opposition to the
motion for modification on January 29, 1982.  On February 5, 1982 respondent
filed a memorandum of points and authorities supporting modification and
included an amended financial statement. The proof of service showed that the
same had been mailed to appellant on February 4, 1982.  The financial statement
accompanying the points and authorities differed from the prior financial
statement filed in support of the original motion for modification in that it
listed as expenses an additional $ 321 per month, consisting of a $ 5 increased
mortgage payment, $ 100 in property taxes, and the  $ 216 monthly payment of
past due federal and state income taxes.

   On February 8, 1982, the date set for hearing, the court denied appellant's
motion for a continuance which was made on the ground that appellant had
received respondent's amended financial statement and points and authorities on
the Friday prior to the hearing and had inadequate time to respond to the newly
raised legal and factual issues.  The court stated that it had received the most
recent papers only an hour before the hearing and had adequate time to review
them.  Counsel for appellant then moved to strike the papers served on him on
February 5, 1982, contending that they were untimely under Code of Civil
Procedure section 1005.  The court initially granted the motion subject to
reconsideration after hearing testimony.  The court later reversed its ruling
and allowed the financial statement into evidence, stating: "I'm going to
reverse my original ruling and not strike the declarations of the Respondent
here, Mr. Luce.  I'm going to consider the declaration which was filed on
February 5.  I think it is of assistance to the Court and it would be brought
out by testimony.  It will just shortcut testimony.  [para. ] You may refer to
the amended declaration."

     Appellant contends he was denied a fair hearing by the trial court's
failure to grant the continuance sought or, in the alternative, strike the
points and authorities and the financial declaration assertedly filed in
violation of Code of Civil Procedure section 1005; and by considering the
evidence regarding increased taxes presented by the papers and by testimony of
respondent and her expert witness despite the fact that, due to respondent's
invocation of the attorney-client privilege at her deposition, appellant was
earlier prevented from learning of much of this evidence.

   A review of the record has compelled us to conclude that appellant was denied
a fair hearing by the court's failure to either grant the continuance or strike
the amended financial declaration.

     Generally speaking, the courts have repudiated the view that the trial
court should exercise great liberality in granting continuances. As stated by
the court in County of San Bernardino v. Doria Mining & Engineering  Corp.
(1977) 72 Cal.App.3d 776 [140 Cal.Rptr. 383], "[Considering] the need for
efficient use of judicial resources, we conclude that there is no policy in this
state of indulgence or liberality in favor of parties seeking continuances.
Rather, such parties must make a proper showing of good cause, in accordance
with rule 224 of the Rules of Court, standard 9 of the Standards of Judicial
Administration, and the case law.  And, if the law must have some kind of litany
or Gregorian chant in this field, we respectfully suggest that 'continuances be
granted sparingly, nay grudgingly, and then only on a proper and adequate
showing of good cause.'" ( Id., at p. 781, fn. omitted.)

     However, "[the] trial judge must exercise his discretion with due regard to
all interests involved, and the refusal of a continuance which has the practical
effect of denying the applicant a fair hearing is reversible error.
[Citations.]" (4 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (2d ed. 1971) Trial, § 8, pp.
2865-2866.)  Good cause for a continuance may be established where a party has
been surprised by unexpected testimony and requires a postponement to enable him
to meet it.  (Id., § 17, p.  2873; see Crosby v. Martinez (1958) 159 Cal.App.2d
534, 541 [324 P.2d 26]; Hays v. Viscome (1953) 122 Cal.App.2d 135 [264 P.2d 173,
39 A.L.R.2d 1435]; CJER, Cal. Judges Benchbook, Civil Trials (1981) § 9.26, pp.
289-290.) Allowance of an amendment to a pleading may make a continuance
necessary.  (Code Civ. Proc., § 473; 4 Witkin, supra, § 18, pp. 2873-2874.)

     Code of Civil Procedure section 1005 provides in pertinent part: "When a
written notice of a motion is necessary, it shall be given at least 15 days
before the time appointed for the hearing and shall be accompanied by all
supporting points and authorities, declarations, and other supporting
materials; provided that if the notice is served by mail, the required 15-day
period of notice before the time appointed for the hearing shall be increased by
five days if the place of address is within the State of California.  . . .  All
papers opposing a motion so noticed shall be filed with the court and served on
each party at least five days before the time appointed for the hearing.  [para.
]  The court, or a judge thereof, may prescribe a shorter time." (Italics
added.)

   Notice of the motion in this case was given several months prior to the
actual hearing by virtue of the continuance granted at appellant's request and
the discovery which followed.  The memorandum of points and authorities filed by
respondent ostensibly responded to appellant's opposition to the initial motion.
However, to the considerable extent that respondent's reply memorandum presented
new factual and legal issues, it should have been provided to appellant at least
15 days prior to the hearing.  We recognize that the statute does provide that
the trial court may prescribe a  shorter time.  (Code Civ. Proc., § 1005.)
However, no such prescription was sought by respondent nor made by the court.
The trial judge simply stated, after the fact of the late filing, that he
nevertheless felt he had adequate time to prepare.  However, the question
appellant raised was not whether the trial court was familiar with the issues,
but whether he himself was denied an adequate opportunity to contest new claims
advanced by respondent at virtually the last moment.  We believe he was denied
such an opportunity.

   The court itself initially struck the amended financial declaration,
apparently agreeing that fairness to appellant required it to do so.  However,
it later reversed itself and allowed the document to be presented.  We cannot be
certain whether the court actually considered respondent's amended financial
declaration in determining her need for purposes of the spousal support award. 3
The court's statement of decision recited that it had "considered the tax
consequences of the respective parties in determining the amount of spousal
support." But this does not necessarily indicate that the court considered the
additional tax expenses newly claimed by respondent.  Rather, it appears that
the court may have been referring to the testimony of respondent's expert as to
the actual costs to appellant or one in his tax bracket of spousal support
awards of varying amounts. 4

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   The trial
court only modified the support award to $ 2,500 per month, which appears to be
based upon the initial financial statement provided by respondent, which showed
total monthly expenses of $ 2,416.  The subsequent financial statement filed by
respondent claimed total monthly expenditures, including the asserted tax
expenses, of $ 2,737.  Respondent actually sought $ 3,250 per month.
4   The testimony of respondent's tax expert centered on the fact that one in
appellant's tax bracket would actually pay only 45 percent of any amount awarded
as spousal support. "[Since] spousal support is deductible in effect he would
end up paying from after tax money only 45% of any spousal support payment."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Neither can we be certain, however, that the court disregarded the amended
financial declaration. Absent a clear statement by the court that it did not
consider the amended declaration in reaching its decision, we must assume that
it did consider all the relevant evidence before it.

   Our conclusion might be different if appellant had been provided an
opportunity to discover the basis of the increased expenses asserted in the
amended financial declaration prior to the eve of the modification hearing.  By
asserting the attorney-client privilege when questioned as to why there was a
discrepancy between her stated expenses and the amount sought for  spousal
support, respondent prevented appellant from acquiring this information. 5

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   Appellant
had available an avenue to compel further discovery if he contended that the
information sought was not properly covered by the attorney-client privilege.
He could have sought an order compelling respondent to answer pursuant to Code
of Civil Procedure section 2034.  We do not purport to determine on this appeal
the likelihood of success of such a motion.  Whether properly asserted or not,
respondent's invocation of the privilege prevented discovery of the new figures.
It seems only fair to allow appellant an opportunity to prepare to challenge the
figures when respondent later sought to introduce them at the modification
hearing.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     As we have indicated, the granting of a continuance was not the only remedy
available to the trial court.  As appellant requested in the alternative, the
court could have stricken the amended financial declaration. Code of Civil
Procedure section 2019, subdivision (b)(1), provides with respect to depositions
that "the court may make any . . .  order which justice requires to protect the
party or witness from annoyance, embarrassment, or oppression." It has been held
that this section grants the court the power to preclude at trial the use of
evidence withheld by a party at deposition on the basis of the Fifth Amendment
privilege against self incrimination.  ( A & M Records, Inc. v. Heilman (1977)
75 Cal.App.3d 554, 567 [142 Cal.Rptr. 309].) No reason appears why the same
cannot be done where relevant evidence sought to be discovered at deposition is
withheld on the basis of the attorney-client privilege.  "So long as the penalty
is appropriate to the dereliction and does not exceed the protection required to
protect the interests of the party entitled to but denied discovery, its
imposition is within the discretion of the trial judge." ( A & M Records, supra
, 75 Cal.App.3d at p. 565.) In short, the trial court had the power to preclude
at the hearing the use of any evidence withheld from appellant at deposition as
well as the related documents belatedly filed.  While the court was not
compelled to exercise this power, it was in our view an abuse of discretion and
unjust not to at least grant appellant a brief continuance in order to provide
him an opportunity to review the adverse evidence that was instead permitted to
surprise him. 6

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   We do not
here suggest that the court erred in allowing respondent's tax expert to testify
concerning the tax consequences to appellant of increased support payments.
Appellant cannot properly claim to have been surprised by such testimony as he
failed to avail himself of the simple procedure provided by Code of Civil
Procedure section 2037 to compel disclosure of expert witnesses.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   We reverse on the ground that the refusal of the court to grant a reasonable
continuance to enable appellant to meet the newly amended financial declaration
denied appellant a fair trial.  We therefore need not address appellant's
contention that the court erred in failing to make specific findings requested
by appellant.  (See Code Civ. Proc., §§ 632, 634.)

    However, for the guidance of the court on retrial, we proceed to address
appellant's central contention: that the court erred in increasing the amount of
spousal support where the only evidence of "changed circumstances" was the
increased ability of appellant to pay support.

   II

   Whether the trial court erred in increasing the amount and duration of
spousal support.

     The linchpin of appellant's argument is that the modification of support
order was based solely upon appellant's increased ability to pay and that
"[there] was no evidence of substantial or justified increased need on the part
of Respondent." Without assessing the accuracy of this disputed characterization
of the facts, which is unnecessary in light of our remand of the case, we think
it useful to correct the misapprehension of law implicit in appellant's
argument.

   In order to qualify for an increase in spousal support, the supported spouse
must demonstrate two things: first, that material circumstances have
significantly changed since the time of the last prior award and, second, that
the reasonable present needs of the supported spouse are not being satisfied.
Though these two factors are conceptually distinct, in most cases both can be
proved by a single factual demonstration that the supported spouse's needs have
increased from the time of the most recent support order. In most cases, in
other words, the increase in need will also constitute the changed circumstance.
But this is not always true; as there are situations in which the change in
circumstance arises out of facts relating to the supporting spouse rather than
to the level of need of the supported spouse. 7 Moreover, in a situation of this
sort, it is entirely possible for the supported spouse to show that his or her
present need is not being met despite the fact that that need has not increased.
Appellant's error, as we shall see, lies in the related assumptions that the
only change in circumstance that matters is that of need, and that there can be
no increase in support unless there has been an increase in need.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7
Conceivably, there may also be situations in which the change in circumstances
arises out of economic facts that may relate to both the need of one spouse and
the ability to pay of the other -- such as significant inflation of the
currency.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      It is elementary that a trial court "is without authority to modify an
order for spousal support unless there has been a material change in
circumstances subsequent to the last prior order." ( In re Marriage of Kuppinger
(1975) 48 Cal.App.3d 628, 633 [120 Cal.Rptr. 654] citing Engelberg v.  Engelberg
(1968) 257 Cal.App.2d 821, 823-824 [65 Cal.Rptr. 269]; Peterson v. Peterson
(1973) 30 Cal.App.3d 477, 479 [106 Cal.Rptr. 482]; and Hester v. Hester (1969) 2
Cal.App.3d 1091, 1095 [82 Cal.Rptr. 811].)

     Contrary to appellant's contention, it is established that an increase in
the husband's ability to pay may be considered a change in the circumstances of
the respective parties sufficient, if there is also a showing of need, to
justify an increased spousal award.  "The change of circumstances which
authorizes a court to modify a support order means a change in the circumstances
of the respective parties, i.e., a reduction or increase in the husband's
ability to pay and/or an increase or decrease of the wife's needs." ( In re
Marriage of Cobb (1977) 68 Cal.App.3d 855, 860-861 [137 Cal.Rptr. 670], italics
added.) Sammut v. Sammut (1980) 103 Cal.App.3d 557 [163 Cal.Rptr. 193]
exemplifies the circumstances in which a change only in the supporting spouse's
ability to pay may justify an increased award.  In that case the husband
originally agreed to pay the wife $ 200 a month spousal support, which sum was
subject to modification by the court upon a showing of changed circumstances.
Some years later, when the wife sought modification, the court ordered spousal
support increased by $ 600 per month, to a total of $ 800.  It appears that the
only change in circumstance that justified the increase was that as a result of
an inheritance from his parents subsequent to the divorce, the husband was now
receiving $ 5,618 per month in dividends as the beneficiary of a life estate.
As stated by the court, "[there] was evidence that the original support sum was
set at $ 200 a month because the husband was putting most of the profits [of the
family business] back into the corporation rather than taking a large salary.
As a result, he had insufficient cash . . . to pay more than $ 200 a month.  The
wife's decision to forego higher spousal support was in part influenced by her
interest in maintaining the value of the community property shares of stock in
the business.  As a result of the income from the husband's inheritance, the
husband no longer had a cash problem and was now adequately able to meet the
wife's needs.  This appears to be a sufficient showing of a change in
circumstances to justify a modification of the order." ( Id., at pp. 563-564,
italics added.)   Sammut is thus consistent with the view that "[in] general a
change of circumstances may be anything that affects the financial status of
either party." (2 Cal. Marital Dissolution Practice (Cont.Ed.Bar 1983)
Modification of Orders, § 24.6, p. 967, italics added.)

     It must at this point be emphasized that, as we have earlier suggested,
there is an important distinction between cases in which the only changed
circumstance alleged relates to the supporting spouse's ability to pay and those
in which the changed circumstance or circumstances is or includes an increase in
the need of the supported spouse. In the former situation  the supported spouse
must demonstrate -- in addition to the other  spouse's increased ability to pay
-- that his or her need is not being satisfied by the existing spousal support
award. This can be accomplished, as it was in Sammut, by evidence that, although
the supported spouse's need has not increased, such need was never satisfied, or
at least is not now being satisfied, by the last previous award at the time it
was made and that need has not decreased.

   Appellant's restrictive view that an increase in the need of the supported
spouse is the only change in circumstances that will justify an increase in
spousal support would work a great injustice.  It would mean that despite his or
her present financial ability to meet the reasonable needs of the supported
spouse, a supporting spouse would be excused from doing so because of an earlier
inability to meet those needs.  Appellant's theory has no support in the law;
for no court has ever held that a supported spouse's unmet needs may be ignored
simply because they have not increased.

   Appellant finds support for his view in the concurring opinion of Justice
Fleming in Modglin v. Modglin (1966) 246 Cal.App.2d 411, 417 [54 Cal.Rptr. 582].
In that case a majority of the court rejected the wife's demand for increased
spousal support. "The parties were married in 1948 and divorced in 1959.  By
stipulation the wife received nearly all the community property (a modest amount
which was liquidated and spent), $ 200 per month alimony for 12 months, and $
125 per month for each of 2 daughters.  A reserved jurisdiction was included
with $ 1 per month alimony after the 12-month period.  In 1964 the wife sought a
modification, showing income as a nurse of $ 3,600 (lower than at the time of
divorce), need of dental attention for herself, and need of better home
furnishings.  She also showed the defendant husband, remarried, had experienced
business success, with the net income of $ 37,500 after taxes, a luxurious home,
modern expensive cars and an airplane maintained by his business.  The trial
judge increased child support but refused additional alimony." (6 Witkin,
Summary of Cal. Law (8th ed. 1974) Husband and Wife, § 178, p.  5048.) A divided
Court of Appeal affirmed.  The lead opinion stressed the original stipulation,
and concluded that the record did not justify setting aside the bargain the
parties had made.  ( Modglin, supra, 246 Cal.App.2d at p. 415.) The concurring
opinion, upon which appellant here relies, took an emphatic position against the
theory that "an ex-spouse can continue to reap where for many years he or she
has not sown." ( Id., at p. 417.) 8 The concurring  opinion is not precedential
authority.  Moreover, we are not, in any event, departing from the central theme
of that opinion -- that subsequently acquired wealth of the supporting spouse
does not in and of itself justify an increase in spousal support -- with which
we do not differ. 9 That is, we agree with appellant that  a supported spouse's
need is an essential element in determining whether he or she is entitled to an
increase in spousal support and that such need cannot be established on the
basis of the supporting spouse's newly acquired wealth.  Simply stated, the need
of one spouse must be established independently of the other's ability to pay.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -8   Justice
Fleming's entire concurring opinion states as follows: "It is not my
understanding that the alimony provisions of a final judgment of divorce
settling the property rights and obligations of the parties are, like stock
market quotations, subject to modification with every fluctuation, for better or
worse, in the fortunes of the parties concerned.  I do not believe that under
the guise of increased alimony a former spouse is entitled to share a new-found
prosperity achieved by an ex-partner with whom relations have long since been
legally severed.  Such a theory would put the rights of an ex-spouse on a par
with those of a current spouse, would suggest that the ex-spouse is legally
entitled to support at whatever style of living the former spouse may thereafter
achieve, and would imply that an ex-spouse can continue to reap where for many
years he or she has not sown.  This flies in the face of our basic concept that
prosperity in the matrimonial household is the result of the joint efforts of
both spouses -- in this case those of the ex-husband and his present wife -- and
that the parties who make a success of their conjugal venture are the ones
entitled to enjoy its fruits." ( Id., at p. 417.)
9   We do, however, differ with Justice Fleming's opinion to the extent it
suggests that, regardless whether he or she is financially able to do so, a
supporting spouse has no responsibility to satisfy unmet reasonable needs of the
supported spouse where such needs have been established independently of the
ability to pay of the supporting spouse.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Accordingly, if upon remand the trial court finds that the prior award of
spousal support never was or no longer is adequate to meet respondent's
reasonable needs, the court may increase the award regardless whether
respondent's needs have increased since the time of the last award (assuming, if
her needs have not increased, that appellant concedes or the court again finds
that his ability to pay is greater today than at the time of the earlier award).

   The judgment is reversed and the cause remanded to the superior court for
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.  Each party shall bear its own
costs on appeal.

CONCUR BY: SMITH

CONCUR

   SMITH, J. I concur in the reversal of the judgment because the trial judge
failed to grant appellant a reasonable continuance to enable him an opportunity
to review and answer the amended financial declaration.

   However, I would like to stress that modification of support cannot
exclusively turn on whether the supporting spouse has an increased ability to
pay. Otherwise, a supported spouse, whose present needs are being met, would
seek modification to enjoy a free ride on the new found prosperity of the
supporting spouse. Rather, an inquiry into the modification of spousal  support
begins with whether the reasonable needs of that supported spouse are being met.


                              82 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of DONA B. and ROSENDO V. LOPEZ.  ROSENDO
                V. LOPEZ, Appellant, v. DONA B. LOPEZ, Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 19030

            Court of Appeal of California, Third Appellate District

            115 Cal. App. 3d 776; 173 Cal. Rptr. 718; 1981 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1395


                                February 5, 1981

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Yolo County, No. 27886, Harry A. Ackley and
James C.  McDermott, Judges.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1a) (1b) Military; Civil Defense § 4--Soldiers' and Sailors' Relief Act--
Proceedings Covered--Modification of Spousal and Child Support Payments Ordered
in Marital Dissolution Proceeding.  --The trial court abused its discretion in
denying the motion of a former husband to vacate a modification order increasing
spousal and child support payments he had been ordered to pay in his marital
dissolution proceeding, where his prior show cause order attacking the
modification order disclosed he had received no notice of hearing on his former
spouse's application for modification of spousal and child support and that he
was in the military service in Germany at the time of such hearing, his
supporting points and authorities specifically set forth arguments based on the
Soldiers' and Sailors' Civil Relief Act (50 U.S.C. § 501 et seq.), the trial
court had not appointed an attorney to represent him at the hearing on the
application for modification of spousal and child support although it had been
informed he was in the military service by his former attorney of record, he was
unquestionably prejudiced by the modification order by reason of his military
service resulting in his absence from the hearing on the application for an
increase in his spousal and child support payments, and his application for
relief from the modification order was timely filed with respect to the
provisions for such relief under the Soldiers' and Sailors' Civil Relief Act (50
U.S.C. § 501 et seq.).

(2a) (2b) Courts § 13--Jurisdiction--Moot Questions--Vacation of Spousal Support
Order.  --In a spousal and child support modification proceeding in which the
trial court's modification order increasing spousal and child support and
awarding fees to the former wife's attorneys was subsequently vacated on motion
by the former husband pursuant to his showing of a right to such relief under
the Soldiers' and Sailors' Civil Relief Act (50 U.S.C. § 501 et seq.), the
vacating of the modification order mooted the issue of the former wife's appeal
from the order that had previously retroactively reduced spousal support in lieu
of vacating the modification order, but the appellate court could still vacate
the spousal support reduction order. The appellate court had jurisdiction to
vacate the spousal support reduction order, where that order constituted
reversible error and the vacating of that order had the effect of tidying up the
record and restoring the former wife and the former husband to their
premodification order positions.

(3) Military; Civil Defense § 2--Soldiers' and Sailors' Relief Act--Judicial
Discretion.  --The Soldiers' and Sailors' Civil Relief Act is always to be
liberally construed to protect those who have been obliged to drop their own
affairs to take up the burdens of the nation. The discretion that is vested in
trial courts to that end is not to be withheld on nice calculations as to
whether prejudice may result from absence, or whether absence may result from
military service. Absence when one's rights or liabilities are being adjudged is
usually prima facie prejudicial. But in some few cases absence may be a policy,
instead of a result of military service, and discretion is vested in the courts
to see that the immunities of the act are not put to such unworthy use.

COUNSEL: McPherson & Barnett, Robert E. Barnett and Michael C. Mattice for
Appellant Husband.

John H. Knowles for Appellant Wife.

JUDGES: Opinion by Carr, J., with Regan, Acting P. J., and Wolters, J., *
concurring.

*   Assigned by the Chairperson of the Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: CARR

OPINION

     These appeals are from postdissolution modification proceedings on child
and spousal support.

   Appellant Dona B. Lopez (Dona) appeals from that portion of an order of
August 17, 1979, which reduced to $ 1 per month spousal support of $ 150 ordered
in a prior modification hearing on June 12, 1978, in which a formal order was
signed  and filed November 7, 1978.  Respondent (petitioner in the trial court)
Rosendo V. Lopez (Rosendo) cross-appeals from that portion of the order entered
August 17, 1979, denying his motion to vacate the November 17, 1978, order
increasing child and spousal support. 1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   While
denying the motion to vacate, the court did grant the alternative motion to
reduce the support set in the November 7, 1978, order and reduced spousal
support for Dona to $ 1 per month from $ 150 per month.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Because the cross-appeal is dispositive of the issues herein, we address that
appeal first.

   Petition for dissolution was filed October 27, 1971.  An interlocutory decree
was entered December 20, 1971, terminating the marriage of seven years and ten
months.  Although the record contains no proof of service of substitution, on
September 4, 1975, Robert Barnett was substituted as attorney of record for
Ronald Stone on behalf of Rosendo.

   On April 25, 1978, Dona petitioned the court for increased spousal and child
support. The motion for modification was noticed for hearing on June 1, 1978.
On June 1, 1978, a certificate of service by mail was filed showing service upon
Ronald Stone, Rosendo's former attorney of record.  The record contains no proof
of service on either Rosendo or his current attorney of record.

   On June 1, 1978, Dona appeared with counsel; neither Rosendo nor his attorney
appeared.  The motion to increase child and spousal support was continued to
June 12, 1978.  Neither Rosendo nor his attorney received notice of the
continuance.

   At this time Rosendo was a physician in the United States Air Force stationed
in Germany.  On June 5, 1978, Dona's attorney filed with the court a letter sent
to him from Rosendo, dated May 13, 1978.  In the letter Rosendo stated that "due
to my present military duty in  Germany, I will not be able to be present for
the legal proceeding on June 1, 1978, at the Superior Court of California,
County of Yolo." The letter also explained why Rosendo believed his former wife
was not entitled to increased support and stated: "I have received the legal
papers you have mailed." The record contains no proof of service upon Rosendo or
his attorney, but Dona's attorney filed with the court a post office "Return
Receipt" attached to Rosendo's letter.  The record does not disclose if Dona's
attorney responded to Rosendo's letter or what "legal papers" had been received
by Rosendo.

   A hearing was held June 12, 1978, without a court reporter; neither Rosendo
nor his attorney were present.  On August 17, 1978, the court rendered a
memorandum decision increasing child and spousal support and awarding fees to
Dona's attorneys.  On November 7, 1978, a formal order of modification setting
child support at $ 150 per month for each of the two children and spousal
support at $ 150 per month was signed and filed.

   On May 22, 1979, while still in military service, Rosendo filed an order to
show cause requesting "that the modification [of November 7, 1978] be set aside
or in the alternative that the court further modify support order to a figure
that is reasonable and that I can afford." The matter was heard on June 18,
1979, at which time the court granted Rosendo until June 29 to amend and
supplement his moving papers.  Rosendo did not specifically state the legal
theories upon which he sought relief;  however the points and authorities
clearly contemplated relief upon due process grounds; Griffin v. Griffin (1946)
327 U.S. 220 [90 L.Ed. 635, 66 S.Ct. 556], and the Soldiers' and Sailors' Civil
Relief Act (50 U.S.C.A. Appen. § 501 et seq.), and Allen v. Allen (1974) 30
Cal.2d 433 [182 P.2d 551], were cited as controlling authority.

     On appeal, Rosendo contends: (1) the Soldiers' and Sailors' Civil Relief
Act precludes judgment against a litigant unable to attend because of military
duty, and (2) the June 12, 1978, hearing is void as violative of due process of
law for lack of notice.

     Dona, in her appeal, contends (1) the order of modification improperly
provided for  retroactive reduction of accrued spousal support; (2) the order
reducing spousal support to $ 1 per month was an abuse of discretion in that
there was no evidence of material change of circumstances of the parties after
the date of the existing order, and (3) it was an abuse of discretion to require
her as a supported spouse and the custodial  parent of two minor children of the
marriage, to demonstrate in a subsequent proceeding that she was unable to seek
gainful employment because of adverse effects on the minor children.

   Rosendo asserts the order made pursuant to the hearing of June 12, 1978, is
void under provisions of the Soldiers' and Sailors' Civil Relief Act of 1940 (50
U.S.C.A. Appen. § 501 et seq.), relying on Allen v. Allen, supra, 30 Cal.2d 433.
Allen was an appeal from an order denying a motion to vacate an order increasing
respondent wife's spousal support. Appellant had not received personal notice of
the hearing, was neither present nor represented by counsel, and was in the
military service. In reversing the denial of appellant husband's motion to
vacate, the Supreme Court, in summarizing and applying the pertinent provisions
of the act, stated: "[Section 520] provides that if there is a default of
appearance by the defendant in any proceeding, plaintiff shall file an affidavit
showing that the defendant is not in the military service. If such an affidavit
cannot be filed, plaintiff must file an affidavit showing that defendant is in
the military service or that plaintiff is unable to determine whether or not
defendant is in such service.  If an affidavit cannot be made showing that
defendant is not in the service, the court shall not order the entry of judgment
without appointing an attorney to represent defendant and protect his interests.
In the present case, no such affidavits were filed by plaintiff, although the
court was informed by [defendant's former attorney of record] that defendant was
in the military service. [para. ] There is no doubt that the trial court erred
in failing to appoint an attorney to represent the defaulting serviceman." ( Id
., at pp. 434-435.)

   However, the Allen court held that proceedings contrary to section 520 are
not void but voidable and until properly attacked are valid.  Section 520
further authorizes the trial court to vacate or set aside its judgment in any
proceeding where it appears that the party was prejudiced by reason of his
military service in making his defense and provides: "If any judgment shall be
rendered in any action or proceeding governed by this section against any person
in military service during the period of such service or within thirty days
thereafter, and it appears that such person was prejudiced by reason of his
military service in making his defense thereto, such judgment may, upon
application, made by such person or his legal representative, not later than
ninety days after the termination of such service, be opened by the court
rendering the same and such defendant or his legal representative let in to
defend; provided it is made to appear that the defendant has a meritorious  or
legal defense to the action or some part thereof.  Vacating, setting aside, or
reversing any judgment because of any of the provisions of this Act . . . shall
not impair any right or title acquired by any bona fide purchaser for value
under such judgment." (50 U.S.C.A. Appen. § 520(4).)

   The court initially determined that Rosendo's contentions concerning the
Soldiers' and Sailors' Civil Relief Act as set forth in his points and
authorities were not properly before the court, apparently because neither the
act nor the Allen case was mentioned by name in his order to show cause.   We do
not find this controlling as the matter was before the court.  The order to show
cause contained the factual basis for the relief sought: that Rosendo had
received no notice of the hearing of June 12, 1978, and was in the military
service stationed in Germany at the time of the hearings of June 1 and June 12,
1978.  His supporting points and authorities specifically set forth arguments
based upon the Soldiers' and Sailors' Civil Relief Act, as well as due process
grounds.  By supplemental briefs, Dona replied to these arguments.   Both Dona
and the court had been adequately apprised of Rosendo's reliance upon the act as
authority for his position.

   The trial court made and filed a "rationale" in which the reasons for its
ruling were set forth. Therein the court stated even if the act were properly
before the court, its decision would be unchanged.  The court reasoned that
since a judgment obtained in violation of the act is not void, but voidable upon
a showing of prejudice by the serviceman ( Allen, supra, 30 Cal.2d 433), the
court at the hearing of June 12, 1978, must have determined Rosendo was not
prejudiced by his absence; that the letter written to Dona's attorney prior to
the hearing of June 12, 1978, and submitted to the court by Dona's attorney was
a sufficient response by Rosendo for the court to conclude the ability of
Rosendo to protect his interests was not materially affected by reason of his
military service. We disagree with that analysis.  Though inconsistent with its
finding of no prejudice, the obvious inference from the court's action in
reducing spousal support from the $ 150 per month ordered at the June 12th
hearing to $ 1 per month is that Rosendo was prejudiced by his absence at the
prior modification proceedings.  The court went even further and erroneously
reduced the spousal support retroactively, of which Dona complains on appeal.

     The bounds of judicial discretion with respect to the Soldiers' and
Sailors' Civil Relief Act have been explored by the United States  Supreme Court
in Boone v. Lightner (1943) 319 U.S. 561 [87 L.Ed. 1587, 63 S.Ct. 1223], wherein
the court observed: "The Soldiers' and Sailors' Civil Relief Act is always to be
liberally construed to protect those who have been obliged to drop their own
affairs to take up the burdens of the nation.  The discretion that is vested in
trial courts to that end is not to be withheld on nice calculations as to
whether prejudice may result from absence, or absence result from the service.
Absence when one's rights or liabilities are being adjudged is usually prima
facie prejudicial. But in some few cases absence may be a policy, instead of the
result of military service, and discretion is vested in the courts to see that
the immunities of the Act are not put to such unworthy use." ( Id., at p.  575
[87 L.Ed., at p. 1596].) The instant case is not one in which absence was used
by the serviceman as a matter of policy.  Rosendo was stationed in Germany while
proceedings were held in California.  He did not ever receive proper notice of
the proceedings.  He was unquestionably prejudiced by reason of his military
service resulting in his absence.

   The trial court erred in failing to at least appoint an attorney to represent
Rosendo in the absence of his own counsel.  ( Allen v. Allen, supra, 30 Cal.2d
at p. 435; see In re Larson (1947) 81 Cal.App.2d 258, 262 [183 P.2d 688].)
Moreover, the court misconstrued the letter from Rosendo to opposing counsel.
There isn't the slightest indicia the letter was intended to serve as a complete
statement of Rosendo's position or as a substitute for his appearance or
representation at the hearing.  The letter did serve to notify the court that he
was a serviceman whose military duty in Germany prevented him from appearing in
court.  He now seeks the opportunity to present his case and contest the motion.
He is requesting the very relief contemplated by the act.  ( Allen, supra, 30
Cal.2d at p. 437.)

   Finally, in refusing to vacate the previous order, the lower court
erroneously determined Rosendo's application for relief was barred by the
six-month limitation of section 473 of the Code of Civil Procedure. The
Soldiers' and Sailors' Civil Relief Act provides that upon application, at any
time within 90 days after termination of service, judgment may be vacated if it
appears that: (1) the person was prejudiced by reason of his service; and (2) he
has a meritorious defense to the action. 2  Rosendo's application was timely
within the provisions of the act and at least a prima facie case of  prejudice
is inferable from the trial court's later reduction of spousal support. Nor do
we concur that Rosendo's delay in seeking relief from judgment constituted
prejudicial and unexcused laches as found by the court. 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Cf.
Syzemore v. County of Sacramento (1976) 55 Cal.App.3d 517 [127 Cal.Rptr. 741],
holding that the 100-day period within which a claim may be brought under
Government Code section 911.2 is tolled pursuant to section 525 of the Soldiers'
and Sailors' Civil Relief Act.
3   We note that the judge who made the August 17, 1979, order was not the same
judge who heard the June 12, 1978, modification motion and there was no
transcript of that proceeding.  This placed a burden on the second judge, who
apparently was attempting to mete out what was considered essential justice.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   For the reasons stated we conclude it was an abuse of discretion for the
lower court to deny petitioner's motion to set aside the order entered on
November 7, 1978.  The order of August 17, 1979, denying the motion of appellant
Rosendo Lopez to vacate the decree of November 7, 1978, is reversed and the
order of November 7, 1978, is ordered vacated.

     We agree that the order of August 17, 1979, reducing spousal support to $ 1
retroactive to October 1, 1978, 4 is reversible error. Our ruling on the
cross-appeal moots this issue raised by Dona's appeal as the order modified has
been ordered vacated. However, to tidy up the record and restore the parties to
their pre-June 1978, positions, we order the entire order entered August 17,
1979 vacated.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   The
source of this date is not revealed by the record.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Each party shall bear his or her own costs on appeal.


                              83 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In re the Marriage of BETH and JACK VAN SICKLE.  BETH VAN
                SICKLE, Appellant, v. JACK VAN SICKLE, Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 2579

            Court of Appeal of California, Fifth Appellate District

            68 Cal. App. 3d 728; 137 Cal. Rptr. 568; 1977 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1359


                                 March 30, 1977

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     The petition of appellant Husband for a hearing by the
Supreme Court was denied June 9, 1977.
Related proceeding at Van Sickle v. Gilbert, 2011 Cal. App. LEXIS 849 (Cal. App.
3d Dist., June 29, 2011)

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Sacramento County, No. 185679, George E.
Paras, Judge.
In re Marriage of Van Sickle, 62 Cal. App. 3d 582, 133 Cal. Rptr. 250, 1976 Cal.
App. LEXIS 1934 (Cal. App. 5th Dist., 1976)

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1) Appellate Review § 18--Decisions Appealable--Final Judgments and Orders--
Final Determination of Collateral Matters.  --Unless otherwise provided by
statute, an appeal lies only from a judgment that terminates the proceeding in
the lower court by disposing of all issues of law and fact, insofar as the court
has the power to do so. While an exception is made as to an issue which is
collateral to the main controversy, the exception applies only if the issue is
severable, and then only if a decision thereon determines finally the rights of
the parties, leaving no further judicial acts to be done by the court in regard
to that issue.

(2) Dissolution of Marriage § 48--Property Rights of Parties--Division of
Community and Quasi-community Property--In Separate Action.  --Since California
adheres to the concept of "divisible divorce," controversies over spousal
support, division of marital property, and custody of minor children need not be
litigated in the action brought to dissolve the marriage; such controversies can
be litigated in separate actions.

(3) Dissolution of Marriage § 25--Dissolution and Separation Proceedings--Appeal
From Interlocutory Judgment--Effect of Bifurcation of Collateral Matters.  --If
the essentially collateral matters of spousal support, the division of community
property, and child custody are at issue in an action for the dissolution of a
marriage, they may be bifurcated for trial so that the dissolution issue can be
resolved promptly at an early trial, and if that occurs, an immediate appeal may
be taken from the interlocutory judgment dissolving the marriage to review the
correctness of the court's decision dissolving the marriage.

(4) Dissolution of Marriage § 25--Dissolution and Separation Proceedings--Appeal
From Interlocutory Judgment--Where Jurisdiction Reserved by Trial Court as to
Collateral Matters.  --If severable collateral matters are resolved, with
finality, by an interlocutory judgment dissolving a marriage, an appeal may be
taken from that part of the judgment, but if the court elects to reserve
jurisdiction to decide a severable, collateral matter, such as the division of
the community property, at a time subsequent to the entry of the interlocutory
judgment dissolving the marriage, no appeal may be taken from an interim or
preliminary ruling or decision the court may make as to that collateral matter
even though the ruling or decision is embodied in the interlocutory judgment of
dissolution of marriage.

(5) Dissolution of Marriage § 25--Dissolution and Separation Proceedings--Appeal
From Interlocutory Judgment--Scope of Review--Matters Not Finally Determined.
--That portion of an interlocutory judgment of dissolution of marriage
purporting to delineate the community property assets of the parties was not
appealable, and attempts of the parties to raise issues pertaining to the
character of the property on appeal from the interlocutory judgment were
premature, where questions as to the value to be placed on each asset and the
manner in which the property was to be distributed remained to be determined,
and where it was impossible to determine from the record whether monetary
adjustments the trial court had ordered to be made when the community assets
were divided were proper or an abuse of discretion. Moreover, the propriety of
an order denying spousal support to the wife could not be judged until after the
value of the community property had been determined and a division ordered.

(6) Dissolution of Marriage § 38--Pendente Lite Orders--Support Maintenance, and
Child Custody During Proceedings--Power of Trial Court to Modify or Revoke.
--In entering an interlocutory decree of dissolution of marriage, the trial
court erred in directing the wife to repay the husband or to reimburse him from
her share of the community property, for all spousal support payments he had
made pursuant to pendente lite orders. Since the husband had not noticed any
motion to reduce or discontinue the pendente lite payments, the order was
impermissible under the provision of Civ. Code, § 4357, that an order awarding
spousal support during the pendency of a dissolution proceeding "may be modified
or revoked at any time except as to any amount that may have accrued prior to
the date of the filing of the notice of motion or order to show cause to modify
or revoke."

(7a) (7b) Dissolution of Marriage § 120--Recognition, Enforcement, and Effect of
Foreign Orders and Decrees--Collateral Attack and Full Faith and Credit--
Propriety of Service of Process.  --In a marriage dissolution proceeding, the
trial court properly determined that a Nevada divorce decree previously secured
by the husband was void, where, although the copy of the complaint served on the
wife correctly described land situated in Nevada as held by the parties as joint
tenants, the original complaint on file with the Nevada court incorrectly
alleged that the land was community property, thus making possible that court's
award of all the property to the husband.

(8) Process, Notices and Papers § 24--Process--Defects and Remedies--
Irregularities in Copy of Complaint.  --Where the law requires service of
process by the delivery of a copy of the complaint with the summons, the copy of
the complaint must conform to the original. Although inconsequential
irregularities between the original and the copy do not necessarily invalidate
the service, substantial and misleading deviations in the copy that is served
will defeat the court's jurisdiction.

COUNSEL: Jackson & Wheatley, H. Herbert Jackson, Anthony J. Scalora and Gregory
F. Gilbert for Appellant Beth Van Sickle Wife.

Watson & Hoffe, Francis A. Watson, Jr., and Ronald A. Rubenstein and George J.
Ziser for Appellant Jack Van Sickle Husband.

JUDGES: Opinion by Gargano, J., with Brown (G. A.), P. J., and Franson, J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: GARGANO

OPINION

     This litigation originated in the court below on July 23, 1968, when
appellant Beth Van Sickle, hereafter referred to as wife, filed a complaint
seeking declaratory relief as to the validity of a Nevada divorce obtained by
her husband, appellant Jack Van Sickle, hereafter referred to as husband; in the
same complaint, wife also sought a division of the parties' community property,
custody of the parties' two minor children, child support, spousal support,
attorney's fees and costs.  Later, after the court noticed an intended decision
holding that the Nevada divorce was invalid, wife amended her original pleading
to include a petition for the dissolution of the marriage. Both sides have
appealed from the interlocutory judgment the court subsequently entered
dissolving the parties' marriage.

   Briefly, the pertinent facts are these.

   The parties were married on June 3, 1955; they separated nine years later, on
June 19, 1964.  At the time of separation, the couple had two children, a
daughter, Hettie, born on February 7, 1957, and a son, Wayne, born on March 3,
1963.

   On June 3, 1955, when the parties were married, husband owned a parcel of
land near Elk Grove in Sacramento County, part of which he had acquired from his
parents, and part of which he had purchased from another individual.  He also
owned 508 acres of land in Douglas County, Nevada, and El Dorado County,
California, which he purchased in 1941 for $ 7,000; this land was situated near
and along the California-Nevada border at South Lake Tahoe and hereafter will be
referred to as the Patterson Parcel.

    After the marriage, the parties resided in a home situated on the California
side of the Patterson Parcel.  Thereafter, the couple worked hard to preserve
and improve the land.  In 1960 they acquired 240 acres of land in Douglas
County, Nevada; this land, hereafter referred to as the Hansen Parcel, adjoined
the Patterson Parcel.

   During the parties' marriage a relatively small portion of the Patterson
Parcel on the California side was subdivided into a shopping center, apartments
and resort facilities.  Later, ownership of the subdivided lands was transferred
to three corporations in which husband was the only stockholder; at the time of
trial the corporations and the remaining property were worth millions of
dollars.

   On June 19, 1964, when the parties separated, wife and the two minor children
left the family residence at South Lake Tahoe and moved to Sacramento; husband
later moved to the State of Nevada.

   On January 22, 1965, husband filed a complaint in a Nevada state court to
obtain a divorce from his wife.  The complaint, among other things, alleged that
husband and wife had purchased a 240-acre parcel of land in Douglas County in
1960 (i.e., the Hansen Parcel), and that they held title to the land as
community property. In reality, the couple purchased the property as joint
tenants, and before serving a copy of the complaint on wife, husband's lawyer
deleted the words "community property" from the copy and inserted in lieu
thereof the words "joint tenants;" the original complaint never was corrected.

   On February 25, 1965, the Nevada court entered judgment granting husband a
divorce from wife; although the court found that the 240 acres of property in
Douglas County was community property, it awarded all of the property to
husband.  It is this judgment that the Superior Court of Sacramento County
declared invalid.

   At the conclusion of the trial in the present case, the court entered an
interlocutory judgment dissolving the parties' marriage which contained numerous
other judicial determinations.  First, the judgment  declared the Nevada divorce
decree obtained by husband void and not entitled to full faith and credit in
California; awarded joint legal custody of the minor children to the parties,
with the physical custody of the girl, Hettie, going to husband, and the
physical custody of the boy, Wayne, going to wife; and ordered husband to pay
wife the sum of $ 200 a month toward the support of the minor child, Wayne.

    Second, the judgment delineated with particularity each item of property the
court determined was community property of the marriage. However, because one of
the corporations the court found to be community property was involved in a
lawsuit with a third party over a leasing agreement, and because the resolution
of the lawsuit could substantially affect the value of the stock of that
corporation, the court did not fix the value of the stock or any other community
property asset; nor did the court divide any of the community property between
the parties.  Instead, the court reserved jurisdiction to fix the value of the
respective community property assets and to divide the community property at a
later date, pursuant to the authority of subdivision (a) of section 4800 of the
Civil Code.

   Third, the judgment terminated all temporary spousal support orders and
directed wife to reimburse husband, either directly or from her share of the
community property, at the time the community property was divided, for all of
the court-ordered temporary spousal support payments husband made to her and for
certain obligations he paid on her behalf.  It also directed the parties to make
certain adjustments for specified sums of money each party owed the corporations
found to be community property, and ordered husband to pay wife the sum of $
3,000 a month until such time as the community property was divided, the
payments to be charged to her share of the community property. The court did not
award spousal support but retained jurisdiction over that issue.

   While both parties have appealed, the focal point of the appeals is on that
part of the interlocutory judgment which delineates the community property;
several weeks of trial were spent in the court below on this hotly contested
issue, and neither party is satisfied with the court's conclusions in this
respect.  The central question, therefore, is whether the court's decision
delineating the community property of the marriage, without fixing the value of
the assets or dividing the community property between the parties, is appealable
merely because the decision is embodied in an interlocutory judgment of
dissolution of marriage which is made appealable by statute.  (See Code Civ.
Proc., § 904.1, subd. (j).)

   We have concluded that the answer to this question is in the negative.
First, it is a settled principle of appellate practice that unless otherwise
provided by statute, an appeal lies only from a judgment that terminates the
proceeding in the lower court by disposing of all issues of law and fact,
insofar as the court has the power to do so.  ( Bank of America v. Superior
Court (1942) 20 Cal.2d 697, 701-702 [128  P.2d 357]; Nolan v. Smith (1902) 137
Cal. 360, 361-362 [70 P. 166]; Vallera v. Vallera (1944) 64 Cal.App.2d 266, 270
[148 P.2d 694]; see Tenhet v. Boswell (1976) 18 Cal.3d 150, 153 [133 Cal.Rptr.
10, 554 P.2d 331]; Bakewell v. Bakewell (1942) 21 Cal.2d 224, 226-227 [130 P.2d
975].) This principle, known as the "one final judgment" rule is grounded on the
theory that ". . . piecemeal disposition and multiple appeals in a single action
would be oppressive and costly, and that a review of intermediate rulings should
await the final disposition of the case." (6 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (2d ed.
1971) Appeal, § 36, p. 4050; accord Knodel v. Knodel (1975) 14 Cal.3d 752, 760
[122 Cal.Rptr. 521, 537 P.2d 353]; Efron v. Kalmanovitz (1960) 185 Cal.App.2d
149, 154 [8 Cal.Rptr. 107]; Brown v. Memorial Nat. Home Foundation (1958) 158
Cal.App.2d 448, 455 [322 P.2d 600, 72 A.L.R.2d 997].) Furthermore, while an
exception is made as to a matter which is collateral to the main controversy,
the exception applies only if the matter is severable from the general subject
of the litigation, and then only   if a decision thereon determines finally  the
rights of the parties in relation to the collateral matter, leaving no further
judicial acts to be done by the court in regard to that matter.  Such a
determination is substantially the same as a final judgment in an independent
proceeding.  ( In re Marriage of Skelley (1976) 18 Cal.3d 365, 368 [134
Cal.Rptr. 197, 556 P.2d 297]; Meehan v. Hopps (1955) 45 Cal.2d 213, 216-217 [288
P.2d 267]; Spencer v. Spencer (1967) 252 Cal.App.2d 683, 688-689 [60 Cal.Rptr.
747]; see 6 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (2d ed. 1971) Appeal, §§ 38, 39, pp.
4052-4053.)

     Second, California adheres to the concept of "divisible divorce" ( Lopez v.
Lopez (1965) 63 Cal.2d 735, 737 [48 Cal.Rptr. 136, 408 P.2d 744]; Hull v.
Superior Court (1960) 54 Cal.2d 139, 147 [5 Cal.Rptr. 1, 352 P.2d 161]), and,
hence, controversies over division of marital property, custody of minor
children and, under appropriate circumstances, spousal support need not be
litigated in the proceeding brought to dissolve the marriage; such controversies
may be litigated in a separate action.  ( Hudson v. Hudson (1959) 52 Cal.2d 735,
744-745 [344 P.2d 295]; Estate of Williams (1950) 36 Cal.2d 289, 292-293 [223
P.2d 248, 22 A.L.R.2d 716]; In re Marriage of Fink (1976) 54 Cal.App.3d 357, 362
[126 Cal.Rptr. 626]; Callnon v. Callnon (1935) 7 Cal.App.2d 676, 680 [46 P.2d
988]; see Hull v. Superior Court, supra, 54 Cal.2d 139, 147-148; cf.  See v.
Superior Court (1960) 55 Cal.2d 279, 280-281 [10 Cal.Rptr. 634, 359 P.2d 32];
Chichester v. Chichester (1964) 228 Cal.App.2d 491, 495-496 [39 Cal.Rptr. 553].)
Since disputes over division of marital property, custody of minor children and
spousal support are essentially collateral to the issue of dissolving the
marriage (see Hull v. Superior Court, supra, 54 Cal.2d 139, 147),  it has been
stated that the "divisible divorce" concept is not inconsistent with the basic
principle that a single action should result in only one final appealable
judgment because each action results in a single judgment disposing of the issue
involved in that action ( In re Marriage of Fink, supra, 54 Cal.App.3d 357, 362)
.

     Lastly, if essentially collateral matters such as the division of community
property, child custody and spousal support are in dispute in the proceeding for
the dissolution of the marriage, they may be bifurcated for trial so that the
dissolution issue can be resolved promptly at an early trial; if this occurs, an
immediate appeal may be taken from the interlocutory judgment dissolving the
marriage to review the correctness of the court's decision terminating the
marriage. ( In re Marriage of Fink, supra, 54 Cal.App.3d 357, 362-366; see Hull
v. Superior Court, supra, 54 Cal.2d 139, 147-148.) As the court explained in In
re Marriage of Fink, the Family Law Act of 1970 ". . . embodied a legislative
intent that the dissolution of marriage should not be postponed merely because
issues relating to property, support, attorney fees or child custody were
unready for decision." (Supra, 54 Cal.App.3d at p. 363.) The court further
stated in that opinion that "[the] early and separate trial of the dissolution
issue . . . might prove to be of little benefit to a spouse seeking speedy
disentanglement, if that determination did not become a judgment until all other
issues had been decided." (Supra, 54 Cal.App.3d at p. 364.)

   In light of these principles, it seems clear to us that the legislative
policy in permitting an interlocutory judgment of dissolution of marriage to be
a judgment from which an appeal can be taken, is to enable the court to resolve,
promptly and simply, the dissolution issue in marriages which have irrevocably
failed.  (See In re Marriage of Fink, supra, 54 Cal.App.3d 357, 364, 366.) It
also seems clear to us that controversies over such matters as the division of
marital property, child custody and spousal support raise severable, collateral
issues which can be decided independently of the dissolution of marriage issue.
Consequently, if a matter severable and collateral to the issue of terminating
the marriage is in dispute in a dissolution of marriage proceeding, an appeal
may be taken from the interlocutory judgment dissolving the marriage even though
the collateral matter is bifurcated and is still unresolved when the
interlocutory judgment dissolving the marriage is entered.   Also, if a
severable, collateral matter is resolved with finality in the interlocutory
judgment, an appeal may be taken from that part of the judgment.  ( In re
Marriage of Stuart (1972) 27 Cal.App.3d 834, 837-838 [104 Cal.Rptr.   395]; see
Cal. Rules of Court, rule 1(a).) But, if the court elects to reserve
jurisdiction to decide a severable, collateral matter, such as the division of
the community property, at a time subsequent to the entry of the interlocutory
judgment dissolving the marriage, no appeal may be taken from any interim or
preliminary ruling or decision the court may make as to that collateral matter
even though the ruling or decision is embodied in the interlocutory judgment of
dissolution of marriage.

   To recapitulate, an appeal may be taken from an interlocutory judgment
dissolving a marriage and from any part of the judgment which decides a
severable, collateral matter with finality.  However, to hold that interim and
preliminary rulings or decisions affecting severable and collateral matters
arising in connection with the dissolution of a marriage are appealable as well,
merely because they are embodied in the interlocutory judgment dissolving the
marriage, would pave the way to a piecemeal disposition of such severable and
collateral issues in contradiction of the very rationale upon which the "one
final judgment" rule is predicated.  For example, under the guise of appealing
from the interlocutory judgment dissolving the marriage, parties could litigate
on a piecemeal basis complex preliminary questions affecting the ultimate
division of community property before the property is divided, thus flooding the
already overburdened appellate courts with needless and multiple appeals.

     For the reasons we have articulated, it is patent that the part of the
interlocutory judgment in question merely purporting to delineate the community
property assets of the parties, without dividing them, is at best an interim
decision on a matter severable and collateral to the issue of the dissolution of
the marriage and that the attempts of the parties to raise issues pertaining to
the nature and character of the property in question in this appeal from the
interlocutory judgment of dissolution of marriage are premature.  (Cf.
Lauderdale v. U. & I. Equip. Co. (1969) 271 Cal.App.2d 140, 142-143 [76
Cal.Rptr. 483].) Still to be decided are such important questions as the value
to be placed on each asset and the manner in which the community property is to
be divided.  In fact, the community property assets described in the judgment
are primarily ownerships of stocks in corporations which could have fluctuating
values, and it is conceivable that the parties could be dissatisfied with the
ultimate values fixed by the court on those assets or with the manner of
distribution; if so, further appeals will follow.  In addition, the court
purported to order the parties to make certain monetary adjustments when the
community assets are divided, the propriety of which essentially  will turn upon
the value of community property received by each party; accordingly, it is
impossible in this appeal to determine whether the adjustments are proper or
whether the court abused its discretion on these points.  For instance, the
trial court denied wife's request for spousal support primarily on the ground
that she ultimately was going to receive community property of great value and,
instead, ordered husband to pay her $ 3,000 a month, and then directed that the
amounts so paid be charged to her share of the community property; until such
time as the value of the community property assets is fixed and the property is
divided, there is no way we can judge the propriety of the order.  Thus, when
the community property is ultimately divided, if wife still is dissatisfied with
the court's denial of spousal support and the court's order on the $ 3,000
payments, another appeal will be necessary.

   In rebuttal, the parties apparently assume that merely because subdivision
(a) of section 4800 of the Civil Code authorizes the superior court to retain
jurisdiction to divide  the community property at a time subsequent to the entry
of the interlocutory judgment of dissolution of marriage, any order the court
may make as to the community property is appealable if the order is embodied in
the interlocutory judgment of dissolution of marriage no matter how interimistic
or preliminary that order may be.  They primarily rely upon In re Marriage of
Brown (1976) 15 Cal.3d 838 [126 Cal.Rptr. 633, 544 P.2d 561] for this
proposition.  In that case, the Supreme Court held that the superior court could
award each spouse an appropriate portion of future nonvested pension payments as
they became due even though the court would have to retain jurisdiction to
supervise its order.  (Supra, 15 Cal.3d at pp. 848-849.) The high court also
held that its decision that those portions of nonvested pension rights earned
during the marriage were to be treated as community property assets should not
apply retroactively in cases where the property rights of the marriage already
had been adjudicated by a decree of dissolution that had become final, unless
the decree expressly reserved jurisdiction to divide the pension rights at a
later date.  (Supra, 15 Cal.3d at p. 851.)

   The parties' reliance on the Brown opinion is misplaced.  In Brown, the
Supreme Court recognized the difficulty of evaluating nonvested pension rights
which might never mature due to death or termination of employment.  It was in
this context that the high court indicated that the superior court could solve
the uncertainty by awarding each spouse an appropriate portion of each pension
payment as it becomes due and payable.  It was also in this context that the
high court indicated that the  fact that the superior court would be required to
retain jurisdiction to supervise its order was not a deterring factor.  However,
it is evident that a judgment awarding each spouse an appropriate portion of a
nonvested pension payment if and as it becomes due and payable, is for all
intents and purposes a final judgment; the retention of jurisdiction to see that
the order is carried out is purely administrative in nature (see, supra, 15
Cal.3d at pp. 848-849) and does not deprive the judgment of its finality (
Goodman v. Community S. & L. Assn. (1966) 246 Cal.App.2d 13, 20 [54 Cal.Rptr.
456]).

   Turning briefly to the Supreme Court's statement that the Brown decision was
retroactive as to those cases where the court had retained jurisdiction to
divide the community property under authority of subdivision (a) of section 4800
of the Civil Code, the court had reference only to those decrees in which the
superior court retained jurisdiction to divide nonvested pension rights if and
when they became vested.  (See, supra, 15 Cal.3d at p. 851.) The high court did
not imply that every interim or preliminary ruling or decision affecting vested
community property rights is appealable as part of an appeal from an
interlocutory judgment dissolving a marriage when embodied in such a judgment.

   We consider next wife's contention that the court abused its discretion in
denying her permanent spousal support. As we have indicated, the trial court
denied wife's request for permanent spousal support primarily for the reason
that the court was of the opinion that she ultimately was going to receive
community property of great value, and we cannot judge the propriety of this
order until after the value of the community property has been fixed and the
community property has been divided.  For the same reasons, we cannot decide the
question as to whether the court abused its discretion in refusing to award the
parties' attorney's fees and costs.

     We conclude, however, that in any event, the court erred in directing wife
to repay husband or to reimburse husband from her share of the community
property for all temporary spousal support payments he made pursuant to pendente
lite spousal support orders.  Under section 4357 of the Civil Code, any order
awarding spousal support during the pendency of a dissolution proceeding ". . .
may be modified or revoked  at any time except as to any  amount that may have
accrued prior to the date of filing of the notice of motion or order to show
cause to modify or revoke." (See also Civ. Code, § 4801, subd. (a).) As far as
the record before us indicates, husband never noticed a motion to reduce or
discontinue the pendente lite spousal support payments he was making to wife; it
appears that the court ordered wife to make restitution of all prior pendente
lite support payments paid to her as part of its overall plan to have the
ultimate division of community property to be absolutely equal.  Under these
circumstances, the court's order requiring wife to reimburse husband for
temporary spousal support payments made during the pendency of the dissolution
proceeding was in effect an impermissible attempt to modify the preexisting
temporary spousal support orders retroactively.  (See Keck v. Keck (1933) 219
Cal. 316, 320-321 [26 P.2d 300]; In re Marriage of Ludwig (1976) 58 Cal.App.3d
744, 749-750 [130 Cal.Rptr. 234]; Vick v. Superior Court (1965) 239 Cal.App.2d
105, 108 [47 Cal.Rptr. 840].)

     The trial court correctly determined that the Nevada divorce decree was
void.  As is pertinent to this case, the Nevada law required a copy of the
summons and a copy of the complaint to be served upon wife.  However, while the
copy of the complaint served upon wife correctly described the Nevada land as
joint tenancy ownership, the original complaint on file with the Nevada court
incorrectly alleged that the land was community property, and this inaccuracy
never was corrected.   It is elementary that where the law requires service of
process by the delivery of a copy of the complaint with the summons, the copy of
the complaint must conform with the original; although inconsequential
irregularities between the original and the copy do not necessarily invalidate
the service, substantial and misleading deviations in the copy that is served
will defeat the court's jurisdiction.  (See Hershenson v. Hershenson (1962) 205
Cal.App.2d 382, 385 [23 Cal.Rptr. 185]; McGinn v. Rees (1917) 33 Cal.App. 291,
293-294 [165 P. 52]; 62 Am.Jur.2d (1972) Process, § 20, pp. 802-803.)

     In this case the altered copy of the complaint served upon wife admitted
that wife had an undivided one-half interest in the Nevada property.  On the
other hand, the allegation in the complaint on file with the Nevada court stated
that the Nevada land was community property and made it possible for the court
to award all of the property to husband; the alteration was substantial and
misleading.  Under these circumstances, the service was invalid and subject to
collateral attack.   (See 72 C.J.S. (1951) Process, § 1,  p. 986; 62 Am.Jur.2d
(1972) Process, § 157, p. 941; 46 Am.Jur.2d (1969) Judgments, § 757, pp.
919-920.)

   We turn to the points raised by husband in his petition for rehearing.

   Husband alleges that a material fact was omitted from the opinion.  He
complains because we did not mention the fact that the court determined that
some of the property which husband owned at the time of the marriage was
transmuted to community property by an implied agreement.  It should be apparent
to husband that we omitted to state this fact because the implied transmutation
agreement is one of the crucial issues involved in the severable, collateral
matter we held was nonappealable.

   Husband asserts that in reaching our decision we ignored the practical
considerations.  He cites for an example the drastic gift tax consequences
attendant to the division of property which was originally separate property and
which the court found was transmuted to community property. Practical
considerations do not make a nonappealable order appealable. Further, the trial
court's decision as to the transmutation is an interim decision and there can be
no tax consequences until the community property has been divided and the
judgment has become final.

   Husband complains because we did not discuss the cases of Degnan v. Morrow
(1969) 2 Cal.App.3d 358 [82 Cal.Rptr. 557] and Clovis Ready Mix Co. v. Aetna
Freight Lines (1972) 25 Cal.App.3d 276 [101 Cal.Rptr. 820]. He maintains that
these cases support his position that we should have  entertained the appeal on
the community property issue.

   In Degnan plaintiff and defendant entered into a partnership on a real estate
development; they sought a dissolution of the partnership, a partnership
accounting, and the partition of certain partnership real property. Thereafter,
an appeal was taken from the court's order partitioning the real property though
the judgment made no provision for the dissolution of the partnership; the trial
court had declared that the partners owned the real property "jointly and
equally" and if they were unable to agree on an equal division they were to sell
the property and divide the proceeds equally.  In entertaining the appeal, the
appellate court merely held, in essence, that the partition of the real property
was separate and collateral to the partnership dissolution and that the court's
partition order made a final determination of property rights; it also directed
the performance of an act, i.e., the sale of the property if the  parties could
not agree on a division.  In short, the appellate court treated the partition
order as a severable matter in which nothing further of a judicial nature had to
be done.

   In Clovis Ready Mix Co., a premature appeal was taken from a trial court's
order granting a partial summary judgment and dismissing plaintiff's complaint
before issues raised by the cross-complaint were adjudicated.  The court treated
the appeal as a petition for an extraordinary writ and resolved the legal
issues.  Husband relies upon this case to argue that we should entertain the
appeal on the issue of the nature and character of the community property in the
interest of justice and to avoid further delays.  Extraordinary writs, such as
mandamus or prohibition, are often used to resolve legal issues raised by
pleadings or motions granting partial summary judgments in order to avoid
hardships and unnecessary litigation where the lower court's ruling bars a
substantial portion of a party's cause from being heard on the merits.  (See
e.g., Vasquez  v. Superior Court (1971) 4 Cal.3d 800, 807 [94 Cal.Rptr. 796, 484
P.2d 964, 53 A.L.R.3d 513].) No such situation is involved in the present case.
In fact, before a final division of the community property the trial court may
be induced to change its position as to the extent, nature and character of
community property, thus curing any possible error.  (See 5 Witkin, Cal.
Procedure (2d ed. 1971) Extraordinary Writs, § 52, p. 3827.)

   Husband insists that the trial court's determination that wife should
reimburse husband for the temporary spousal support payments finds justification
in the court's power to achieve an equitable division of the community property.
He contends the court's decision determining that a substantial portion of his
separate property was transmuted into community property means that wife has a
one-half interest in some very substantial income-producing assets, and
accordingly the accounting adjustment ordered by the trial court as to the
already paid temporary spousal support was in effect a determination that the
community property and not husband would bear the burden of wife's support.
(See Civ. Code, § 4805.) If this is true, and if husband used his separate
property to make the temporary spousal support payments, husband should not seek
reimbursement directly from wife but from the community.

   Husband claims that this court itself has engaged in piecemeal appellate
review by considering some but not all of the judicial determinations appearing
in the interlocutory judgment of dissolution of marriage. In particular, he
mentions our review of the order requiring  wife to reimburse husband for the
temporary spousal support payments and the declaratory judgment determining the
Nevada divorce decree to be invalid.  Both matters are severable and collateral
to the other matters involved in this case, and the lower court's resolution of
these matters left nothing further of a judicial nature to be done; as such,
both judicial determinations are final for the purposes of appeal.  (See In re
Marriage of Skelley, supra, 18 Cal.3d 365, 368; Meehan v. Hopps, supra, 45
Cal.2d 213, 217; 6  Witkin, Cal. Procedure (2d ed. 1971) Appeal, §§ 38-40, pp.
4052-4055.)

   The purported appeals from that part of the judgment delineating the
community property and from all interim orders affecting the ultimate
distribution of the community property are dismissed.  That part of the judgment
ordering wife to reimburse husband for all temporary spousal support paid to her
pursuant to the pendente lite spousal support orders is reversed.  All parts of
the judgment that otherwise are final, the propriety of which are dependent upon
the ultimate distribution of the community property (including the order denying
spousal support, the order relating to the $ 3,000-a-month payments to be made
to wife, the order pertaining to attorney's fees and costs and the various final
orders concerned with reimbursements that are to take place before the community
property is divided), are reversed with directions to the trial court to
reconsider the issues raised by such orders in light of the ultimate division of
the community property. In all other respects, the judgment is affirmed.  The
parties are to bear their own costs on appeal.


                              84 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In re the Marriage of CHRIS C. and GREG A. HAMER. CHRIS C.
                HAMER, Appellant, v. GREG A. HAMER, Respondent.

                                  No. A087332.

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FIRST APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION FOUR

           81 Cal. App. 4th 712; 97 Cal. Rptr. 2d 195; 2000 Cal. App.
                     LEXIS 481; 2000 Daily Journal DAR 6505


                             May 18, 2000, Decided

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     The Publication Statuts of this Document has been
Changed by the Court from Unpublished to Published June 15, 2000.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Humboldt County. Super. Ct. No. 94FL0182.
Joyce Hinrichs, Temporary Judge. *

*   Pursuant to California Constitution, article VI, section 21.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports

(1a) (1b) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 109--Child and Spousal Support
Orders--Enforcement--Wage Assignment Order--Spouse's Waiver of Right to Collect
Support.  --In a postdissolution proceeding, the trial court erred in granting
the husband's motion to quash a 1998 wage assignment order on the ground that
the wife had waived her right to collect the support reflected in the November
1993 final judgment. In addition, even though an order on the husband's motion
to modify support had been filed in October 1993, reducing child support and
suspending spousal support, the permanent November 1993 support order superseded
that earlier, temporary support order. Once entered, the judgment for child and
spousal support was per se enforceable until paid in full and was not
retroactively modifiable either as to accrued arrearages or any interest due
thereon. The Legislature has made it clear that a lack of diligence can no
longer be asserted or considered as a defense to the enforcement of child
support orders and the collection of arrears (Fam. Code, §§ 3651, subd. (c),
4502, 5100, 5101; Code Civ. Proc., § 683.130, subd. (c)). Further, the husband
presented no evidence of an express oral modification agreement with the wife,
and mere acquiescence in payment of an amount of child and spousal support less
than that provided by a final dissolution judgment is not sufficient to
constitute a waiver. The wife's four-year delay was not conduct so inconsistent
with an intent to enforce her rights to support as to induce a reasonable belief
that those rights had been relinquished. Also, since the husband did not
demonstrate prejudice, laches did not apply.

   [See 11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (9th ed. 1990) Husband and Wife, § 216;
10 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (9th ed. 1989) Parent and Child, § 297.]

(2) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 109--Child and Spousal Support Orders
--Enforcement--Defense of Laches.  --Despite substantive and significant changes
in the statutory provisions governing enforcement of child and spousal support
orders between 1992 and 1994 (Fam. Code §§ 4502, 5100, 5101), the defense of
laches is still available to thwart a stale attempt at enforcement of a judgment
for past due spousal support or the collection of child support arrearages.

COUNSEL: Stokes, Steeves, Rowe & Hammer and John R. Stokes III for Appellant.

Greg A. Hamer, in pro. per., for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Sepulveda, J., with Hanlon, P. J., and Reardon, J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: Sepulveda

OPINION

     SEPULVEDA, J.

   Chris C. Hamer timely appeals from an order quashing a wage assignment that
she obtained in April 1998 against her former husband, respondent Greg A. Hamer,
to compel payment of certain child and spousal support arrearages for the period
November 1993 through May 1997.  1 The trial court found that, by her conduct,
Chris waived any right to collect the unpaid support, which was computed under
the terms of the final judgment entered on November 12, 1993, in the dissolution
action.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   For
convenience, we will refer to the parties by their first names. Obviously, no
disrespect is intended by our use of this shorthand device.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   We conclude that the trial court's order quashing the wage assignment is
contrary to case law and statutes governing the enforcement of support orders,
and that it is not supported by substantial evidence. Nor can the portions of
the order relating to collection of child support be sustained, as Greg urges,
as an exercise of the trial court's inherent power to craft an "equitable"
remedy. Thus, the trial court's order will be reversed.

I. FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

   Chris filed a petition for dissolution in Ventura County Superior Court on
December 4, 1992. An order for temporary child and spousal support was made on
December 23, 1992, and, pursuant to stipulation, Chris was permitted to move to
Humboldt County with the parties' three children. A further stipulated order
regarding custody, as well as child and spousal support, was made at a
settlement conference on April 21, 1993 (the April 1993 support orders). Under
the terms of the April 1993 support orders, Greg was required to pay $ 1,860 per
month in child support and $ 140 per month in spousal support. A separate order
regarding the property settlement was entered the same day. Both of the April
21, 1993 orders were handwritten. A stipulated judgment was subsequently
circulated for signature by the attorneys and parties. The stipulated judgment
provided for child and spousal support in the same amounts set forth in the
April 1993 support orders, and also included the parties' agreements with
respect to property, custody, and visitation.

    On August 2, 1993, while the stipulated judgment was being circulated for
signature, Greg--acting without counsel, although he still had an attorney of
record--filed a motion in Ventura County Superior Court, seeking modification of
the December 1992 custody order and the April 1993 support orders. Greg asked
for child support to be set "Per schedule," and that the April 1993 spousal
support order be terminated. In a declaration filed on September 27, 1993, in
response to the modification motion, Chris stated: "I do consent to a
modification of support, commencing November 1, 1993, based upon the income of
both parties at that time."

   Greg's modification motion was heard in chambers on October 19, 1993, with
Chris's attorney present. Chris testified that she did not attend the hearing
because she was "an emotional wreck," overwhelmed with work and the children. An
order on Greg's modification motion was filed October 21, 1993 (the October 1993
order). The October 1993 order reduced child support to $ 1,666 per month,
suspended spousal support (with a reservation of jurisdiction), and modified the
custody  and visitation orders. In the October 1993 order, Greg's visitation was
conditioned on his compliance with his son's psychological counseling
requirements, as well as Greg's attendance at a parenting class. Chris testified
that she received the October 1993 order in the mail but did not read it. She
was assured by her attorney that she should not worry about it and that he would
handle the matter.

   Greg admits he signed the stipulated judgment sometime between September 16
and 22, 1993. Chris did not sign the stipulated judgment until October 21, 1993.
2 At the time, she was in Eureka. The stipulated judgment was signed by the
trial court judge on November 5, 1993, and filed in Ventura County Superior
Court on November 12, 1993 (the November 1993 judgment). Notice of entry of the
November 1993 judgment was served on Greg's counsel on November 12, 1993. Greg
admits he received a copy of the notice of entry of judgment from his attorney
shortly thereafter.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Greg
concedes that the trial court erred when it found that Chris signed the "marital
settlement agreement" in June 1993.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Greg never made child or spousal support payments in the amounts specified in
the November 1993 judgment. When he paid support, it was in the amounts stated
in the October 1993 order, less offsets he elected to take. In January 1994,
Chris obtained a wage assignment to enforce the support orders contained in the
judgment, but never collected any money pursuant thereto.  3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   The same
judge, Robert C. Bradley, signed the April 1993 support orders, the October 1993
order, the November 1993 judgment, and the January 1994 wage assignment order.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    In February 1994, by stipulation of the parties, venue for further family
law proceedings was changed to Humboldt County. As far as this record
discloses, there were no further proceedings until December 1997, when Greg
filed a motion to modify child support, albeit without specifying which order he
was seeking to modify. In her responsive papers, Chris indicated she would
consent to Greg's request that future child support be set at the guidelines
amount. (See Fam. Code, § 4055.) 4 However, on February 11, 1998, Chris signed
an affidavit of arrearage for the period May 1993 through February 1998. Based
on Chris's affidavit, the Family Support Division of the Humboldt County
District Attorney's office obtained a wage assignment order on April 15, 1998,
to collect arrearages of $ 23,252.79 for child support and $ 1,750.21 for
spousal support.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   All
further statutory references are to the Family Code unless otherwise indicated.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   On May 15, 1998, Greg filed a motion seeking spousal support from Chris in
the amount of $ 1,750 per month, and asking that the November 1993 judgment "be
quashed based on equity." On July 17, 1998, the parties agreed to reduce Greg's
future child support obligation to $ 1,150 per month and to eliminate spousal
support, effective January 1, 1998.

   On June 5, 1998, the trial court held a hearing on Greg's motion to modify
the April 1993 support orders. Chris testified that she did not discover the
discrepancy between the amounts specified in the November 1993 judgment and the
amounts specified in the October 1993 order until June 1997. Greg testified that
he understood the October 1993 order to be controlling, and viewed the November
1993 judgment as "just something that made us officially divorced." He admitted
he "ignored" the November 1993 judgment insofar as it required him to pay
spousal support and a greater amount of child support.

   On September 1, 1998, the trial court entered an order finding that insofar
as Greg's motion was one to set aside the November 1993 judgment, it was filed
beyond the one-year period for modification of stipulated judgments based on
fraud or mistake. (§ 2122, subds. (a), (e).) However, the court further found
that Chris had "by  her conduct, waived her right to the support amounts
contained in the judgment filed in November 1993." Accordingly, the trial court
quashed the April 15, 1998 wage assignment order, and enjoined Chris from any
further attempt to collect the difference between the amount of support due
under the October 1993 order and the November 1993 judgment.

   Chris moved for reconsideration of the September 1, 1998 order, arguing that
it was contrary to the evidence presented at the hearing on Greg's motion. She
further contended that the trial court's order was an improper retroactive
modification of child support. (See § 4009.) In a declaration filed  in
opposition to Chris's motion for reconsideration, Greg acknowledged that he
received the January 1994 wage assignment order, realized it called for the
amounts set forth in the April 1993 support orders, and called Chris to ask for
an explanation. In a declaration filed in support of her motion for
reconsideration, Chris acknowledged that Greg called her soon after the 1994
wage assignment was served upon his employer, "shouting and otherwise
demonstrating great anger," and threatening to move to Texas and cut off all
contact with the children if she did not withdraw the wage assignment. Chris
claimed she was "upset by his outbursts and frightened by his threats," and
"finally agreed to tell [her] attorney to withdraw the wage assignment as [Greg]
demanded." Greg claimed that Chris told him the wage assignment was filed by
mistake. He did not, however, rebut or deny Chris's claims about his
intimidating conduct.

   On November 1, 1998, a court commissioner ordered the September 1, 1998 order
vacated and took the motion for reconsideration under submission. On February
19, 1999, the commissioner issued a ruling denying the motion for
reconsideration and reinstating the September 1, 1998 order. A formal order
embodying the commissioner's ruling was filed March 29, 1999. This timely appeal
followed.

II. DISCUSSION

     As we have noted, the trial court granted Greg's motion to quash the April
15, 1998 wage assignment on the grounds that Chris waived her right to the
support amounts contained in the judgment filed in November 1993. As we will
discuss, although there are two California cases that recognize and apply the
theory of postjudgment "waiver" of court-ordered child and spousal support,
recently enacted statutory provisions cast doubt upon the rules stated in those
cases. Even if those cases retain precedential value, however, the evidence in
this record was insufficient to support a finding that Chris voluntarily
relinquished her rights, and those of her children, to receive child and spousal
support as provided in the November 1993 judgment.

   We turn first to the question whether the October 1993 order or the November
1993 judgment was legally effective to determine Greg's support obligations as
of November 12, 1993, when judgment was entered and, for all intents and
purposes, the parties' dissolution action was concluded. The answer is
straightforward: the temporary support order of October 1993 was superseded by
the permanent support order in the November 1993 judgment. (In re Marriage of
Horowitz (1984) 159 Cal. App. 3d 377, 380 fn. 1 [205  Cal. Rptr. 880].) 5 Such a
conclusion is implied in the trial court's findings that Chris was initially
entitled to but "waived" any right to collect support as provided in the
November 1993 judgment, and that Greg was mistaken in his belief that the
October 1993 order governed his support obligations. Greg has admitted  that he
had notice of entry of the November 1993 judgment shortly after it was filed in
Ventura County Superior Court. Thus, once entered, the judgment for child and
spousal support was per se enforceable until paid in full, and was not
retroactively modifiable either as to accrued arrearages or any interest due
thereon. (§§ 3651, subd. (c), 4502, 5100, 5101; Code Civ. Proc., § 683.130,
subd. (c); see also In re Marriage of Garcia (1998) 67 Cal. App. 4th 693,
697-698 [79 Cal. Rptr. 2d 242].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   Although
Chris might have been able to appeal the October 1993 order (see In re Marriage
of Padilla (1995) 38 Cal. App. 4th 1212, 1216 [45 Cal. Rptr. 2d 555]), any
appeal from that order would have been rendered moot by the subsequent entry of
judgment in November 1993.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Greg does not suggest that the trial court erred, in the modification
proceedings commenced in 1997, when it concluded it had no power to vacate or
retroactively modify the November 1993 judgment based on fraud or mistake
pursuant to section 2122, subdivision (a) or (e), or any other statute providing
grounds for relief from a judgment that has been entered and become final.  6 So
we must decide whether there was any other viable legal or equitable theory
under which Greg was, or properly could have been, relieved of his support
obligations under the November 1993 judgment. As we have noted, the trial court
found and concluded that Chris "waived" any right to collect the child and
spousal support arrearages claimed pursuant to that judgment. We believe this
theory was legally and factually unsupported.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   For the
first time on appeal, however, Greg suggests that the entry of a judgment
containing the April 1993 support orders was mere "clerical error" that could
have been corrected at the time of entry and still could be corrected. (See Code
Civ. Proc., § 473, subd. (d); Estate of Goldberg (1938) 10 Cal. 2d 709, 715 [76
P.2d 508].) Greg does not cite any authority in support if this argument which
is, in any event, one he should have directed to the trial judge who signed the
1993 orders and judgment. (Code Civ. Proc., § 473, subd. (d); see also Estate of
Goldberg, supra, 10 Cal. 2d at p. 715; Martin v. Ray (1946) 74 Cal. App. 2d 922,
928 [170 P.2d 75] [trial court properly modified judgment to conform to prior
memorandum decision].) Nor does Greg cite or otherwise provide any evidence
suggesting that the rendering of the November 1993 judgment was inadvertent
judicial error. We have no way of knowing whether Judge Bradley thought better
of his October 1993 modification order or whether he overlooked it when he was
presented with, and signed, the fully executed stipulated judgment in November
1993. Either scenario is equally plausible on this record.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    There are only two California cases discussing the concept of "waiver" of a
right to support established by a final judgment. In Graham v. Graham (1959) 174
Cal. App. 2d 678 [345 P.2d 316], a 1947 divorce decree required the husband to
pay $ 50 per month in alimony and $ 80 per month in child  support. (Id. at p.
680.) In 1958, the husband filed a motion seeking to reduce his support
obligation to $ 50 per month. The wife objected to the entertainment of the
husband's motion on the ground that he had never fully complied with the
original support order and was, thus, in contempt of court and not entitled to
be heard. In an affidavit, the husband responded to the wife's contempt argument
by asserting that, within days of entry of the divorce decree, the parties had
entered into an oral agreement under which the wife was to be paid a combined
support payment of $ 25 per week, and that the husband thereafter had regularly
paid such sums to the wife. (Id. at p. 681.) At the hearing on the motion, the
husband testified as follows: " 'Well, I just told her at that time I just
couldn't pay $ 130 a month, so we talked it over and I said, "I'll pay you $ 25
a week," and that is the agreement I came to and I have been paying it ever
since.' " (Id. at p. 682.) The wife admitted she had never taken any legal steps
to enforce the 1947 support order, but denied that she had agreed to this
reduction. As the Graham court noted, moreover, nothing in the husband's
testimony showed that the wife actually agreed to accept $ 25 a week in full
payment of the court-ordered amount. (Id. at pp. 681, 682.) Nevertheless, the
trial court found on the conflicting evidence, and inferences arising therefrom,
that the husband was not in arrears because the wife had "waived" all sums in
excess of $ 25 per week. (Id. at p.  683.) The trial court then proceeded to
grant the husband's motion, in part, reducing his child support obligation to $
15 per week. (Id. at p. 681.)

   The wife appealed the modification order, contending that an order of support
cannot as a matter of law be modified by an executed oral agreement or as to
past due installments. (Graham v. Graham, supra, 174 Cal. App. 2d at p. 683.)
The Court of Appeal affirmed,  holding as follows: "Although no case has been
found expressly holding that one may waive the benefit of an award for alimony
and [child] support, the law is well settled that one may waive any civil right
[citations], and that 'any one may waive the advantage of a law intended solely
for his benefit.' [Citation.] A wife may waive her right to alimony pendente
lite [citation], and her right to avoid a transfer of community real property
executed solely by her husband. [Citation.] There appears to be no valid reason
why a woman cannot also waive her right to a portion of the alimony and [child]
support provided for by a decree of divorce so as to relieve her former husband
of a charge of contempt based upon a wilful disobedience of said order. The
mandate is clear that a court may not modify an award as to accrued installments
([former] Civ. Code, § 139), but that is not the situation here. And the
question here is not whether the parties themselves modified the court order but
rather whether or not a waiver was effected by an agreement between [the wife]
and [the husband]. [P] . . . . Although here the evidence of a waiver by express
agreement certainly is equivocal, yet when the testimony is considered in
connection with the conduct of [the] plaintiff in failing to take any steps to
enforce payment in accordance with terms of the decree for over 10 years, we
cannot say as a matter of law that the conclusion drawn by the trial court was
not justified. We therefore hold that the finding that [husband] was not in
arrears and therefore not in contempt and entitled to be heard finds adequate
support both in the facts and in the law." (Graham, supra, 174 Cal. App. 2d at
pp. 683-684.) 7

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   The
Graham court did not explain how the right to receive child support may be
deemed an " 'advantage of a law intended solely for his [or her] benefit,' "
such that a parent may validly waive that right. (Graham v. Graham, supra, 174
Cal. App. 2d at pp. 683-684.) On the contrary, even in 1959, we would have
thought it well settled that child support is owed to the child, not to the
spouse identified in the support order as the recipient of child support
payments. (See Jackson v. Jackson (1975) 51 Cal. App. 3d 363, 367 [124 Cal.
Rptr. 101], and cases cited therein; see also Evans v. Evans (1908) 154 Cal.
644, 645-646 [98 P. 1044] [a mother may not forfeit her children's right to
support from their father].) This analytical flaw in the reasoning of the Graham
court may explain why no other published case has upheld a finding of
post-judgment "waiver" of child support, much less invoked Graham to bar
enforcement of a final judgment containing an order for payment of child support
, and may well relegate Graham to the status of "sport."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Graham was followed by the court in In re Marriage of Paboojian (1987) 189
Cal. App. 3d 1434 [235 Cal. Rptr. 65] (Paboojian). In Paboojian, the trial court
quashed a writ of execution as to amounts of spousal support provided by a
December 1968 divorce decree that went unpaid until 1984, at which time the wife
obtained the writ to collect arrearages for the preceding 10-year period. The
obligor husband testified that he had had serious financial trouble around the
time of the divorce and had called his ex-wife in January 1969 and said, " 'I
can barely pay [child] support and you've got to agree I can't pay alimony.' "
The husband further testified that his ex-wife said, " 'Take care of the
children and forget the alimony,' " but the wife denied ever making such a
statement. The husband thereafter fully satisfied his child support obligations,
and never made any spousal support payments. On this evidence, the trial court
found that the wife "waived spousal support in the January 1969 telephone
conversation and quashed the writ of execution." (Id. at p. 1437.)

    The Court of Appeal affirmed, reasoning as follows: "  'Unless otherwise
provided by law, any person may waive the advantage of a law intended for his
[or her] benefit. (Civ. Code, § 3513.) Waiver is the voluntary relinquishment of
a known right. [Citation.] To constitute a waiver, it is essential that there be
an existing right, benefit, or advantage, a knowledge, actual or constructive,
of its existence, and an actual intention to relinquish it or conduct so
inconsistent with the intent to enforce the right in question as to induce a
reasonable belief that it has been relinquished.' " (Paboojian supra,  189 Cal.
App. 3d at p. 1437; quoting Outboard Marine Corp. v. Superior Court (1975) 52
Cal. App. 3d 30, 41 [124 Cal. Rptr. 852].) The Paboojian court relied on Graham
to conclude that an express oral agreement prospectively waiving spousal support
was sufficient to bar collection of the arrearages. (Graham v. Graham, supra,
174 Cal. App. 3d at p. 1438.)

   We conclude that neither Graham nor Paboojian supports the trial court's
order quashing the wage assignment in this case. The holding in Graham was
specifically directed to the trial court's finding that the husband was not in
contempt of court for having failed to pay child and spousal support in
conformity with the divorce decree (Graham v. Graham, supra, 174 Cal. App. 2d at
p. 684), and does not authorize a finding of waiver so as a bar to collection of
unpaid child support. If it is still good law, Paboojian might bar collection of
spousal support based on postjudgment "waiver" of the rights established by the
divorce decree. But both Graham and Paboojian are, in any event, plainly
distinguishable from the instant case.

   Unlike the husbands in Graham and Paboojian, Greg presented no evidence of an
express oral agreement with Chris to accept less than the amounts required by
the judgment of dissolution and to forego collection of the difference, or other
conduct so inconsistent with an intent to enforce the rights to support
established by the judgment as to induce a reasonable belief that those rights
had been relinquished. 8 The only evidence about the parties' postjudgment
conduct presented in the hearing on Greg's motions was--as the trial court
found--that "[Greg] paid and [Chris] accepted, according to the October 1993
order, $ 1,666 [sic] in child support and nothing in spousal support, instead of
$ 1,860 in child support and $ 140 in spousal support, according to the November
1993 judgment." However, neither Graham nor Paboojian can be stretched to say
that mere acquiescence in payment of an amount of child and spousal support less
than that provided by a final dissolution judgment is sufficient to constitute a
waiver or otherwise to bar collection of the unpaid amounts.  9

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -8   In its
statement of decision, the trial court found that "on October 19, 1993, the
parties stipulated and the judge signed an order, in regard to the August
motion, that reduced child support to $ 1,663.00 and eliminated spousal support
effective November 1993." There was no such stipulation, and Greg acknowledges
as much.
9   In response to Chris's motion for reconsideration, Greg acknowledged that he
had received a copy of the January 1994 wage assignment, calling for the support
amounts due under the April 1993 support orders and the November 1993 judgment,
and had called Chris to ask her to explain. He claimed Chris said the filing of
the wage assignment was "a mistake." In her declaration, Chris admitted that she
discussed the discrepancy between the October 1993 order and the November 1993
judgment with Greg, and that she "finally agreed" to tell her attorney to
withdraw the wage assignment order. However, she claimed that Greg had shouted
at her and frightened her into forgoing enforcement of the November 1993
judgment. The trial court did not consider or resolve the factual dispute thus
raised about the voluntariness of any agreement the parties may have reached on
these facts.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Nor did Chris wait as long to enforce her and the children's rights to
support under the November 1993 judgment as did the wives in Graham and
Paboojian, who delayed beyond the then existing, 10-year limitations period for
collection of  child and spousal support (see Code Civ. Proc., former § 681;
Szamocki v. Szamocki (1975) 47 Cal. App. 3d 812, 818 [121 Cal. Rptr. 231])
before asserting their rights under the divorce decrees in those cases. (Graham
v. Graham, supra, 174 Cal. App. 2d at p. 684 [11 years]; and Paboojian, supra,
189 Cal. App. 3d at p. 1439 [16 years].) It may have been for that reason that
the courts found it necessary to craft an equitable solution for the problems
generated by the extended delay in seeking enforcement of the right to support.
But it simply cannot be said that the four-year delay in the instant
case--especially in the absence of an express agreement to forego collection of
the unpaid amounts--was " 'conduct so inconsistent with the intent to enforce
the right in question as to induce a reasonable belief that it has been
relinquished.' " (Paboojian, supra,  at p. 1437.)

   Furthermore, whatever the merits of Graham and Paboojian when decided, 10 we
think the "waiver" rule established therein cannot be reconciled with recent
legislative developments in the area of child and spousal support enforcement.
As we have noted, the current state of the law is that a judgment for child or
spousal support, once entered, is per se enforceable until paid in full, and is
not retroactively modifiable either as to accrued arrearages or any interest due
thereon. (§§ 3651, subd. (c), 4502, 5100, 5101; Code Civ. Proc., § 683.130,
subd. (c); see also In re Marriage of Garcia, supra, 67 Cal. App. 4th 693,
697-698 ["With these legislative changes, spousal and family support orders are
enforceable in perpetuity until paid."].) These rules were established by the
Legislature in a series of statutes enacted and amended between 1992 and 1994.
(See Stats. 1992, ch. 718, § 3, pp. 3319-3320, amended Stats. 1993, ch. 876, §
1, pp. 4662-4663, operative Jan. 1, 1994; Stats. 1992, ch. 162, § 10, pp.
464-722, amended Stats. 1993, ch. 876, §§ 21, 22, pp. 4675-4676, operative Jan.
1, 1994; In re Marriage of Garcia, supra, at pp. 697-698.) By these recent
enactments, the Legislature also made clear that a lack of diligence can no
longer be asserted or considered as a defense to the enforcement of child
support orders and the collection of arrears. (See §§ 4502, 5100, 5101; In re
Marriage of Garcia, supra, at pp. 698-699.) That is, in effect, all that was
shown in this case.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -10   We have
to wonder at the rule announced in Graham and Paboojian. If an obligor and
obligee spouse have, in fact, voluntarily agreed to a reduction in the amount of
court-ordered child and/or spousal support--presumably because of some material
change of circumstances--why then would the obligor spouse not simply seek court
approval for their stipulation via a timely modification motion?
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     Greg contends, however, that we should affirm the trial court order based
on the doctrine of laches. That is, he would have us find that Chris  lost any
substantive rights she or the children might have had under the November 1993
judgment by unreasonable delay in asserting those rights, with accompanying
prejudice to him. In 1997, the Fourth Appellate District held that, despite the
"substantive and significant" changes in the statutory provisions governing
enforcement of child and spousal support orders (In re Marriage of Garcia,
supra, 67 Cal. App. 4th at p. 698, fn. 4), the defense of laches is still
available to thwart a stale attempt at enforcement of a judgment for past due
spousal support. (In re Marriage of Plescia (1997) 59 Cal. App. 4th 252, 258,
262 [69 Cal. Rptr. 2d 120].) In In re Marriage of Fogarty & Rasbeary (2000) 78
Cal. App. 4th 1353 [93 Cal. Rptr. 2d 653], Division Two of the Second Appellate
District extended the holding of In re Marriage of Plescia to the collection of
child support arrearages. (Id. at pp. 1360-1364; cf.  In re Marriage of Cutler
(2000) 79 Cal. App. 4th 460, 478 [94 Cal. Rptr. 2d 156] [declining to extend
laches defense to child support enforcement action because of father's "unclean
hands"].)   Under the facts of the present case, we do  not find that Chris's
four-year delay in seeking enforcement of the support orders constitutes laches,
as Greg has not demonstrated any undue prejudice to him from the delay. (Cf.  In
re Marriage of Plescia, supra, 59 Cal. App. 4th at pp. 256-257 [obligee spouse
delayed nine years before attempting to collect unpaid spousal support, during
which time the obligor spouse changed his position by retiring under the
assumption that there were no arrearages]; In re Marriage of Fogarty & Rasbeary,
supra, at pp. 1365-1366 [delay of 17 years before attempting to collect unpaid
child support, during which time obligor spouse failed to keep record of amounts
paid in reliance on assurances by child's custodial grandparents that he did not
have to continue paying court-ordered amount of child support, and that he could
provide for his daughter by paying for "extras" such as horse gear, summer camp,
ski trips].)

   Perhaps the real issue here is which party had the burden of clarifying which
child support orders were in effect in and after November 1993. At bottom, we
believe that Chris was entitled to rely on the entry of the November 12, 1993
judgment as establishing Greg's support obligations, and that it was incumbent
upon Greg--upon receiving notice of entry of that judgment--to move immediately
to bring the error, if any, to the trial court's attention via a motion to
correct or vacate the judgment, or by appeal. Failing that, he was free to seek
and obtain a reduction in his support obligations by stipulation or modification
motion--as he ultimately did in 1998. He was not free to simply ignore the
judgment--as he admittedly did. Having failed to avail himself of the proper
procedures for seeking modification of the support orders contained in the
November 1993 judgment, Greg is in no position to demand or obtain retroactive
approval of this conduct. (Lehrer v. Lehrer (1976) 63 Cal. App. 3d 276, 279-280
[133 Cal. Rptr. 709]  [trial court declined to quash a wage assignment to
collect amounts owing by father who stopped paying child support under the
mistaken belief it was not required after the child was emancipated]; see also
In re Marriage of Beilock (1978) 81 Cal. App. 3d 713, 730-733 [146 Cal. Rptr.
675]; Spivey v. Furtado (1966) 242 Cal. App. 2d 259, 265, 267 [51 Cal. Rptr.
362].) 11

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -11   We think
it goes without saying that an obligor spouse is not free to bully or intimidate
the obligee spouse into accepting a lesser amount of support. Of course, as we
have noted, the trial court did not resolve the factual dispute between the
parties on this issue.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

III. CONCLUSION

   For all the foregoing reasons, the order of the trial court quashing the
April 15, 1998 wage assignment is reversed. Appellant shall recover her costs.

   Hanlon, P. J., and Reardon, J., concurred.


                              85 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            In re the Marriage of JUNE H. and ARNOLD LEIB.  JUNE H.
                  LEIB, Respondent, v. ARNOLD LEIB, Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 52051

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

            80 Cal. App. 3d 629; 145 Cal. Rptr. 763; 1978 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1449


                                  May 4, 1978

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Los Angeles County, No. D 845618, Billy G.
Mills, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69--Support of Other Party--
Modification, Revocation, and Extension--Change of Conditions--Supported Party
Cohabiting With Person of Opposite Sex--Statutory Presumption.  --Under Civ.
Code, § 4801.5, as amended in 1976, a former spouse seeking relief from an order
requiring the payment of spousal support to an ex-spouse who has a relationship
with someone of the opposite sex must declare only that such relationship
includes cohabitation to initiate the proceeding.  If cohabitation is found to
exist, the rebuttable presumption of decreased need for spousal support must be
overcome by the supported spouse. No proof of holding out as "husband and wife"
is required.

(2) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69--Support of Other Party--
Modification, Revocation, and Extension--Change of Conditions--Supported Party
Cohabiting With Person of Opposite Sex--Statutory Purpose.  --The legislative
intent underlying Civ. Code, § 4801.5, as amended in 1976 (spousal support to a
person cohabiting with one of the opposite sex) was to treat those to whom the
section applies without penalty.  The statute reflects the realistic procedure,
recently evolved in the area of domestic relations, that focuses attention not
upon actions as culpable or innocent, but upon how those actions should be
treated in reaching fair and equitable results to society in general as well as
between the litigating parties.

(3) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 68--Support of Other Party--
Modification, Revocation, and Extension--Factors Considered--Supported Party
Cohabiting With Person of Opposite Sex--Statutory Presumption.  --In determining
whether evidence has rebutted the presumption of decreased need for spousal
support raised by a recipient's cohabitation with a person of the opposite sex (
Civ. Code, § 4801.5, as amended in 1976), it is not enough to balance income
against expenditures. What a former spouse receiving spousal support "needs"
under the statute is made up of a variety of factors viewed within the totality
of particular and changing circumstances, and to this end there must be a
thorough and meaningful consideration of the factors enumerated in Civ. Code, §
4801 (spousal support in decree of dissolution).

(4a) (4b) (4c) (4d) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69--Support of Other
Party--Modification, Revocation, and Extension--Change of Conditions--Supported
Party Cohabiting With Person of Opposite Sex--Failure to Rebut Statutory
Presumption of Decreased Need--Gift of Services.  --A former wife who, with her
child, had been cohabiting with a man for more than two years while receiving
from her former husband $ 250 per month in child support and $ 500 per month in
spousal support as set forth in the dissolution decree, failed to overcome the
presumption of decreased need for spousal support ( Civ. Code, § 4801.5, as
amended in 1976) on judicial application by the former husband to revoke such
support.  A reduction to a nominal $ 10 per month was appropriate where the
evidence showed that, although $ 500 per month approximated the difference
between her potential monthly income (without spousal support) and her total
monthly expenditures for herself and the child (including $ 300 toward the
rent), the only partial repayment, from the man she was living with, that could
be deemed to have been made out of his $ 30,000 annual income toward the
marketable value of her services as homemaker, housekeeper, cook, and companion,
was his gift to her of the use of one of his three Ferraris and a six-week trip
to Europe.

(5a) (5b) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69--Support of Other Party--
Modification, Revocation, and Extension--Change of Conditions--Supported Party
Cohabiting With Person of Opposite Sex--Statutory Presumption--Gift of Services.
--Unmarried persons of the opposite sex have the right to contract expressly or
implicitly the terms upon which they will live and cohabit, but a person,
whether male or female, receiving spousal support while cohabiting with a person
of the opposite sex cannot give away his or her services where the result is to
create a status of apparent continuing need and thus to overcome the presumption
of decreased need created by Civ. Code, § 4801.5, subd. (a), as amended in 1976.


(6) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69--Support of Other Party--
Modification, Revocation, and Extension--Change of Conditions--Supported Party
Cohabiting With Person of Opposite Sex--Intent Underlying Statute.  --The
provisions in Civ. Code, § 4801.5, as amended in 1976 (spousal support to a
person cohabiting with one of the opposite sex) referring to change of
circumstances and creating a presumption, from cohabitation, of decreased need
for spousal support, reflect a legislative intent, when read together with Civ.
Code, § 4801 (spousal support in decree of dissolution), that the requirements
of a divorced spouse receiving spousal support while cohabiting with another
person of the opposite sex should by reason of such "changed circumstances" be
reassessed, and that the reassessment should reflect and take into account all
factors and facets that, based on evidence before a trial court, may be properly
associated with the supported spouse and the cohabiting partner.

COUNSEL: Harold Drooz for Appellant.

Jules S. Rensen for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Roth, P. J., with Compton and Beach, JJ., concurring.

OPINION BY: ROTH

OPINION

     On February 25, 1975, June Leib (respondent) after an approximate 15-year
marriage, pursuant to her petition, received a dissolution judgment of her
marriage to Arnold Leib.  By the terms thereof, June was awarded custody of
Paul, born in 1962; $ 250 per month plus extras for his support; her one-half of
the community property; $ 500 per month spousal support until her remarriage,
the death of herself or Arnold or the further order of the court.

   Prior to the entry of the judgment of dissolution, June and Paul commenced to
reside and live with Leonard Elbaum as a  family unit and did continuously
reside and live as a unit to and through March 10, 1977, the date of the hearing
on the order which is the subject of this appeal.

   June and Leonard cohabited, and in domestic, social and other respects lived
as man and wife except that during the period of the relationship they shared
expenses as detailed infra and did not at any time hold themselves out as
husband and wife. To the contrary, each maintained separate names, bank and all
other accounts, managed severally their separate properties, and in all social
and other contacts maintained separate legal identities.

   On August 11, 1976, Arnold initiated a motion based on Civil Code section
4801.5 as it then existed demanding June to show cause why the portion of the
dissolution judgment requiring him to pay spousal support to her should not be
revoked.  That statute then provided:

   "Upon the petition of a spouse who has been ordered to pay support under
Section 4801, the court shall revoke the order for support upon proof that the
spouse to whom support has been ordered to be paid is living with a person of
the opposite sex and holding himself or herself out as the spouse of the person
for a total of 30 days or more, either consecutive or nonconsecutive, although
not married to the person.  The court shall order the restitution of any support
which has been paid since the date upon which the spouse to whom support has
been ordered to be paid commenced holding himself or herself out as the spouse
of the person."

    Arnold's motion was denied. The trial judge held: ". . . neither . . .
[June] or [Leonard] . . . have [sic] been holding themselves out as husband and
wife or as spouses . . . ." 1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Arnold
filed another motion based on the same code section on December 8, 1976, and
affidavits pro and con were filed with respect thereto.  The hearing on the
motion, however, was aborted.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   On February 24, 1977, Arnold filed a motion for the same relief based on the
same numbered section as it had been amended in 1976, effective January 1, 1977.
The amended section 4801.5 reads as follows:

   "(a) Except as otherwise agreed to by the parties in writing, there shall be
a rebuttable presumption, affecting the burden of proof, of decreased need for
support if the supported party is cohabiting with a person of the opposite sex.
Upon such a finding of changed circumstances, the court may modify the payment
of support as provided for in subdivision (a) of Section 4801.

   "(b) Holding oneself out to be the husband or wife of the person with whom
one is cohabiting is not necessary to constitute cohabitation as the term is
used in this section.

   "(c) Nothing in this section shall preclude later modification of support
upon proof of change of circumstances."

   On March 10, 1977, after a hearing of the February motion, the trial court
made a minute order denying Arnold relief.  Arnold's appeal herein is from this
order.  He asserts the decision of the trial court was clearly erroneous in that
the undisputed facts provided insubstantial evidence as a matter of law to
justify a holding that the presumption of decreased need under section 4801.5
was overcome by respondent.  Alternatively, he claims the undisputed facts show
that he has shown by a preponderance of the evidence no need for continued
spousal support. No findings were requested by either party as permitted by
Civil Code section 4801 and none were made. 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Upon
conclusion of oral argument, the trial judge said:

   "The matter having been submitted, the Court determines as follows:

   "First pursuant to the stipulation that the petitioner is a person who
resides with another person of the opposite sex, actually the word is,
'co-habitates,' with a person of the opposite sex. The Court feels after
listening to the evidence that the petitioner has rebutted the presumption of
decreased need for support as required by Section 4801.5 of the Civil Code.

   "The Court denies the motion to modify spousal support."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     It is apparent that the current section 4801.5 is markedly different from
the section as it read before it was amended.  Because section 4801.5 has not
heretofore been interpreted by any appellate court of this state, we feel it
necessary to discuss what appears to be its primary purpose and its significance
in relation to former section 4801.5 and recent cases in related areas of family
law.

     Presently, a former spouse seeking relief from an order requiring the
payment of spousal support to an ex-spouse who has a relationship with someone
of the opposite sex must declare only that such relationship includes
cohabitation to initiate the proceeding.  If cohabitation is found to exist, the
rebuttable presumption of decreased need for spousal support must be overcome by
the supported spouse. No holding out as husband and wife is required for 30 or
any number of days.

   To properly construe the amended section 4801.5 in its application to what
must be proved by the contesting parties, it is necessary to note what appears
to be legislative declaration of state policy that cohabitation by a supported
spouse with a person of the opposite sex is not in and of itself sufficient to
revoke or reduce spousal support. In brief, if the presumption of decreased need
is overcome, two divorced spouses of the opposite sex each receiving support by
way of a prior dissolution from their respective divorced spouses may cohabit
publicly or otherwise (and the statute does not limit the length of time) and
continue to receive spousal support in whole or in part conditioned only on
proof of continuing need.

   We digress briefly to discuss the law under section 4801.5 before it was
amended.

   We construed it in Lang v. Superior Court (1975) 53 Cal.App.3d 852 [126
Cal.Rptr. 122].

   The parties in Lang were not formally married and there was no proof or
attempted proof of cohabitation, but each of the three elements statutorily
required by section 4801.5 prior to January 1, 1977, to wit: (1) living
together, (2) holding themselves out as married, and (3) that (1) and (2)
existed for at least 30 days had been proved.  The result in Lang impelled by
section 4801.5 before its amendment was harsh. 3 Similar  consequences to a
divorced spouse receiving support are now avoided by the Legislature's
pronouncement in section 4801.5.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   The
statutory construction of section 4801.5 as it existed in 1974 when this court
decided Lang was fortified by In re Marriage of Ludwig (1976) 58 Cal.App.3d 744
[130 Cal.Rptr. 234] and also by construction of a similar statute by the Court
of Appeal in New York (Cf. the recent case of Northrup v. Northrup (1978) 43
N.Y.2d 566 [402 N.Y.S.2d 997, 373 N.E.2d 1221] which deals with earlier New York
cases similar to Lang.  There, situations such as the one in Lang and the one at
bench are still governed by section 248 of the Domestic Relations Law of New
York.  That section is similar to California's section 4801.5 as it was prior to
January 1, 1977.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    At bench, cohabitation is admitted.  Respondent contends, and the trial
court held, although there is no formal finding, respondent had overcome the
presumption.

   We disagree.

   Before we discuss and analyze the facts, it seems necessary to reiterate what
should now enjoy common understanding; namely, that the evolution of the law in
the area of domestic relations has been toward eliminating litigation of fault
within or outside marriage between the contending parties so as to relieve
courts of the burden of determining questions generated by charges of one
against the other of irresponsibility, immorality and/or other conduct of
omission or commission within the ambit of domestic disputes.  The policy of the
law as we understand it is to avoid those thorny and oftentimes disagreeable
considerations in favor of a more pragmatic solution whereby substantial
objective justice may be rendered between contending parties, irrespective of
the fault of either.   Such realistic procedure focuses attention not upon
actions as culpable or innocent, but upon how those actions should be treated in
reaching fair and equitable results to society  in general as well as between
the litigating parties. 4

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   Alimony
was unknown to the common law though it was not unfamiliar in ecclesiastical
courts.  In this country, it became a typical adjunct of divorce, created by
statute and accepted generally as an award to a wife from a husband as a
substitute for marital support lost through the husband's fault. ( Miller v.
Superior Court (1937) 9 Cal.2d 733 [72 P.2d 868]; Mueller v. Mueller (1955) 44
Cal.2d 527 [282 P.2d 869]; Hall v. Superior Court (1955) 45 Cal.2d 377 [289 P.2d
431]; Estate of Fawcett (1965) 232 Cal.App.2d 770 [43 Cal.Rptr. 160]; Brawman v.
Brawman (1962) 199 Cal.App.2d 876 [19 Cal.Rptr. 106]; Cardew v. Cardew (1961)
192 Cal.App.2d 502 [13 Cal.Rptr. 620]), though that definition was often
softened to avoid its abrasive characteristics.  ( Newman v. Newman (1969) 268
Cal.App.2d 895 [74 Cal.Rptr. 444].)

   The Family Law Act (Stats. 1969, ch. 1608, operative January 1, 1970) makes
no use of the term, speaks only of support or, perhaps by way of partial
misnomer, spousal support, and eliminates reference to the notion of fault as a
factor to be considered in effecting economic justice between parties upon
dissolution of marriage.

   "Under the preexisting law an award of spousal support rested in the judicial
discretion of the trial court upon consideration of the circumstances of the
parties, but one of the circumstances to be considered was the comparative
marital fault of the parties.  (See former Civ. Code, § 139; Nunes v. Nunes, 62
Cal.2d 33, 38 [41 Cal.Rptr. 5, 396 P.2d 37].) There was involved 'a concept of
granting support to the "innocent" or against the "guilty."' (Attorney's Guide
to Family Law Act Practice (Cont.Ed.Bar 1970) p. 139, § 3.3; see Arnold v.
Arnold, 76 Cal.App.2d 877, 885-886 [174 P.2d 674]; Webber v. Webber, 33 Cal.2d
153, 157-158 [199 P.2d 934].) Under The Family Law Act the matter of spousal
support is still addressed to the judicial discretion of the trial court upon a
consideration of 'the circumstances of the respective parties, including the
duration of the marriage, and the ability of the supported spouse to engage in
gainful employment without interfering with the interests of the children of the
parties in the custody of such spouse.' ( Civ. Code, § 4801, subd. (a).)
However, the specific circumstances now mentioned in the statute (the duration
of the marriage and the ability of the supported spouse to engage in gainful
employment) have long been among the circumstances considered by the courts in
making awards of spousal support. (See The California Family Lawyer (Cont.Ed.Bar
1963) § 28.23, pp. 1333-1336 and cases cited; Attorney's Guide to Family Law Act
Practice (Cont.Ed.Bar 1970) supra.) Thus, the change effected by Civil Code,
section 4801 was the elimination of the consideration of the comparative marital
fault of the parties and the 'concept of granting support to the "innocent" or
against the "guilty."' (See Attorney's Guide to Family Law Act Practice
(Cont.Ed.Bar 1970) supra, § 3.3, pp. 139-140.) In determining the need for, the
amount of and the duration of spousal support under The Family Law Act the court
is to ignore marital fault and is to base its determination solely on the
circumstances of the parties, including the duration of their marriage and the
ability of the supported spouse to engage in gainful employment. ( Civ. Code, §
4801, subd. (a).) '"Circumstances" includes "practically everything which has a
legitimate bearing upon the present and prospective matters relating to the
lives of both parties" [Citation omitted.] "[It] refers to the needs of the
parties and the abilities of the parties to meet such needs; and in measuring
such circumstances, consideration should be given to property owned and
obligations to be met as well as ability to earn and actual earnings." [Citation
omitted.]' ( Hall v. Hall, 42 Cal.2d 435, 442 [267 P.2d 249]; see also the
enumeration of factors to be considered set forth in The California Family
Lawyer (Cont.Ed.Bar 1963) supra.)" ( In re Marriage of Rosan (1972) 24
Cal.App.3d 885; 892-893 [101 Cal.Rptr. 295].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     The new statute fortifies this conclusion.  In addition to the distinctions
already mentioned between the new section 4801.5 and the old, there are other
significant distinctions.

   The old statute:

   (1) upon proof of its requirements mandates ". . . the court shall revoke the
order . . ." (italics added) and provides for restitution of money paid;

   (2) makes no alternate provision for a decrease instead of revocation;

   (3) makes no provision for "later modification . . . upon proof of change of
circumstances."

   The above factors suggest that the Legislature's intent in its enactment of
the current section 4801.5 was to treat those to whom the section  applies
without penalty.  The omission in section 4801.5 to fix duration of cohabitation
may, too, be the reason for subdivision (c) which allows the court to deal with
the parties upon the basis of circumstances as they exist from time to  time on
occasion when either party makes an application for relief.  In many, though not
all, instances, fairness and equity in this respect depend solely upon economic
considerations.  Such is the case here.  We need not consider nor pass upon the
morality of the relationship between June and Leonard nor upon their intent or
the lack of it to evade section 4801.5 to examine whether under that section
June or Arnold is entitled to prevail.   What is pertinent is a thorough and
meaningful consideration of those factors enumerated in section 4801 5 and their
proper relation to the question of diminished need under section 4801.5.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   In
pertinent part, section 4801 provides:

   "(a) In any judgment decreeing the dissolution of a marriage or a legal
separation of the parties, the court may order a party to pay for the support of
the other party any amount, and for such period of time, as the court may deem
just and reasonable.  In making the award, the court shall consider the
following circumstances of the respective parties:

   "(1) The earning capacity and needs of each spouse.

   "(2) The obligations and assets, including the separate property, of each.

   "(3) The duration of the marriage.

   "(4) The ability of the supported spouse to engage in gainful employment
without interfering with the interests of dependent children in the custody of
the spouse.

   "(5) The time required for the supported spouse to acquire appropriate
education, training, and employment.

   "(6) The age and health of the parties.

   "(7) The standard of living of the parties.

   "(8) Any other factors which it deems just and equitable."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    It is not enough under such analysis to balance income against expenditures
to show need or its diminution. 6 On the contrary, to do so improperly restricts
the meaning of the word "need" in section 4801.5.  What a former spouse
receiving spousal support "needs" under the statute is made up of a variety of
factors viewed within the totality of particular and changing circumstances.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   It is
clear as pointed out (infra) June's standard of living, which is relevant but
not controlling, is not determined solely by her income and expenditures but by
a variety of factors which include in addition, her continued relationship with
another who could provide her with more than she has or could hope for without
the relationship.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Discussion Of The Facts

   June and her son Paul now live with Leonard in a home purchased by Leonard in
1976.  June has, since the divorce, paid her living expenses and those of Paul
and has had for some time past and currently still has  approximately $ 1140
total monthly expenses against her total monthly income of $ 859, made up of $
750 received from Arnold in child and spousal support and $ 109 from interest on
savings and dividends on stock.  Major items of expense testified to by June
comprise: $ 325 per month for food for herself and Paul; $ 300 per month rental
for herself and Paul which she pays to Leonard; and $ 515 for necessary
household and living expenses for herself and Paul covering laundry, clothing,
insurance, dental, entertainment, installment payments and other incidental
living costs.  June testified she drives a 1969 Ferrari automobile provided by
Leonard at no expense to her except for gasoline; she, Leonard and Paul, among
other trips, went on a six-week trip to Europe in 1976 for which she paid a
portion of Paul's expenses with Leonard paying all other costs; she has stock of
the value of $ 4,000 and two savings accounts--one of $ 18,000 and another of "$
37,000 something," 7 all of which were included with other substantial items of
property in the dissolution judgment as her share of the community property.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   This sum
is maintained in respondent's name in a four-year account.  No allowance was
made for any interest earnings accruing to respondent's benefit since, according
to her testimony, "that can't be touched."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    June also testified that the sum of $ 325 spent by her monthly for food and
household supplies was only a part of the total spent by her and Leonard for
that purpose but that she did not know how much Leonard spent for similar
supplies, 8 but she said  Leonard paid the expenses of the new home and his
personal living expenses.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -8
Respondent's lack of knowledge about such matters was considerable.  She did not
know the purchase price of the house in which she lives, nor how much Leonard
put down against its cost, nor what were the mortgage payments, nor the monthly
utility expenses.  She did not know how much she received in cash from her
settlement with appellant.  She did not know how much Leonard paid for her
portion of the 1976 European trip. She did not know what Leonard spent for
insurance on her Ferrari, nor for repairs and maintenance respecting it nor did
she know its value.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Leonard, an automobile lease salesman, testified that: he acquired the new
house in 1976 at a cost of $ 90,900; his annual income was and is $ 30,000; loan
payments on the new house were $ 572 a month, with taxes and utilities
approximately $ 300 and $ 140 per month, respectively, and monthly maintenance,
$ 100.  Insurance on June's Ferrari totaled $ 1,340 per year with a cost of
maintenance in 1976 of "close to $ 4,000;" he owned two Ferraris other than the
one used by June; his expenses for food and "if you want to call it
entertainment, eating out, would run somewhere in the neighborhood of four to $
500 a month." In pertinent part, Leonard also testified:

    [By Appellant's Counsel:]

   "Q. Do you receive any money from Mrs. Leib in connection with the payment of
the mortgage on this house that you just purchased?

   "A. Not against the mortgage, no.

   "Q. Okay.  Well, for what purpose do you receive money?

   "A. I receive from Mrs. Leib $ 300 a month.  It is based on all that she can
afford.

   ". . . .

   "Q. And what was that conversation?

   "A. At that time, the conversation was that her particular consideration
would be $ 400 against the total expenses.  But she couldn't make the grade.  So
I says all right.  Fine.

   ". . . .

   "Q. Would you tell us what your annual income is, Mr. Elbaum?

    "A. My annual income is $ 30,000 a year.

   "Q. According to your figures, your monthly expenses amount to $ 2,000.  Is
that about right?

   "A. I would say they come pretty close.

   "Q. So that would be $ 24,000 a year and you subtract the contribution Mrs.
Leib makes to you of $ 300 a month, $ 3,600.  You come out with about $ 20,000
that you have to pay.  Is that about right?

   "A. If you don't take my partner, Uncle Sam.

   "Q. So before taxes --

   "A. That's right.  I would say it would be close."

   Application Of Civil Code Section 4801.5

   It is clear that for approximately two and one-half years since the entry of
the dissolution judgment June has been continuously living with Leonard and
provides to him the identical services a nonworking wife is expected to and
generally does furnish to a working husband.  The services of a woman or a man,
cohabiting or living on a platonic basis with a person of the opposite sex
profitably employed, who renders services as homemaker, housekeeper, cook and
companion have money value.

    In Marvin v. Marvin (1976) 18 Cal.3d 660 [134 Cal.Rptr. 815, 557 P.2d 106],
after analyzing and dissecting the contrary arguments theretofore applied to
services rendered during meretricious relationships, the court said at p. 683:
"There is no more reason to presume that services are contributed as a gift than
to presume that funds are contributed as a gift; in any event the better
approach is to presume, as Justice Peters suggested, 'that the parties intend to
deal fairly with each other.' ( Keene v. Keene, supra, 57 Cal.2d 657, 674 [21
Cal.Rptr. 593, 371 P.2d 329] (dissenting opn.); see Bruch, op. cit., supra, [
Property Rights of De Facto Spouses Including Thoughts on the Value of
Homemakers' Services (1976)] 10 Family L.Q. 101, 113.)"

   Today's minimum wage approaches $ 3 per hour.  Numerous men and women of all
ages can and do earn an independent living  for themselves and frequently assist
others dependent upon them by living in, operating and maintaining households
for others.  Wholly aside from the fact that June's services as homemaker,
housekeeper, cook and companion are not denied, it is clear from the record that
such services were rendered and were satisfactory to Leonard.  Leonard and June
lived and cohabited together in three separate residences before settling in the
house purchased by Leonard in which they now reside (or did at the time of
trial).  Nothing in June's declaration in response to the order to show cause
which generated this appeal and nothing in the record lists any item of expense
for maid, cleaning, or any other service required for the operation and
maintenance of any of the residences occupied by her and Leonard.

   In addition, the direct evidence given by June and Leonard is illusive and
insubstantial.  It is difficult to accept June's testimony that she paid $ 300
of the monthly rental of $ 400 for an apartment previously occupied by Leonard,
herself and her son Paul because she and Paul were two and Leonard one, or
Leonard's testimony that June paid him $ 300 per month because that was "all she
could afford" or her statement that she did not know how much she received in
the dissolution settlement made approximately two years before the hearing.
This is especially so when it is borne in mind that she had just completed
making a declaration in response to the order to show cause and testified with
respect to items of stocks and two savings and loan accounts totaling $ 55,000.

    Further, it is clear that if interest were collected at current rates on the
savings account which "couldn't be touched" and was added to the other savings
account $ 18,000, June would receive at savings and loan rates  an approximate $
300 monthly--an amount equivalent to the sum she pays to Leonard for rent.

   In addition, June's declaration in response to the order to show cause showed
dividends and interest at $ 109 per month.  The large items of her listed
expenses were $ 300 rent and $ 325 for food, $ 115 for auto repairs.  Other
miscellaneous items total $ 400.  June testified she had the use of a Ferrari
with all costs paid except gas.  The item of $ 115 per month for auto repairs
appears to be an amount with which she is not chargeable.  If the $ 115 is
subtracted, the remaining total, accepting all expenditures as listed, leaves a
total of $ 1025.

   On sheer mathematics, the difference between June's expenditures as testified
to and what can clearly be her fixed monthly income from the dissolution
judgment without spousal support of approximately $ 659 is a difference of less
than $ 500 from her total listed expenditures.

   On any market, the services of a homemaker, housekeeper, cook and companion
who has demonstrated competence to the recipient of such services continuously
for two and one-half years have a reasonable market value in excess of the use
of a Ferrari and a trip to Europe.

   In brief, June has the undoubted right to gift her services, which have
substantial value on the open market, to Leonard--but we are satisfied she has
no right to ask a court to collect for her from her former husband spousal
support in a sum sufficient to enable her to make the gift.

    Unmarried persons of the opposite sex have the pronounced right to contract
expressly or implicitly the terms upon which they will live and cohabit. (
Marvin, supra, 18 Cal.3d at p. 684.)  The conduct of the parties appears to
prove a contract that: each would pay their own way and (except for the cost of
dinners out, an occasional trip and the use of a Ferrari), Leonard would retain
his independent assets and all his income produced as a result of his competence
and efforts but that June, to maintain the relationship between the two, would
contribute the earnings she could realize from independent employment as a
homemaker, housekeeper, cook and companion and so much as might be necessary or
which she could "afford" from spousal support plus as much of the income or
capital from her independent assets which were awarded to her by the dissolution
judgment.

     For the purposes of this decision we assume that such a contract is within
the ambit of the pronouncement of Marvin and therefore acceptable.   We hold,
however, that a person, male or female, receiving spousal support who cohabits
with a person of the opposite sex, cannot give away his or her services where
the result is to create a status of apparent continuing need and thus overcome
the presumption created by section 4801.5.

    Expressly or implicitly, June and Leonard made a contract to live together
on the terms to which they have each testified.  Presumably, it can be changed
by mutual consent.  We are cited to no principle of law, common sense or
abstract justice, which requires a court to compel Arnold to make up by way of
spousal support he had theretofore as part of a dissolution judgment been
ordered to pay to June the money value of services which June, under the terms
of the contract, gives to Leonard.

    Such a contract must be fair and reasonable with respect to the rights of a
supporting spouse. Exchange of services, certainly in the context of
cohabitation, contemplates a fair exchange with full regard to the fair and
reasonable value of all services.

   A court, for the purpose of determining June's further need for spousal
support, is required to examine into the relationship of the cohabiting parties
and to consider "changed circumstances" of the supported spouse.

   In this connection, the manner in which June lives with Leonard, her services
to Leonard, and Leonard's income and June's obvious right to share therein, if
only on the basis of a domestic, are before the court.

    Logical analysis would indicate that the Legislature created the presumption
against a cohabiting former spouse supported by a divorced husband or wife based
on thinking that cohabitation establishes a status for the benefit of the
supported spouse and such status therefore creates a change of circumstances so
tied in with the payment of spousal support as to be significant enough by
itself to require a re-examination of whether such need for support continues in
such a way that it still should be charged to the prior spouse. 9

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -9   Our
Supreme Court in Marvin has recognized what is universal knowledge in the
western world that marriage need not exist as a permanent status and that
persons of the opposite sex may live together without marriage in a manner which
creates obligations from one to the other.  It is completely unrealistic,
therefore, to assume, and the law never has so assumed, that obligations created
by a dissolution of marriage need be of indefinite duration. California leads
the way in legal and societal thinking and action toward the achievement of the
goal of complete equality between the sexes.  Inherent in that objective and as
a sine qua non to its attainment is the assumption of obvious responsibilities
by a woman as well as a man.  Section 4801.5 is a constructive legislative step
in that direction.  Controversies engendered by the marital relationship are now
treated on the basis of "no fault." Spousal support is no longer a penalty (fn.
4) and the inherent tenuous nature of continuing obligations fixed in a
dissolution judgment is significantly pinpointed in at least one vital respect,
to wit: cohabitation, by section 4801.5.  Our understanding of the legislative
thinking codified in sections 4801 and 4801.5 which should be read together, is
that requirements of a divorced spouse receiving spousal support while
cohabiting with another person of the opposite sex should by reason of such
"changed circumstances," be reassessed, and the reassessment should reflect and
take into account all factors and facets which, based on evidence before a trial
court, may be properly associated with a supported spouse and a cohabiting
partner.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      In our above analysis we have made no attempt to place a money value upon
the services of June as a sex companion. We suggest, however, the rewrite of
section 4801.5 which recognizes cohabitation between divorced persons and others
of the opposite sex as a socially acceptable fact of life indicates that the
Legislature does not respect the legal fiction that sex except in a marriage has
no value as legal consideration.

   We are satisfied the evidence is insufficient in all respects to overcome the
presumption of decreased need.  On the contrary, substantial evidence shows by a
heavy preponderance that June has not from the beginning of her relationship
with  Leonard had, and does not now have, a continuing need for spousal support.

   Accordingly, we vacate the judgment and remand the case to the trial court to
make a finding that the presumption in section 4801.5 has not been overcome and
to enter an order in favor of Arnold, modifying June's right to spousal support
to ten ($ 10) dollars per month.  Costs on appeal to appellant.


                              86 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of TOBY and JOSEPH W. KEEVA. TOBY KEEVA,
                   Respondent, v. JOSEPH W. KEEVA, Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 48716

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Three

          66 Cal. App. 3d 512; 136 Cal. Rptr. 82; 1977 Cal. App. LEXIS
                                      1149


                                January 27, 1977

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Los Angeles County, No. D 824289, Jules D.
Barnett, Temporary Judge. *

*   Pursuant to Constitution, article VI, section 21.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 62--Property Rights of Parties--
Support of Other Party--Jurisdiction.  --The trial court's inadvertent failure,
in so many words, to retain jurisdiction in an order reducing a husband's
obligation of spousal support for a period of five months, based on the
husband's representation he was presently unemployed, did not result in a
termination of the trial court's jurisdiction under Civ. Code, § 4801, subd. (d)
, providing a support order shall terminate at the end of the specified period
unless the trial court in its order retains jurisdiction, where a prior
temporary reduction expressly limited to a five-month period, and specifically
providing for reinstatement, had proven not to be of sufficient duration, and
the manifest purpose of the extension in the current order was to cover the
situation until the husband's earning capacity improved, where the current order
simultaneously continued the matter until a later date, which was inconsistent
with an intent that support terminate at such time, and where the interlocutory
decree had provided that the husband's obligation of support would continue
until the wife's death, remarriage, or further order of the court.

COUNSEL: Herb Wiener for Appellant.

Trope & Trope and Timothy S. Harris for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Potter, J., with Cobey, Acting P. J., and Allport, J.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: POTTER

OPINION

     Appellant Joseph W. Keeva (hereinafter husband) appeals from an order of
the  superior court dated December 10, 1975, continuing spousal support awarded
petitioner Toby Keeva (hereinafter wife).

   An interlocutory judgment of dissolution was filed November 14, 1974, which
contained provisions for spousal and child support as follows:

   "Respondent is ordered to pay Petitioner as and for spousal support the sum
of $ 1,000.00 per month, payable one-half (1/2) on the first (1st) and one-half
(1/2) on the fifteenth (15th) of each month, effective November 1, 1974, through
and including the payment to be made on October 15, 1975.  Thereafter,
Respondent to pay Petitioner, the sum of $ 1.00 per month, payable on the
fifteenth (15th) of each month, commencing on November 15, 1975, until death of
the Petitioner, remarriage of the Petitioner, or further Order of the Court,
whichever occurs first.

   "Respondent is ordered to pay directly to Petitioner, as and for support for
the minor child, Daniel Scott Keeva, born August 18, 1971, the amount of $
350.00 per month, payable one-half (1/2) on the first (1st) and one-half (1/2)
on the fifteenth (15th) of each month, effective November 1, 1974, and
continuing until further Order of the Court."

   On November 20, 1974, husband filed his application for modification of both
child support and spousal support, requesting that child support be set at "a
reasonable sum," and that spousal support be terminated, based upon allegations
that at the time of the "intended decision for the Interlocutory Judgment,"
husband "was employed . . . and his gross salary was $ 3,000 a month and his net
monthly salary varied between $ 2,099.50 and $ 2,204.00," but that on October
30, 1974, husband "was terminated by his employer . . . and presently has no
income whatsoever."  The order to show cause on husband's petition was heard
January 17, 1975, at which time the court made its order as follows:

   "Respondent is ordered to pay to the petitioner as and for spousal support,
the amount of $ 250.00 per month, payable one-half on the 1st and one-half on
the 15th of each month commencing January 1, 1975 and continuing through the
calendar month of May, 1975 at which time, the order heretofore made for spousal
support of $ 1,000 per month is re-instated.

   "The respondent is ordered to pay to the petitioner as and for the support of
the minor child of the parties namely, Daniel, born August 18, 1971, $ 150.00
per month, payable one-half on the 1st and one-half on the 15th of each month
commencing January 1, 1975 through the calendar month of May, 1975.  Effective
with the first day of June, 1975, the former order of $ 350.00 per month for
child support is re-instated to continue for the term set forth in the aforesaid
Judgment."

   Before the expiration of the period for which diminished support was
provided, and on May 16, 1975, husband filed his further application for
modification. Again, child support in "a reasonable sum" was requested and
husband sought to avoid paying any spousal support. His supportive declaration
repeated the facts concerning termination of his employment and stated that his
only income had been unemployment insurance.  Husband also alleged that he was
informed and believed that his wife was presently employed and earning an
adequate salary. The matter was heard on June 11, 1975, and the court made the
following order with respect to support:

   "The Court Makes the Following Order: Interlocutory Judgment of Dissolution
of Marriage of November 14, 1974 as heretofore modified by the order of January
17, 1975 is further modified in the following particulars: The respondent is
ordered to pay directly to petitioner for child support the sum of $ 15.00 per
week, payable Saturday of each week, retro-actively commencing Saturday May 17,
1975 and so payable through payment due Saturday November 15, 1975; further he
shall pay directly to petitioner by way of spousal support $ 15.00 per week, on
the same Saturdays continuing through Saturday 15th of November 1975.  This
order is predicated upon representation to  the Court that the respondent at
this time is unemployed and his only income is $ 90.00 weekly unemployment and $
100.00 Insurance commission per month.  . . .   Matter ordered continued to
November 15, 1975 8:30 a.m. in Department 2.  Both ordered back at that time
without further order."

   On August 4, 1975, having been advised that November 15 was a Saturday, the
court made its nunc pro tunc order as follows:

   "The Court having inadvertently continued the Order to Show Cause re
Modification to November 15, 1975 (a Saturday); the Court, now, on its own
motion corrects its order of June 11, 1975 nunc pro tunc as of that date as
follows:

   "This matter is ordered continued to November 19, 1975 at 8:30 a.m. in
Department 2."

   The November 19 hearing was continued until December 10, 1975.  In connection
with that hearing, respondent filed his financial declaration showing total
monthly income of $ 700.  At the hearing on December 10, husband challenged the
power of the court "to continue granting spousal support because it has lost
jurisdiction." The objection to the jurisdiction was denied and the court
proceeded to hear the matter upon husband's declaration. The order appealed from
was the result.  It reads in pertinent part:

   "After argument of counsel in open court the court orders: on the
Interlocutory Judgment dated 11/18/74, the present level of support shall be
continued on the following conditions:

   "1) That there is a representation that respondent's gross earnings are $
700.00 per month and that

   "2) Respondent will give to Petitioner's counsel a quarterly annual report as
to his income.

   "The Court rules to retain jurisdiction over child and spousal support."

Contentions

     Husband contends that the June 11, 1975, order terminated the allowance for
spousal support on November 15, 1975, and did not retain jurisdiction;
therefore, the court had no jurisdiction to reinstate the spousal support order.
Wife contends that properly construed, the order did not terminate support on
that date.

Discussion

   Husband's position is based upon the provisions of section 4801, subdivision
(d), of the Civil Code which at all pertinent times has provided: "An order for
payment of an allowance for the support of one of the parties shall terminate at
the end of the period specified in the order and shall not be extended unless
the court in its original order retains jurisdiction." This language came from
section 139.7 of the Civil Code, added in 1965, the language of which was in all
pertinent respects identical.

   The clear language of the interlocutory decree in this case retained
jurisdiction by awarding petitioner "the sum of $ 1.00 per month, payable on the
fifteenth (15th) of each month, commencing on November 15, 1975, until death of
the Petitioner, remarriage of the Petitioner, or further Order of the Court,
whichever occurs first." Husband is, therefore, obliged to rely upon the holding
of Maben v. Superior Court, 255 Cal.App.2d 708, 712 [63 Cal.Rptr. 439], that the
"original order" referred to in section 4801, subdivision (d) (then Civ. Code, §
139.7) is "the latest order in point of time in which the court has made an
allowance for the support of either party." In Maben, the last order in point of
time was a modification reducing the alimony from the amount set by a prior
modification and continuing it for a period of 12 months, "'at which time
alimony shall terminate.'" (255 Cal.App.2d at p. 710.) Husband assumes, without
argument, that the effect of the June 11, 1975, order was the same as the
modification order in Maben, saying in this respect only: "It is respectfully
submitted that the court's order of June 11, 1975, provided  for weekly spousal
support of $ 15.00 a week to be paid by husband to wife to a specified period,
November 15, 1975, and that the order did not retain jurisdiction to extend
wife's spousal support in that order."

   Husband also refers to Faught v. Faught, 30 Cal.App.3d 875 [106 Cal.Rptr.
751], and Bain v. Superior Court, 36 Cal.App.3d 804 [111 Cal.Rptr. 848], as
authorities allegedly citing Maben with approval.  Faught contains no such
citation.  It does, however, apply Civil Code section 4801, subdivision (d), to
a separate maintenance decree, the language of which is not quoted, in which the
court "did not retain jurisdiction." Bain does cite Maben.  It does not,
however, base any holding upon it and notes that it is questioned on one point
in Dahlstet v. Dahlstet, 272 Cal.App.2d 174 [77 Cal.Rptr. 45]. The holding in
Bain,  however, was that section 4801, subdivision (d), did not limit the trial
court's power to award temporary alimony pending an appeal.

   Wife does not dispute husband's claim that the pertinent "original order"
within the meaning of section 4801, subdivision (d), is the June 11, 1975,
order.  She claims, however, that fairly construed, that order did not specify
the end of the period for payment of spousal support. The trial court agreed
with wife.  We are persuaded that its interpretation is reasonable and should be
affirmed.

   The circumstances under which the June 11, 1975, order were made strongly
suggests that the court did not thereby intend to limit the period for which
spousal support payments would be made.  Wife had been deprived of the
substantial spousal and child support payments virtually from their inception by
the adverse economic circumstances of husband, and it appeared that he would be
unable to provide such support at any time prior to the November 15, 1975, date
specified in the interlocutory decree for reduction of spousal support to $ 1
per month.  The order of June 11 specifically recites that it is "predicated
upon representation to the Court that the respondent at this time is unemployed
and his only income is $ 90.00 weekly unemployment and $ 100.00 Insurance
commission per month." A prior temporary reduction expressly limited to the
period January 1 through May 1975, specifically providing for reinstatement, had
proven not to be of sufficient duration. The manifest purpose of the extension
was to cover the situation until husband's earning capacity improved.

    Moreover, the simultaneous continuance of the matter to November 15, 1975,
manifested the court's intent to deal further with the matter in light of
husband's earning capacity at that time and was inconsistent with an intent that
support terminate at such time.  The failure of the nunc pro tunc order
continuing the hearing to November 19, 1975, to also continue the reduced level
of support is more indicative of further inadvertence than of an intent
permanently to terminate support.  The continuance to November 19 implies that
there would be something to rule upon on that date.  If the effect of the
court's failure to act on November 15 were loss of jurisdiction, the November 19
setting was a nullity.  It is thus apparent that although the court did not use
the words that it "retains jurisdiction," there was no intent to limit the
duration of the period of payment for support.

    Section 4801 does not require the use of "magic words" to avoid loss of
jurisdiction. In Lassiter v. Lassiter, 256 Cal.App.2d 81 [63 Cal.Rptr. 676], the
court dealt with an interlocutory judgment of divorce which it described as
follows: "The divorce judgment details an eight-year declining scale of support
payments, states defendant's support obligation shall terminate in eight years,
and declares ' . . . the parties intend that the provisions for plaintiff's
support shall be modifiable. . . .'" (Id.) In holding that a modification made
within the eight-year period extending defendant's obligation was within the
court's power, the court on appeal stated (256 Cal.App.2d at p. 82): "Assuming
without deciding that section 139.7 governs, the trial court's interlocutory
judgment declaration  that the support provisions shall be modifiable is a
retention of jurisdiction."

    Dahlstet v. Dahlstet, supra, 272 Cal.App.2d 174, 175, involved an
interlocutory decree entered prior to the enactment of Civil Code section 139.7,
which provided for alimony of $ 250 per month "for a period of four years from
the date of this interlocutory Judgment of Divorce." A 1966 modification order
increased the support to $ 400 per month and made the following reference to the
four-year term (272 Cal.App.2d at p. 180): "'It Is Noted that the question of
whether this support and maintenance should continue beyond four years from the
date of the Interlocutory Judgment of Divorce was not before the court; the
modification ordered herein shall not affect that issue one way or the other.'"

   Respecting the effect of this modification, the court said (id.):

   "The trial court in the order appealed from did not in terms interpret the
meaning and effect of the August 19, 1966, order.  But it must in fact have
interpreted that order when in the order appealed from the court stated: 'Under
the circumstances of this case, Civil Code Section 139.7 does not deprive the
Court of jurisdiction to extend support and maintenance payments to be made by
defendant to plaintiff.'

   "That interpretation was a reasonable one.  The order of August 19, 1966, did
not limit the duration of the period for payment of support."

   The factual situation in Dahlstet was comparable to the case at bench.  In
that case, the original order was not subject to the provisions of Civil Code
section 139.7 because it predated that section.  The original interlocutory
decree in this case clearly provided for retained jurisdiction,  thereby
avoiding the effect of the successor section 4801, subdivision (d).  The
modification order in Dahlstet was made subsequent to the enactment of section
139.7 and its effect was to simply change the amount of the award up to the end
of the four-year period.  It made no express provision for retention of
jurisdiction. Nevertheless, it was construed as not intending to "limit the
duration of the period for payment of support." The order appealed from in this
case is subject to the same interpretation.  It was intended only to determine
the amount of the support until the next hearing, not to limit the duration of
the support provided by the interlocutory decree. The court's jurisdiction was
not terminated by its inadvertent failure, specifically in so many words, to
retain jurisdiction.

   The order appealed from is affirmed.


                              87 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In re the Marriage of BORIS M. and ANN E. ACKERMAN.  BORIS
            M. ACKERMAN, Respondent, v. ANN E. ACKERMAN, Appellant.

                               G034259 & G034582

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FOURTH APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION THREE

          146 Cal. App. 4th 191; 52 Cal. Rptr. 3d 744; 2006 Cal. App.
             LEXIS 2056; 2207 Cal. Daily Op. Service 17; 2006 Daily
                               Journal DAR 16935


                            December 27, 2006, Filed

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY: Modification order at In re Marriage of Ackerman, 2007 Cal.
App. LEXIS 82 (Cal. App. 4th Dist., Jan. 23, 2007)
Review denied by In re Ackerman, 2007 Cal. LEXIS 2075 (Cal., Mar. 14, 2007)

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Orange County, No. 01D010971, Michael J.
Naughton, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports

(3) Dissolution of Marriage § 52.2--Division of Community Property--Valuation--
Professional Businesses and Professional Degrees--Goodwill.--Despite a wife's
contention to the contrary in a divorce proceeding, substantial evidence
supported the trial court's determination of reasonable compensation for a
similarly situated professional. In establishing goodwill value, opinion
evidence is admissible but is not conclusive. The trier of fact may also take
into consideration the situation of the business premises, the amount of
patronage, the personality of the parties engaged in the business, the length of
time the business has been established, and the habit of its customers in
continuing to patronize the business. The record showed that the trial court did
just that. It used an expert's methodology as a curbstone, but then also applied
its own quality control and commonsense view by considering evidence of the
husband's actual business situation, talent, training, expertise, and
reputation. The trial court reasonably determined that the husband would
generate a greater income than the national average.  Because the trial court
relied upon evidence set out in the testimony and expert reports, its
determination of reasonable compensation for a similarly situated professional
was supported by substantial evidence.

   [11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (10th ed. 2005) Community Property, § 102 et
seq.; 11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (10th ed. 2005) Husband and Wife, § 224.]

COUNSEL: Law Offices of Brian G. Saylin, Brian G. Saylin; Law Offices of Ellen
G. Winterbottom, Ellen G. Winterbottom; Law Offices of Jeffrey W. Doeringer and
Jeffrey W. Doeringer for Appellant.

Keith E. Dolnick for Respondent.

JUDGES: Rylaarsdam, J., with Sills, P. J., and Aronson, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: Rylaarsdam

OPINION

    RYLAARSDAM, J.--This is a consolidated appeal arising out of the dissolution
of the marriage of Ann E. Ackerman (wife) and Boris M. Ackerman (husband). In
the two appeals, wife respectively challenges the trial court's valuation of
husband's medical practice and the award of child and spousal support. We reject
those challenges and affirm the judgment.

FACTS

   The parties married in August 1991 and legally separated in September 2001.
During the marriage, they had two children. At the time of separation, Ethan was
three and Audrey was one. Ethan was diagnosed with autism at age two and a half.

   Husband is a licensed physician engaged in the practice of plastic surgery.
He obtained his physician's license in 1981 and  received his board
certification in plastic and reconstructive surgery in 1987, at which time he
established his medical practice as a sole proprietorship known as Boris M.
Ackerman, M.D. Wife signed a premarital agreement, reflecting the practice was
husband's separate property with a value of $ 162,000 as of the date of
marriage. Any increase in the medical practice's value would be deemed community
property and subject to division upon dissolution. Upon dissolution, the
practice would be appraised by a forensic accountant utilizing any generally
accepted methodology for valuation.

   Wife was not employed outside the home during marriage. She graduated from
law school in 1995 and took the California State Bar examination in 1998, but
was unsuccessful.

   The valuation of the medical practice was litigated, with each party
presenting his or her own forensic accountant. The court received briefs and
then made its final ruling. Wife filed objections to the proposed statement of
decision. The trial court responded to each objection in a detailed minute
order. Judgment on the bifurcated issue of the medical practice was entered some
months later. Wife filed a notice of appeal from that judgment.

   In the meantime, the parties litigated support. They stipulated their monthly
controllable cash flow at the date of separation was $ 61,000. The parties' 2001
jointly filed tax return showed a net income of approximately $ 36,000. The
court took half that amount, rounded it up to $ 20,000 as a reasonable estimate
of half of the community net income, and determined that to be the marital
standard of living for each party.

   For spousal support, husband was ordered to pay wife $ 7,500 per month
commencing January 15, 2004, $ 6,500 per month commencing September 1, 2004, and
$ 3,000 per month commencing September 1, 2005. In August 2006, spousal support
terminated and in August 2009, jurisdiction terminates. The order was based on
three assumptions: (1) wife would review for the bar exam and take it in July
2004; (2) if she passed, she would obtain employment as an attorney before
September 1, 2005, when the step-down order took effect; (3) regardless of
whether she passed, she would be able to secure  employment by September 1,
2004, and earn at least $ 3,000 a month as a paralegal or legal assistant, based
on her own testimony and the vocational examiner's report. If the assumptions do
not materialize, the order allows wife to move to modify its terms.

    Child support was ordered as follows: $ 10,070 per month for seven and
one-half months commencing January 15, 2004, then $ 9,080 per month commencing
September 1, 2004. The reduction took into account wife's potential earning
capability.

   Wife filed a notice of appeal from this judgment as well. We consolidated the
two appeals for all purposes.

DISCUSSION

1. Introduction

   Wife challenges the trial court's valuation of husband's medical practice and
award of child and spousal support. In assessing these contentions, we begin
with the well-established rule that "[a] judgment or order of a lower court is
presumed to be correct on appeal, and all intendments and presumptions are
indulged in favor of its correctness. [Citations.]" (In re Marriage of Arceneaux
(1990) 51 Cal.3d 1130, 1133 [275 Cal. Rptr. 797, 800 P.2d 1227].) The
deferential abuse of discretion standard governs our review. (In re Marriage of
Cheriton (2001) 92 Cal.App.4th 269, 282-283, 304 [111 Cal. Rptr. 2d 755] [child
and spousal support orders] (Cheriton); In re Marriage of Nichols (1994) 27
Cal.App.4th 661, 670 [33 Cal. Rptr. 2d 13] [determination of goodwill value].)
Generally, "the appropriate test of abuse of discretion is whether or not the
trial court exceeded the bounds of reason, all of the circumstances before it
being considered. [Citations.]" (In re Marriage of Connolly (1979) 23 Cal.3d
590, 598 [153 Cal. Rptr. 423, 591 P.2d 911].) To the extent that a trial court's
exercise of discretion is based on the facts of the case, it will be upheld "as
long as its determination is within the range of the evidence presented.
[Citation.]" (In re Marriage of Nichols, supra, 27 Cal.App.4th at p. 670.)
Conversely, a court abuses its discretion if its findings are wholly
unsupported, since a consideration of the evidence "is essential to a proper
exercise of judicial discretion. [Citation.]" (Johns v. City of Los Angeles
(1978) 78 Cal. App. 3d 983, 998 [144 Cal. Rptr. 629].)

   Findings will be normally implied to support judgments or orders if supported
by substantial evidence. (In re Marriage of Aninger (1990) 220 Cal. App. 3d 230,
238 [269 Cal. Rptr. 388], overruled by statute on another ground as stated in In
re Marriage of O'Connor (1997) 59 Cal.App.4th 877, 882 [69 Cal. Rptr. 2d 480].)
But where a party states objections, and the  statement of decision does not
resolve a particular issue, "it shall not be inferred on appeal ... that the
trial court decided in favor of the prevailing party ... on that issue." (Code
Civ. Proc., § 634.)

2. Medical Practice Valuation

   Wife contends the trial court's valuation of husband's medical practice
should be reversed because the value of the tangible assets--specifically cash,
medical equipment, and an excluded asset--and the goodwill value ascribed to the
practice were not supported by substantial evidence. Additionally, she argues,
"The court failed to make a finding as to [her] community interest in the rents
received ..." from the surgical center that was built during marriage as part of
husband's medical practice. We address these in turn.

a. Tangible Assets

i. Cash

   The court found the total cash in husband's medical practice was $ 35,388,
but deducted "accrued liability" to arrive at a net figure of $ 13,388. Wife
argues this was error because there were only two accounts at issue and one of
those "had only one outstanding check in the amount of $ 2,406," while the other
had "no outstanding checks." Since her accountant, Glenn Mehner, "reconciled
those accounts as of the date of separation[] at $ 30,442," she asserts "[i]t is
unknown how the court could have selected any other number" and that, because
she objected, we may not infer the trial court decided in husband's favor on
this issue.

   No inference is necessary. At the hearing on wife's objections, the court
explained it arrived at $ 13,388 by taking "either outstanding liabilities or
outstanding checks, and ... took it off the $ 35,000." This finding is supported
by Mehner's valuation report. At page 6 of that report, Mehner explains that $
35,388 "[r]epresents cash balance at 8/31/01 in [husband's two accounts]" but
that $ 22,000 is "[e]stimated as approximately one-half months [sic] expenses
based on average monthly expenses for the eight months end[ing] August 31,
2001." Deducting the expenses from the cash balance yields $ 13,388, the number
reached by the court.

ii. Medical Equipment

   Wife contends the court's determination the medical equipment had a current
value of $ 10,000 lacked substantial evidence. We disagree.

   The record is somewhat confusing on this issue because the court's oral and
written rulings do not contain any references to "medical equipment."  Rather,
the only time during its oral ruling that it mentioned $ 10,000 is when it said
it "didn't believe that the office furniture exceed[s] $ 10,000[,] so [it] used
that." Similarly, both the proposed and signed statement of decision, as well as
the signed judgment, "add[] back $ 10,000 for the office furniture" to the
amount awarded for goodwill. Neither party addresses this ambiguity but instead
assumes the court's references to "office furniture" include medical equipment.
We will do the same.

   In his report, husband's expert, James Christensen, identifies the categories
of office furniture, leasehold improvements, and medical equipment, along with
their corresponding dates of purchase, original cost, depreciation, book value
as of December 2001, and estimated current value. The original cost of the
office furniture and medical equipment together totaled $ 111,370. After
depreciation, their book value was $ 7,326. Christensen estimated their current
value to be approximately $ 11,000.

   Rather than relying on the estimated current value, the court used an
accelerated or straight-line depreciation method and placed a $ 10,000 value on
the furniture and medical equipment. According to Christensen's chart, the
original cost of the office furniture and medical equipment in 1995-1996 was $
46,278 and $ 65,092, respectively. By December 2001, their book value had
depreciated to $ 3,455 and $ 3,871. Wife has not shown the court abused its
discretion by rounding the total up to $ 10,000.

   Wife claims Christensen's only basis for his estimate of the current value of
the furniture and medical equipment was a conversation with another plastic
surgeon. Whether it was or not is irrelevant because the trial court did not
rely on Christensen's current value estimate.

iii. Excluded Asset

   Wife's next contention relates to husband's medical practice's purchase of
new computers for $ 7,900 in February 2001, six months before they separated.
Wife objected to the proposed statement of decision on the ground that the
computers were a "missed asset" because neither expert included computers in his
analysis. The court overruled wife's objection because "[t]here was no evidence
as to a 'missed asset.' "

   On appeal, wife acknowledges that Christensen considered the computers, but
asserts "he added this expense back as personal in nature without any basis
therefor." To the contrary, Christensen testified he added back certain
nonrecurring office expenses and legal expenses, and that the computers were a
nonrecurring or personal expense. The trial court was correct there was no
evidence of a missed asset.

b. Goodwill

   Wife argues substantial evidence does not support the court's calculation of
goodwill. We disagree.

   No rigid rule applies for determining the value of goodwill. (In re Marriage
of Foster (1974) 42 Cal. App. 3d 577, 583 [117 Cal. Rptr. 49].) Rather, it "may
be measured by 'any legitimate method of evaluation that measures its present
value by taking into account some past result,' so  long as the evidence
'legitimately establishes value.' [Citation.]" (In re Marriage of Rosen (2002)
105 Cal.App.4th 808, 819 [130 Cal. Rptr. 2d 1] (Rosen).) "[E]ach case must be
determined on its own facts and circumstances and the evidence must be such as
legitimately establishes value. [Citations.]" (In re Marriage of Foster, supra,
42 Cal. App. 3d at p. 583.) Because goodwill value of a business is a question
of fact for the trial court, its determination will be upheld if supported by
substantial evidence. (In re Marriage of Nichols, supra, 27 Cal.App.4th 661, 670
.)

   The "capitalization of excess earnings" method is one recognized valuation
technique. (See Rosen, supra, 105 Cal.App.4th at pp. 818-819.) This "method
focuses on the ' "earning power" ' of the business to determine what ' "rate of
return" ' the predicted earnings will yield in light of the risks involved to
attain them. [Citation.]" (Id. at p. 818.) "Broadly put, the excess earnings
approach is predicated on a comparison of the earnings of the professional in
question with that of a peer whose performance is 'average.' " (In re Marriage
of McTiernan & Dubrow (2005) 133 Cal.App.4th 1090, 1095 [35 Cal. Rptr. 3d 287],
fn. omitted.)

   To make this comparison, courts may, among other things, "determine[] the
annual salary of a typical salaried employee who has had experience commensurate
with the spouse who is the sole practitioner or sole owner/employee." (In re
Marriage of Garrity and Bishton (1986) 181 Cal. App. 3d 675, 688, fn. 14 [226
Cal. Rptr. 485].) Alternatively, courts may apply the "similarly situated
professional" standard, under which reasonable compensation is based on " ' "
'the cost of hiring a nonowner outsider to perform the same average amount that
other people are normally compensated for performing similar services ... .' " '
" (In re Marriage of Iredale & Cates (2004) 121 Cal.App.4th 321, 330 [16 Cal.
Rptr. 3d 505], fn. omitted, quoting Rosen, supra, 105 Cal.App.4th at p. 823.)

   Although not binding, professional compensation surveys may be used by
experts and trial courts as guidelines for determining reasonable compensation
of a practitioner's peers. (In re Marriage of Iredale & Cates, supra, 121
Cal.App.4th at pp. 325-326 [affirming expert's use of own surveys to  determine
reasonable compensation of practitioner's peers for purposes of valuing her
personal goodwill]; Rosen, supra, 105 Cal.App.4th at p. 822.) To be relevant,
however, the surveys must account for similarly situated professional practices
and practitioners. (Rosen, supra, 105 Cal.App.4th at p. 822.)

   The court in this case applied the excess earnings valuation method. Wife
challenges only its determination of reasonable compensation for husband's
peers. Each side's expert relied on different surveys to arrive at different
figures.

   Mehner utilized the Medical Group Management Association Physician
Compensation and Production Survey (MGMA survey) because it broke down
statistics by region, specialty, and years in practice and was the most
comprehensive survey in his opinion. He relied on the Pacific region, which
encompasses the western states. Based on the MGMA survey, he calculated
reasonable compensation to be $ 291,000 under the median compensation and $
355,000 under the 75th percentile.

   Christensen, on the other hand, based his opinion on statistical data from
the American Medical Association's Physician's Socioeconomic Statistics surveys
(AMA survey) for the United States. The survey relied on information from 1996,
1997, 1998, and 2000; there was no study relying on 1999. He calculated the
total revenue for self-employed surgeons, the professional expenses for
self-employed physicians under the category of surgeons, and the net income of
self-employed surgeons, and then calculated the net income as a percentage of
the total revenue. As "a sanity check," he took husband's "net income as a
percentage of the total revenue" and applied it to husband's "gross revenue in
order to calculate what reasonable compensation would be as a percentage of his
gross revenue." At the court's request, he also provided a rebuttal to Mehner's
report and included the results of his own personal survey of plastic surgeons
in the Newport Beach area. Although the local survey was admittedly "limited,"
Christensen used it to show husband "generates almost the 'average' amount of
revenue." He determined reasonable compensation to be approximately $ 515,000,
which was lower than the $ 551,000 average compensation paid to the local survey
group.

   The court found problems with the surveys submitted by both experts. As to
the MGMA survey, the court was "troubled by [what a national survey of the
western states has] to do with a plastic surgeon who is doing essentially
cosmetic surgery in Newport Beach." The court considered it common knowledge
that, unlike other types of surgery, cosmetic surgery used discretionary income
and the amount of discretionary income in Southern California "is remarkably
different ... than in such places as Pocaltella [sic], Idaho; or Gallow [sic],
New Mexico; or Little Rock, Arkansas."

    As to Christensen's report, the court was not sure it had "any stronger
basis other than the fact he went out and talked to a couple of people as a kind
of quality control check ... ." It noted the difficulty of relying on reasonable
compensation statistics for employees, stating, "it just boggles the mind to
think" anyone making as much money as husband would work for an employer and
receive "a third of what he's actually making."

   Accordingly, the court applied its "own quality control," observing that
husband "is a guy with peculiar talent, training and expertise that is making a
rather substantial amount of money because, among other things, ... he has a
special reputation in the community and he's doing this[,] in large part, as a
self-employed person ... ." The court used "[its] own kind of common sense view"
of husband's track record and ultimately determined the amount of reasonable
annual compensation to be $ 544,000.

   In response to wife's request for an explanation on how that number was
reached, the court responded that it had been troubled that the surveys
submitted by the parties were not "sufficiently fine-tuned and honed to our area
here to be particularly valuable," and neither party presented "a vocational
rehabilitation specialist who's more familiar with the local market," "a medical
head hunter [sic], or an economist, or something like that to supplement" the
surveys. Nevertheless, it stated it had not "pick[ed] a number out of the air"
but had used as a "curbstone" the methodology set forth by Christensen, "which
was the percentage of gross method on his national scale ... or a western states
average ... ."

   Despite wife's contention to the contrary, substantial evidence supports the
determination of $ 544,000 as reasonable compensation for a similarly situated
professional. In establishing goodwill value, "opinion evidence is admissible
but is not conclusive. [Citation.] The trier of fact may also take into
consideration the situation of the business premises, the amount  of patronage,
the personality of the parties engaged in the business, the length of time the
business has been established, and the habit of its customers in continuing to
patronize the business. [Citation.]" (In re Marriage of Foster, supra, 42 Cal.
App. 3d at p. 583.) The record shows the court did just that. It used
Christensen's methodology as a "curbstone," but then also applied its own
"quality control" and "common sense view" by considering evidence of husband's
actual business situation, talent, training, expertise, and reputation. The
trial court reasonably determined that a plastic surgeon in Newport Beach,
California would generate a greater income than the national average. Because
the court relied upon evidence set out in the testimony and expert reports, its
determination of reasonable compensation for a similarly situated professional
is supported by substantial evidence.

    Wife's challenge that the court referred to Christensen's survey as covering
the western states when in fact it was a national survey is without merit. We
review the result, not the trial court's reasoning, and do not consider comments
by the trial judge. (Whyte v. Schlage Lock Co. (2002) 101 Cal.App.4th 1443, 1451
[125 Cal. Rptr. 2d 277].)

   Next, wife attacks the two surveys underlying Christensen's opinion.
According to wife, reliance on a national average is "unhelpful" because under
Rosen, supra, 105 Cal.App.4th at page 822, the numbers presented in a survey
"must be shown to actually relate to the subject practice." Rosen reversed the
trial court's determination of reasonable compensation on the ground that "the
testimony of [the wife's] expert regarding 'reasonable compensation' [was]
conjecture and could not be used in forming an expert's opinion of goodwill
value." (Id. at pp. 821-822.) The expert had relied on two surveys to determine
reasonable compensation for the husband, a sole practitioner lawyer handling
state-funded criminal appeals. The first was a national survey, which the court
faulted because there was no showing the national figures were commensurate with
those in Southern California and because it did not distinguish between
different types of law practices, particularly one consisting "almost
exclusively of ... state-funded criminal appeals." The second survey was also
problematic because it purported to show average compensation for officers and
directors of various kinds of businesses, whereas the husband was a sole
practitioner with no officers or directors. The expert did not have any
particular knowledge of lawyer compensation, was not familiar with the husband's
type of law practice, and did not attempt to relate the information in the two
surveys to an analysis of the husband's law practice. (Ibid.) Thus, Rosen
concluded the surveys used by the wife's expert were not useful in establishing
compensation under either the " 'annual salary of the average salaried person' "
standard or the " 'similarly situated professional' " standard. (Id. at p. 823.)

   Here, in contrast, the AMA survey shows the nationwide total revenue, the
professional expenses, and the net income of self-employed surgeons. Christensen
explained he had based his valuation on the five years preceding separation by
analyzing husband's tax returns and financial records. He detailed the study
dates he utilized and his methodology of calculating total revenue for
self-employed physicians and expenses for self-employed surgeons to ascertain a
net income as a percentage of the total revenue. Although wife is correct "there
[was] no evidence that ... Christensen has any particular expertise of plastic
surgeon compensation (as he had  never valued a plastic surgery practice
before)," unlike in Rosen, Christensen related the information in the AMA survey
to an analysis of husband's practice to ensure his figure was accurate. First,
he inserted husband's gross revenue and net income to see what result he
reached. Second, he performed a local survey of Newport Beach plastic surgeons
to assess whether his number was correct.  Unlike the surveys in Rosen, the AMA
survey thus proved useful as a baseline to establish compensation under the
"similarly situated professional" standard.

   Wife's contention the MGMA survey was better than the AMA survey amount to
nothing more than a request that we resolve the conflict between the experts,
reweigh the evidence, and substitute our judgment for that of the trial court.
We will not do so because "resolution of conflicts in the evidence, assessment
of the credibility of the witnesses and the weight to be given the opinions of
the experts were all matters within the exclusive province of the trier of
fact." (Ellena v. State of California (1977) 69 Cal. App. 3d 245, 256 [138 Cal.
Rptr. 110].)

   The court considered both experts' testimonies and the surveys upon which
they were based. Having done that, and the parties having failed to present any
other evidence to supplement the surveys, the court ultimately relied on
Christensen's methodology, because it thought that "made some sense." In doing
so, it "exercised its discretion weighing the facts and the evidence such as it
was." Although the court considered the MGMA survey, it found it to be "of
little value ... ." Wife's claim that the court failed to exercise its
discretion in rejecting the MGMA survey lacks merit.

   Regarding Christensen's local survey, wife complains it was conducted after
expert reports were exchanged and the information presented "could not be
corroborated or verified, ... and there was no way to ascertain the accuracy of
the numbers or their relevance to [husband's] practice." But the court "gave
very little weight to this 'survey' " and did not consider it.

   Lastly, wife objects to the court placing the burden of securing a vocational
rehabilitation specialist or a medical headhunter on her alone. The court did no
such thing. It faulted both parties for failing to supplement the surveys and
expert testimony with additional evidence. Absent such evidence, the court had
no choice but to pick the methodology it believed would best establish
reasonable compensation under the facts of the case. It did not abuse its
discretion in doing so.

c. Surgical Center

   Husband's medical practice included a surgery center that was built out
during the marriage in 1996. Wife contends it was a separate business from
husband's medical practice and that the court erred in determining otherwise.
Substantial evidence supports the court's conclusion.

   From 1996 to 2000, husband did not rent out the surgical center. In January
2001, a Dr. Grover began renting it on a monthly basis. But there was no
separate bank account set up for the surgical center and no separation of
expenses attributable to it. For these reasons, and because Dr. Grover had
rented the room for only eight months prior to the date of separation,
Christensen testified the surgical center was not a separate business from the
medical practice. The court did not abuse its discretion in adopting
Christensen's opinion.

   Wife argues the court failed to give an explanation of its findings, as
required under Code of Civil Procedure section 634, and instead merely
"responded it did not  believe that goodwill could be derived from a
'month-to-month tenancy.' " This misrepresents the record and takes the court's
comments out of context. Although the court did "wonder ... how do you get good
will [sic] out of a leasehold which is a month-to-month tenancy," it also
identified the factors upon which it relied. These include its belief the
situation was "somewhat akin to renting out empty [office] space," and the facts
that there was no separate accounting and "nobody in the community really
considered this to be a totally separate entity over ... and above the plastic
surgery practice." It also includes the fact that Mehner could not categorize
the expenses that were attributable solely to the surgical center, as opposed to
husband's main practice.

   Wife maintains the court misunderstood the evidence in stating there was no
separate bookkeeping or accounting for the surgical center. She asserts husband
kept a separate ledger identifying Dr. Grover's gross receipts and rental income
and reported the rental income on his 2001-2003 income tax returns, and that
Mehner "used reasonably accepted accounting principles to arrive at the expenses
associated with the [surgery c]enter, in order to deduce net cash flow." The
trial court considered this evidence and rejected it. We will not reweigh the
evidence.

   Additionally,  the record does not support wife's claim the court "simply
rejected [Mehner's opinion], without comment." The court explained that Mehner's
testimony regarding "the expense portion ... was, at best, conjectural in terms
of what the expense component of the [surgical] center was. They were a series
of extrapolations which were not explained satisfactor[il]y ... ." Mehner
himself acknowledged that his analysis was simply an estimate of what expenses "
might be" "based upon what would make sense ... in terms of potential expenses
that might be associated with that surgery portion of the facility." (Italics
added.) Given the speculative nature of Mehner's testimony, the court was well
within its discretion in concluding as it did.

   We reject wife's contention the surgical center was a community asset that
should be separately valued as of the trial date. The parties stipulated that
the  medical practice should be valued as of the date of separation. They left
for trial, however, the issue of whether the surgical center was a freestanding
center, in which case wife argued its goodwill value should be determined as of
the time of trial. Once the trial court determined the surgical center was an
indivisible part of the medical practice, the parties' stipulation required it
to be valued as of the date of separation.

   As a fallback position, wife argues that even if the surgical center was part
of the medical practice, the court "deprived the community of its fair share" by
using the rental income received from Dr. Grover in the first eight months of
2001, then weighting it using "the prior five years for which [husband] reported
no rental income," rather than considering the increasing postseparation rental
income. We discern no error.

   In Rosen, the court observed that the excess earnings method of determining a
professional practice's goodwill requires an initial determination of " 'a
practitioner's average annual net earnings ... by reference to any period that
seems reasonably illustrative of the current rate of earnings.' [Citation.]" (
Rosen, supra, 105 Cal.App.4th at p. 820.) Because the husband's net income was
volatile, the court held that using his net income for one year "alone is
neither an average nor 'reasonably illustrative' of his earnings," and thus the
husband's expert " 'should have averaged it.' " (Ibid.) Following  Rosen, the
court in this case appropriately weighted the income over the five years before
the separation because "the rental income [was] part of the general overall
income stream of the practice and that is part and parcel of the weighted income
average."

   Wife is correct that "Rosen did not provide that a single year is always
wrongly used." But her assertion that "the last year was, and is, the best
illustrator of ... the current income of the center" is flawed because it
incorrectly assumes the surgical center was a separate business.

3. Spousal and Child Support

   Wife contends: (1) the court's support orders left her and the children at a
standard of living significantly below that enjoyed by husband; (2) income from
earnings and property should not have been imputed to her and the wrong
methodology was used in any event; (3) a stepdown in support was improperly
based on her future earning capacity; (4) all of husband's income should have
been considered in setting support; and (5) the court otherwise erred in
computing support. We find no error.

a. Spousal Support

   "Spousal support is governed by statute. [Citation.] In ordering spousal
support, the trial court must consider and weigh all of the circumstances
enumerated in [Family Code section 4320], to the extent they are relevant to the
case before it. [Citations.] The first of the enumerated circumstances, the
marital standard of living, is relevant as a reference point against which the
other statutory factors are to be weighed. [Citations.] The other statutory
factors include: contributions to the supporting spouse's education, training,
or career; the supporting spouse's ability to pay; the needs of each party,
based on the marital standard of living; the obligations and assets of each
party; the duration of the marriage; the opportunity for employment without
undue interference with the children's interests; the age and health of the
parties; tax consequences; the balance of hardships to the parties; the goal
that the supported party be self-supporting within a reasonable period of time;
and any other factors deemed just and equitable by the court. [Citation.]" (
Cheriton, supra, 92 Cal.App.4th at pp. 302-304, fns. omitted.) The trial court
has broad discretion in balancing the applicable statutory factors and
determining the appropriate weight to accord to each, but it may not be
arbitrary and must both recognize and apply each applicable factor. (Id. at p.
304.) Once it does, "the ultimate decision as to amount and duration of spousal
support rests within its broad discretion and will not be reversed on appeal
absent an abuse of that discretion. [Citation.]" (In re Marriage of Kerr (1999)
77 Cal.App.4th 87, 93 [91 Cal. Rptr. 2d 374].) " 'Because trial courts have such
broad discretion, appellate courts must act with cautious judicial restraint in
reviewing these orders.' [Citation.]" (Ibid.)

   Here, wife contends the trial court did not properly consider various factors
in determining the amount of spousal support. We turn to these now.

i. Marital Standard of Living

   One of the factors the court must consider in awarding spousal support is
"[t]he needs of each party based on the standard of living established during
the marriage." (Fam Code, § 4320, subd. (d); all further statutory references
are to this code unless otherwise indicated.) The marital standard of living has
been described as "reasonable needs commensurate with the parties' general
station in life. [Citation.]" (In re  Marriage of Smith (1990) 225 Cal. App. 3d
469, 491 [274 Cal. Rptr. 911] (Smith).) The actual marital standard of living is
not "an absolute measure of reasonable need, but merely a 'basis' or reference
point for determining need and support." (Id. at p. 484.) "It is a general
description, not intended to specifically spell out or narrowly define a
mathematical standard." (Id. at p. 491.) As such, "it is not in and of itself
sufficient to sustain an award of permanent support. [Citation.]  Likewise, a
disparity in income, standing alone, does not justify an award of spousal
support. [Citation.]" (In re Marriage of Zywiciel (2000) 83 Cal.App.4th 1078,
1081 [100 Cal. Rptr. 2d 242].) In assessing the parties' marital standard of
living, the trial court may consider their income, expenses, and lifestyle
during their marriage. (Cheriton, supra, 92 Cal.App.4th at p. 307.) The court
did so in this case and concluded the marital standard of living was $ 20,000 as
to each party.

   Wife argues this was error because the court did not consider her expenses.
She contends that because Cheriton determined the marital standard of living by
taking the total family income, adjusting it for the husband's absence, and
deducting specific expenses, the trial court had a duty to do the same. It did
not.

   Although a court may properly consider both income and expenses in
determining the marital standard of living (Cheriton, supra, 92 Cal.App.4th at
p. 307, fn. 23), it may also base it on the family's average income, rather than
expenses. (In re Marriage of Weinstein (1991) 4 Cal.App.4th 555, 566 [5 Cal.
Rptr. 2d 558] (Weinstein).) Average income is particularly appropriate where, as
here, there was evidence the parties lived beyond their means. (Ibid.) Moreover,
the court considered wife's claimed expenses of $ 50,000 a month but found them
unreasonable when compared to the $ 61,000 gross average a month husband made
prior to separation and the $ 87,500 a month the parties stipulated that husband
was making or was capable of making. The trial court was not required to accept
wife's assertion of claimed expenses and acted within its broad discretion in
determining what it deemed her actual needs and expenses. (Smith, supra, 225
Cal. App. 3d at p. 487.)

   Likewise, the record does not support wife's claim the court ignored evidence
of the parties' pattern of savings and investment, as required by In re Marriage
of Drapeau (2001) 93 Cal.App.4th 1086 [114 Cal. Rptr. 2d 6]. That case held only
that "the trial court should have considered the parties' practice of savings as
an element in their [marital standard of living]." (Id. at p. 1098.) Here, the
trial court acknowledged there was evidence of "a couple of savings plans" and
that the parties had "put some bucks aside." But it also found that during the
marriage, they had "spent everything [husband made] every month." Even after
separation, wife continued to spend "everything every month and then some."
Whether the parties were living beyond their means is an appropriate factor for
the trial court to balance against other considerations in order "to reach a
'just and reasonable' result." (Smith, supra, 225 Cal. App. 3d at p. 490; see
also Weinstein, supra, 4 Cal.App.4th at p. 566.)

   The record also belies wife's assertion the court did not consider her
efforts in raising the children and tending to one child's special needs. The
court  assessed evidence of wife's child-rearing obligations, including with
respect to the autistic child, but disagreed with wife's belief she needed "two
nannies, a cook, and a couple of babysitters," as well as a personal assistant.

   Nor is there any merit to wife's contention the court refused to acknowledge
that husband was continuing to increase his earnings. The court considered both
the $ 61,000 average a month husband made prior to separation and the stipulated
$ 87,500 a month that he was making or was capable of making. Although it
believed the "marital standard of living ... is set at the date of separation"
while "[t]he ability to pay is whatever it is now," the court expressly stated
it took "the ability to pay into account." In particular, the court viewed the $
87,500 per month that husband was making or was capable of earning insofar as
"it impact[ed] on his ability to carry out the financial concordance of the
court's order."

   Moreover, a trial court is not required to consider a supporting spouse's
postseparation income in awarding spousal support. (Weinstein, supra, 4
Cal.App.4th at p. 566.) Although "an increase in postseparation income may be
considered for purposes of bringing the supported spouse's level of support up
to that necessary to maintain the parties' marital standard of living[, w]here,
as here, an award based on marital income level is sufficient to sustain the
marital standard of living, there is no occasion to draw upon postseparation
income. 'It is [the supported spouse's] needs which must be examined, not [the
supporting spouse's] standard of living due to post-separation separate property
earnings.' [Citation.]" (Ibid.) In re Marriage of Ostler & Smith (1990) 223 Cal.
App. 3d 33 [272 Cal. Rptr. 560], which wife cites, does not persuade us
otherwise. That case merely held the trial court did not abuse its discretion in
awarding additional support based on a percentage of the supporting spouse's
future bonuses. (Id. at p. 50.)

   Wife maintains that the court abused its discretion because the support order
"leaves the parties at significantly different standards of living ... ." But
equality of postseparation income is not an element of section 4320 in setting
spousal support. (See § 4320.) At best, the marital standard of living entitled
wife to financial support commensurate with her lifestyle before she and husband
separated. Although the law protected her from a precipitous drop in her
standard of living after her divorce, it did not guarantee her dollar-for-dollar
equality between her postseparation income and husband's. (In re Marriage of
Hoffmeister (1987) 191 Cal. App. 3d 351, 363 [236 Cal. Rptr. 543] [support award
"must bear some relationship to the standard of living of the parties during
their marriage and not the [postseparation] standard of living of the supporting
spouse"].)

   Wife's authorities do not demonstrate her income must equal husband's. In the
decisions she cites, In re Marriage of Andreen (1978) 76 Cal. App. 3d 667,
671-672 [143 Cal. Rptr. 94] and In re Marriage of Ramer (1986) 187 Cal. App. 3d
263, 273 [231 Cal. Rptr. 647], superseded by statute on other grounds, as set
forth in In re Marriage of Romero (2002) 99 Cal.App.4th 1436, 1441-1442 [122
Cal. Rptr. 2d 220], the differences in postseparation income meant the
difference between poverty for one spouse and relative comfort for the other.
Wife's situation bears no similarity to the penurious state of the ill-supported
spouses in Andreen and Ramer.

    Wife asserts that because husband can afford it, she "should be allowed to
live at the marital standard." But she has not demonstrated that the court's
orders left her and the children "below the marital standard." The trial court
set the marital standard of living to be $ 20,000 per month and determined that
wife would be able to  meet that standard "with a combination of child support,
spousal support, and reasonable interest" from the assets awarded, along with
the $ 3,000 monthly income imputed to her.

   Taking these statements out of context, wife claims it was improper for the
court to find some of her individual "needs would be satisfied by the payment of
child support." The court never said that and wife has not cited any authority
providing that child support may not be considered in determining whether the
marital standard was met. Both section 4053 and In re Marriage of Hubner (1988)
205 Cal. App. 3d 660 [252 Cal. Rptr. 428] involve guidelines for setting child
support, not the marital standard of living.

   Wife claims the court placed an "unfair burden, not contemplated by the law,"
on her to return to court if the amount of support awarded proves insufficient.
The argument is apparently based on In re Marriage of McNaughton (1983) 145 Cal.
App. 3d 845, 852-853 [194 Cal. Rptr. 176], where the court noted the supporting
spouse could seek a modification of spousal support after a reasonable period.
But nowhere does it say the supporting spouse always has the burden to seek a
modification of a spousal support order. Case law provides otherwise (see In re
Marriage of Winick (1979) 89 Cal. App. 3d 525, 531 [152 Cal. Rptr. 635] [trial
court did not abuse its discretion in placing burden on supported spouse to seek
modification of support if desired]), and wife has not explained why requiring
her to seek a modification would deprive her of her day in court. In fact, it
would give her yet another day in court.

ii. Imputation of Income

   Wife objects to the imputation of income to her from her share of the
community property without considering outstanding debts and the purchasing of a
residence in Newport Beach. The court considered such factors. Her claim that
there was no substantial evidence showing "she would receive  income from her
share of the community property" because the court did not consider her need to
buy a home lacks merit.

   Citing In re Marriage of Kennedy (1987) 193 Cal. App. 3d 1633 [239 Cal. Rptr.
151], wife argues "the court must look to the actual, not theoretical, return on
the property [she] receives." Kennedy did not did not say that. It believed the
trial court had "overstepped its bounds by using a 10 percent return" but that
it "would have been within the court's discretion to consider the rate of return
earned on the balance of the property division after purchase of [a] home." (Id.
at p. 1641.) Here, after considering wife's need to purchase a residence, the
court imputed a 4.3 or 4.5 percent interest return on her assets because that
was the government bond rate at the time. It did not require her to invest the
assets or invade their principal. We find no abuse of discretion.

   Wife also challenges the imputation of income to her for the purpose of
setting spousal support. The law is established "that a trial court may consider
earning capacity in determining spousal support ... ." (Cheriton, supra, 92
Cal.App.4th at p. 308.) A spousal support order requires the trial court to
balance a number of different factors. (§ 4320.) One of these is "[t]he goal
that the supported party shall be[come] self-supporting within a reasonable
period of time." (§ 4320, subd. (l).) "[T]he weight to be given [this] factor
[lies] within the trial court's broad discretion. [Citation.]" (Cheriton, supra,
92 Cal.App.4th at p. 308.) Another factor within the court's broad discretion is
"[t]he ability of the supported party to engage in  gainful employment without
unduly interfering with the interests of dependent children in the custody of
the party." (§ 4320, subd. (g).) The court considered this factor and found
wife's earning capacity was not impaired by her domestic duties.

   Wife argues the court erred by imputing income to her without "considering
whether such was in the best interests of [the] children" under Cheriton. Wife
acknowledges Cheriton was referring to child support (Cheriton, supra, 92
Cal.App.4th at p. 301), but she asserts the same considerations should be
applicable to spousal support. They are not. "Unlike a child support order ... a
spousal support award does not require the court to consider the children's best
interests. [Citation.]" (Id. at p. 308.) Moreover, unlike in  Cheriton, the
court here made express findings that the imputation of income was in the
children's best interests.

   County of Yolo v. Garcia (1993) 20 Cal.App.4th 1771 [25 Cal. Rptr. 2d 681]
does not support wife's argument the court abused its discretion in imposing an
earning capacity on her. That case held that an award of restitution to the
county for Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) benefits paid to  a
mother could not be based on the mother's earning capacity during the period she
was unemployed because she was the primary caretaker for her younger child and
was thus exempt from seeking work under the AFDC statutes. (Id. at p. 1780.) No
statutory exemption exists here.

   Also baseless is wife's claim that she should be given a reasonable time to
"fulfill her parental duties" before imputing income to her. The court gave her
a reasonable time. No income was imputed to wife for seven and a half months and
even then the spousal support was only reduced by $ 1,000. Wife has not
demonstrated this was unreasonable.

iii. Step Down in Support

   In a related contention, wife asserts "there was no factual basis" for the
orders stepping down support. The record shows otherwise.

   The court premised its step-down order on evidence of wife's earning
capacity, consisting of her testimony and the vocational examination report of
Michael Bonneau. Wife testified she had completed law school and was taking
refresher courses along with bar exam study courses. She hoped to "pass the bar,
and then start looking for employment." If she did not pass, she intended to
"look for work as a legal assistant.? In his expert report, Bonneau opines that
wife is "employable" and could earn between $ 2,080 and $ 3,560 per month as a
paralegal. Alternatively, wife may pass the bar and seek employment as an
attorney with a potential annual salary between $ 57,000 and $ 86,000 as a first
year associate.

   Wife complains she "was just about to turn 43, had completed her legal
education ten years ago, ... had not worked in the field[,] and had not passed
the bar." She also claims "[t]here is no basis for finding [she] can obtain
full-time employment" and "[b]oth ... Bonneau's report and [her] own testimony
support that her domestic duties would prevent that and would be a substantial
obstacle to any employment." These same arguments were presented to, considered,
and rejected by the trial court. We will not reweigh the evidence.

   Wife maintains the trial court should not have presumed her law degree would
"result in a substantially enhanced earning capacity as a matter of law." The
court made no such presumption.

   Wife questions how the court could consider a further stepdown in child
support  speculative and not consider it speculative for spousal support. The
comparison is inapt. Child support and spousal support have different purposes
and are governed by separate statutes and guidelines. (Compare §§ 4050-4076 with
§§ 4300-4360.) As noted above, one of the statutory factors the court must
consider in awarding spousal support is "[t]he goal that the supported party
shall be self-supporting within a reasonable period of time." (§ 4320, subd. (l
).) No similar factor exists for determining child support. (See §§ 4050-4076.)

   Contrary to wife's assertion, In re Marriage of Andreen, supra, 76 Cal. App.
3d 667, did not reverse the step-down order dropping spousal support to $ 1 per
month at the end of five years. (Id. at p. 672.) Nor does In re Marriage of
Regnery (1989) 214 Cal. App. 3d 1367 [263 Cal. Rptr. 243] require, as wife
claims, a finding that the supported spouse should be employed full time before
an earning capacity could be imputed. Rather, it stated an earning capacity may
be imputed when there is an ability to work, a willingness to work, and "an
opportunity to work which means an employer who is willing to hire.
[Citations.]" (Id. at p. 1372.) These factors were met in this case.

   Finally, section 4062, subdivision (a)(1) concerns child support. It has no
application to spousal support.

iv. Termination of Support

   Wife also criticizes the court for setting a spousal support termination
date. She argues termination after a long marriage is disfavored and cannot be
based on speculation. But the cases she cites merely provide that before the
court may order a date-certain termination of a spousal support order, there
must be evidence in the record the supported spouse " 'would be able to provide
for herself at that time.' " (In re Marriage of Vomacka (1984) 36 Cal.3d 459,
468 [204 Cal. Rptr. 568, 683 P.2d 248]; see In re Marriage of Morrison (1978) 20
Cal.3d 437, 454 [143 Cal. Rptr. 139, 573 P.2d 41]; see also In re Marriage of
Beust (1994) 23 Cal.App.4th 24, 29 [28 Cal. Rptr. 2d 201].) Such evidence
existed here.

   Wife asserts that the party seeking termination has the burden of justifying
the spousal support termination order. That may be (see In re Marriage of
Prietsch & Calhoun (1987) 190 Cal. App. 3d 645, 660 [235 Cal. Rptr. 587]), but
wife as the appealing party bears the burden of demonstrating the trial court
abused its discretion. (Denham v. Superior Court (1970) 2 Cal.3d 557, 566 [86
Cal. Rptr. 65, 468 P.2d 193].) She has not done so.

v. Remaining Spousal Support Issues

   Wife is correct that tax consequences must be considered in awarding spousal
support, but the record shows the court considered them. Also  without merit is
her contention the court failed to consider "income from [an] apartment building
which [husband] had apparently gifted to his parents and the $ 2,100 he received
from another rental property ... ." The only supporting evidence consists of
husband's testimony that he "did a[n Internal Revenue Code section] 1031
exchange and purchased a ... rental property," which gave him "[j]ust over $
2,000 a month ... ." At the hearing on wife's objections to the statement of
decision, the trial court ordered the parties to meet and confer about revising
the stipulated amount of income. Once that was done, the court agreed to modify
the child support figure. Whether that was done is not part of the record.
Regardless, the court did not fail to consider the income, as wife claims.

   In her reply brief, wife asserts the trial court failed to consider
additional factors.  These issues require no discussion, however, because we
need not consider new issues raised for the first time in a reply brief in the
absence of good cause, and wife has not shown any. (Reichardt v. Hoffman (1997)
52 Cal.App.4th 754, 766 [60 Cal. Rptr. 2d 770].)

b. Child Support

   Although wife purports to challenge the child support orders along with the
spousal support orders, she has not claimed the child support award was
insufficient. Even if such a claim was buried in her brief, no error has been
shown.

   Section 4057, subdivision (a) states, "The amount of child support
established by the formula provided in subdivision (a) of Section 4055 is
presumed to be the correct amount of child support to be ordered." The trial
court calculated child support pursuant to section 4055. Wife failed to carry
her burden of showing the court misapplied the formula or that the application
of the formula was unjust or inappropriate. (§ 4057, subd. (b).)

4. Miscellaneous

   Throughout the brief, wife raises several conclusory or cursory claims that
are not properly briefed because they are not supported by authority or reasoned
legal argument or both. As a result, those issues are waived. (Evans v.
Centerstone Development Co. (2005) 134 Cal.App.4th 151, 165 [35 Cal. Rptr. 3d
745].)

DISPOSITION

   The judgments are affirmed. Respondent shall recover his costs on appeal.

   Sills, P. J., and Aronson, J., concurred.

   A petition for a rehearing was denied January 23, 2007, and the opinion was
modified to read as printed above. Appellant's petition for review by the
Supreme Court was denied March 14, 2007, S149989.


                              88 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          In re the Marriage of BERYL E. and BERNARD M. LUDWIG.  BERYL
             E. LUDWIG, Appellant, v. BERNARD M. LUDWIG, Respondent

                                 Civ. No. 15477

           Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

            58 Cal. App. 3d 744; 130 Cal. Rptr. 234; 1976 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1583


                                  May 27, 1976

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of San Bernardino County, No. FL 5502, Jacob
H. Jager, Temporary Judge. *

*   Pursuant to Constitution, article VI, section 21.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1) Statutes § 5--Presumption of Prospective Application.  --The presumption
that a statute is to be prospectively applied is only appropriate when it is
impossible to ascertain the legislative intent.

(2) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69--Support of Other Party--
Modification, Revocation, and Extension--Change of Conditions--Statutory
Restitution.  --Prospective application is to be accorded Civ. Code, § 4801.5,
which permits the court to order restitution of spousal support on proof that
the spouse to whom support has been ordered to be paid is living with a person
of the opposite sex and holding himself or herself out as the spouse of the
person for a total of 30 days or more, in light of the heavy, unanticipated
burdens that retroactive application would impose, and in the absence of
material indicating a legislative intent that the statute's restitution
provision be applied to periods prior to the statute's effective date.

(3) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69--Support of Other Party--
Modification, Revocation, and Extension--Change of Conditions--Statutory
Restitution.  --The judicial rule favoring prospective modification only of
spousal support orders is inapplicable to impede a legislative direction of
restitution of spousal support already paid, as provided in Civ. Code, § 4801.5,
which permits a court to order restitution of spousal support on proof that the
spouse to whom support has been ordered to be paid is living with a person of
the opposite sex and holding himself or herself out as a spouse of the person
for a total of 30 days or more, although not married to the person.

(4) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69--Support of Other Party--
Modification, Revocation, and Extension--Change of Conditions--Statutory
Restitution.  --Enactment of Civ. Code, § 4801.5, permitting a court to order
restitution of spousal support already paid, on proof that the spouse to whom
support has been ordered to be paid is living with a person of the opposite sex
and holding himself or herself out as the spouse of the person for a total of 30
days or more, although not married to the person, is a legislative effort to
effect similar treatment between a remarrying spouse, for whom the spousal
support obligation is terminated on remarriage under § 4801, subd. (b), unless
otherwise agreed in writing, and a former spouse foregoing the formalities of a
marriage contract but living in a meretricious relationship.

(5) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69--Support of Other Party--
Modification, Revocation, and Extension--Change of Conditions--Statutory
Restitution.  --A former wife receiving spousal support was no more than an
involuntary trustee of support funds received, where she was living with another
in a meretricious relationship and holding herself out to be his spouse,
rendering her liable under Civ. Code, § 4801.5, to return of spousal support
received during such period.

COUNSEL: Chet Potter for Appellant.

Clayson, Rothrock & Mann and Erling C. Arend for Respondent.

OPINION BY: THE COURT

OPINION

     A final judgment of dissolution was entered on July 19, 1972.  Thereafter
on December 17, 1974, husband filed his order to show cause petition for
termination of spousal support. On March 19, 1975, the court ordered termination
of spousal support as well as restitution of spousal support payments made by
husband after June 29, 1973.

   The modification and restitution orders were made pursuant to the authority
of Civil Code section 4801.5. 1 In accordance with that statute,  the court
found that wife lived with one Franklin A. Elliott and held herself out to be
his spouse.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Civil
Code section 4801.5 reads: "Upon the petition of a spouse who has been ordered
to pay support under Section 4801, the court shall revoke the order for support
upon proof that the spouse to whom support has been ordered to be paid is living
with a person of the opposite sex and holding himself or herself out as the
spouse of the person for a total of 30 days or more, either consecutive or
nonconsecutive, although not married to the person.  The court shall order the
restitution of any support which has been paid since the date upon which the
spouse to whom support has been ordered to be paid commenced holding himself or
herself out as the spouse of the person."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    On appeal wife contends that (1) the restitution provisions of the statute
may not be applied to periods prior to the effective date of January 1, 1975;
(2) the statute is invalid to the extent it allows restitution for any period
because spousal support accrued or paid is a vested right; and (3) the facts of
this case are insufficient to support the termination and restitution orders.

   I

   On the face of the statute restitution is allowed for monies paid but the
statute does not state whether the restitution period is limited only to the
effective date of the statute or relates farther back in time to whenever the
operative act specified in the section occurred.

   Wife relies on the rule of statutory construction that legislative enactments
are generally presumed to operate prospectively rather than retroactively. ( In
re Marriage of Bouquet, 16 Cal.3d 583, 587 [128 Cal.Rptr. 427, 546 P.2d 1371];
Mannheim v. Superior Court, 3 Cal.3d 678, 686 [91 Cal.Rptr. 585, 478 P.2d 17];
DiGenova v. State Board of Education, 57 Cal.2d 167, 174 [18 Cal.Rptr. 369, 367
P.2d 865]; Tevis v. City & County of San Francisco, 43 Cal.2d 190, 195 [272 P.2d
757]; East   Bay Municipal U. Dist. v. Garrison, 191 Cal. 680, 692 [218 P. 43];
Vanderbilt v. All Persons, etc., 163 Cal. 507, 513 [126 P. 158]; Civ. Code, § 3
.) In DiGenova the court found that "[it] is settled therefore that no statute
is to be given retroactive effect unless the Legislature has expressly so
declared and that this rule is not limited by a requirement that a statute be
liberally construed to effect its objects and promote justice." (At p. 174.)
The presumption instead is for prospective application. ( Neuber v. Royal Realty
Co., 86 Cal.App.2d 596, 614 [195 P.2d 501] [disapproved on another point in
Porter v. Montgomery Ward & Co., Inc., 48 Cal.2d 846, 850 (313 P.2d 854)].)
However, application of the prospective presumption is only appropriate where it
is impossible to ascertain the legislative intent. ( In re Marriage of Bouquet,
supra, at pp. 587, 591.) The presumption against retroactivity is "completely
irrelevant" once there is evidence from which the legislative intent may be
deduced.  ( In re Marriage of Bouquet, supra, at p. 591, fn. 6.)

   In Bouquet the court concluded that the amended provisions of Civil Code
section 5118 were intended to operate retroactively. 2 In reaching its
conclusion the court  was faced with a statute that gave no clue on its face
regarding retroactivity. Such is the case before us.  However, in contrast to
Bouquet, here we have been unable to locate any material indicating a
legislative intent that the statute's restitution provision is to be applied to
periods prior to its effective date.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   All
statutory references in this opinion are to the Civil Code.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Prior to the enactment of section 4801.5, if the supported spouse chose to
forgo the formal marriage contract and instead lived with a third person in the
manner often called a "common law marriage," there was no termination of support
monies as a matter of law.  Instead, the supported spouse retained the right to
receive support monies until such time as the paying spouse brought a motion for
modification. (See Grant v. Grant, 52 Cal.App.2d 359 [126 P.2d 130].) Then, only
upon a showing of changed circumstances could the spousal support order be
modified; it was not enough that a meretricious relationship was being
maintained.  (See Double v. Double, 248 Cal.App.2d 650 [56 Cal.Rptr. 687].)
There was no bona fide issue of restitution under any circumstances.

   In Double the paying spouse argued that the meretricious relationship
maintained by the supported spouse constituted a sufficient ground for
terminating support.  In rejecting the contention, the Double court observed
that the proposition was supported only by dicta in two cases and that by
statute in California there was no basis for such a ground justifying
termination. The legislative response to Double was swift.  Former section 139
was amended in 1967 and this amendment carried over to now former section 4801,
subdivision (c).  The Legislature specifically provided that the court could
modify or revoke support where the supported spouse lived with another holding
himself or herself out as the spouse of that third person. There were no
restitution provisions enacted.

   After the passage of the Family Law Act, in 1971 the Legislature reconsidered
its response to Double and repealed the amendment (then codified in § 4801,
subd.(c).) The Family Law Act had eliminated the concept of fault and the
revocation of section 4801, subdivision (c), was intended to recognize that it
was economic circumstances, not private sexual conduct, that should serve as the
basis of modification or revocation. At the time of repeal, argument was
presented before the Legislature that then section 4801, subdivision (c), was
inconsistent with the no fault concepts of the Family Law Act.

    Thus, in 1973 when wife commenced holding herself out as the spouse of
Franklin A. Elliott, there were no restitution provisions in the law as to any
spousal support she received.  The repeal of former section 4801, subdivision
(c), returned the law to its earlier state leaving as the sole threat to
continued support payments the possibility that husband would bring a
modification action and show sufficient changed circumstances to reduce or
terminate future support payments.

   Obviously, in enacting section 4801.5 the Legislature was aware that many
persons had acted in reliance on the repeal of former section 4801, subdivision
(c).  The Legislature, of course, was also aware that giving section 4801.5 full
retroactive application would create monumental burdens on some spouses that had
regularly received support money for long periods prior to section 4801.5.  In
most cases the support money was presumably long gone and the ability to repay
it often nonexistent.  For example, in the instant case restitution to the
effective date of the statute would involve something between $ 3,150 and $
4,500.  A $ 200 per month support order paid for five years would require
restitution of $ 12,000.

     In light of the heavy unanticipated burdens retroactive application would
cause, we think the Legislature's silence as to retroactive application was
intentional.  In any event, the presumption of prospective application is
controlling.

   To the extent the court below ordered restitution for the period prior to
January 1, 1975, the judgment must be reversed.

    II

   A further contention is made that section 4801.5 is invalid to the extent
that it requires restitution for periods subsequent to the effective date of the
statute.  Wife contends that the statute may not be applied retroactively to its
effective date because she had a vested right to the spousal support money
already received.  Wife's reliance is placed on an avalanche of cases holding
that spousal support may not be retroactively modified. This limiting rule
prohibits retroactive judicial modification.  (E.g., Keck v. Keck, 219 Cal. 316,
320-321 [26 P.2d 300]; Double v. Double, supra, 248 Cal.App.2d 650, 652; Vick v.
Superior Court, 239 Cal.App.2d 105, 108 [47 Cal.Rptr. 840].) The rule originated
from Civil Code section 139 as enacted in 1872 which granted judicial power to
modify "from time to time." As interpreted by the courts, the language
represented a legislative intent that only prospective modification  authority
was granted to the courts.  ( Parker v. Parker, 203 Cal. 787, 795 [266 P. 283];
Bruton v. Tearle, 117 Cal.App. 696 [4 P.2d 623]; Rinkenberger v. Rinkenberger,
99 Cal.App. 45, 48-52 [277 P. 1096]; Soule v. Soule, 4 Cal.App. 97, 106-107 [87
P. 205].) Then, in 1951, the Legislature acted in a manner consistent with prior
judicial interpretation by amending section 139 to declare that only prospective
modification was allowed the courts.  Current Civil Code section 4801 has
carried forward this limitation of judicial power with the exception of allowing
retroactive modification "to the date of the filing of the notice of motion or
order to show cause to modify or revoke . . . ." The legislatively drawn
limitations continue to be recognized in recent cases.  (E.g., Armstrong v.
Armstrong, 15 Cal.3d 942, 950 [126 Cal.Rptr. 805, 544 P.2d 941].)

   The history of the California scope of support modifications has rested with
a determination of the breadth of power legislatively granted.

   The right to spousal support, the limitations on its modification, the
circumstances for its termination and the judicial power to order refunding of
money paid all derive from legislative enactment.  In matters of spousal support
the power of the court is no more nor less than that declared by the
Legislature.   Thus the judicial rule of prospective modification is
inapplicable herein due to legislative action and no impediment appears to the
legislative direction of restitution contained in section 4801.5.

   We have considered the restitution provision as a judicial modification; in
reality it is something less in terms of vested rights.  The Legislature has
provided in section 4801, subdivision (b), that unless otherwise agreed in
writing, the spousal support obligation terminates upon remarriage of the
supported spouse. ( Berkely v. Berkely, 269 Cal.App.2d 872, 872-873, 874 [75
Cal.Rptr. 294]; Hansen v. Hansen, 93 Cal.App.2d 568, 570-571 [209 P.2d 626].)
It is obvious that the enactment of section 4801.5 is a legislative effort to
effect similar treatment between remarrying spouses and ones forgoing the
formalities of the marriage contract. Effective January 1, 1975, the Legislature
declared that the living arrangement selected by wife would have the effect of
terminating her right to further support payments from her former husband.  Upon
occurrence of the section 4801.5 operative acts, there is no right to receive
further spousal support payments.  It is fundamental that there is no vested
right to retention of spousal support after the right thereto has terminated.

     Upon receipt of support money after January 1, 1975, where a spouse is
holding himself or herself out in the manner operative under section 4801.5, the
receiving spouse is no more than an involuntary trustee of the funds received.
Upon proper motion to the court and proof of the operative facts to the
satisfaction of the court, its order properly shall issue requiring return of
those funds.

    The restitution order herein, to the extent it related back to January 1,
1975, is valid.

   III

   Due to the minimal record provided to this court on appeal, we cannot reach
the final contention that the findings of the lower court are insufficient.

   Order reversed with directions to enter an order in accordance with the views
expressed in this opinion.  Each party is to bear their own costs on appeal.


                              89 of 100 DOCUMENTS

              In re the Marriage of ELISABETH L. and JOHN W. DICK.
           ELISABETH L. DICK, Appellant, v. JOHN W. DICK, Appellant.

                             Nos. B050928, B055942

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SECOND APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION FOUR

           15 Cal. App. 4th 144; 18 Cal. Rptr. 2d 743; 1993 Cal. App.
          LEXIS 453; 93 Cal. Daily Op. Service 3067; 93 Daily Journal
                                    DAR 5239


                            April 26, 1993, Decided

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Review Denied August 25, 1993, Reported at: 1993 Cal.
LEXIS 4466.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Los Angeles County, No. D 227796, Kenneth A.
Black, Judge, and Lester E. Olson, Temporary Judge. *

*   Pursuant to California Constitution, article VI, section 21.

COUNSEL: Trope & Trope and Thomas Paine Dunlap for Appellant Wife.

Stephen A. Kolodny and Carole R. Azran for Appellant Husband.

JUDGES: Opinion by Woods A. M., P. J., with Epstein, J., and Hoffman, J., *
concurring.)

*   Judge of the Municipal Court for the Los Angeles Judicial District sitting
under assignment by the Chairperson of the Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: WOODS (A. M.), P. J.

OPINION

    These consolidated appeals arise from dissolution proceedings in the
marriage of John W. and Elisabeth L. Dick.  Both have appealed, wife from the
judgment of dissolution, and husband from an order awarding spousal support and
attorney fees.  We considered each appeal separately.

    WIFE'S APPEAL

   Wife appeals from the judgment of dissolution, arguing that the court  lacked
jurisdiction to render the judgment because husband's status as a nonimmigrant
alien, i.e., a tourist, precluded a finding, for purposes of jurisdiction, that
he intended to make his domicile in California.  Viewed in the light most
favorable to the judgment (Sevier v. Locher (1990) 222 Cal.App.3d 1082, 1087
[272 Cal.Rptr. 287]), the evidence established the following facts:

   The parties married on February 14, 1982, and separated in April 1987.  Wife
filed an action for dissolution in Arapahoe County, Colorado, and then refiled
the action in Denver, Colorado.  Husband was not served with the Colorado
actions.

   On October 26, 1988, wife filed a petition for legal separation in the Los
Angeles Superior Court.  In the petition she stated her intention "to amend this
Petition and request Dissolution of Marriage as soon as residence requirements
are met." She subsequently filed a second petition that omitted this statement.
The petition was served on husband by publication.  In his response to the
petition, husband stated that if he was able to meet California's
"jurisdictional requirements, this Response to Amended Petition will be amended
to seek dissolution of marriage." On December 29, 1989, husband amended his
response to allege that he had satisfied the jurisdictional requirements of
residence by residing in the state for six months and the county for three.  He
requested that the court dissolve the marriage. He also moved for bifurcation of
trial so that the issue of status could be determined apart from the issue of
spousal support.

   Wife filed papers challenging husband's claim that he had satisfied the
residence requirement.  The core of her argument was that, because husband was a
nonimmigrant alien, he could not possess the intention to be a resident of
California.  She cited deposition testimony by husband in which he admitted he
was a Canadian citizen who had tourist status in the United States.  She argued
that under immigration law, tourist status embodied an intent to return to one's
homeland, and this conflicted with an intent to become a resident of California
for purposes of the dissolution proceedings.

   The motion for bifurcation was granted and a trial conducted on the issue of
status.  The only issue as to which evidence was taken went to the question of
whether husband had satisfied the residence requirement.

    It was established at trial that during the marriage, the parties resided in
Englewood, Colorado, but they also maintained residences elsewhere, including a
manor on the Isle of Jersey in the Channel Islands, two houses in  Palm Springs,
a house in Pasadena, a penthouse in London and a skiing condominium in
Breckenridge, Colorado.

   Husband testified that until 1984, he had dual American and Canadian
citizenships.  That year he renounced his American citizenship and became a
citizen of the Dominican Republic.  He continued to travel on a Canadian
passport.

   From 1981 to 1988 or 1989, husband testified he considered his principal
residence to be on the Isle of Jersey.  In June 1989, husband rented a room at
his sister's house in Pasadena but subsequently rented an apartment in Los
Angeles.  Husband came to Los Angeles with the intent of remaining here
indefinitely to develop business contacts.  Husband obtained a California
driver's license and opened a local bank account.  While he lived at his
sister's house, he paid her $ 400 a month for the room he occupied and had a
telephone installed in it.  He received his phone bill at her address  and,
after he moved out, his mail was forwarded to his Los Angeles apartment from his
other residences.  He also testified that he owned a car registered in
California at his present address.

   Husband testified that his current immigration status was as a tourist and
that he was required to leave the country every six months and to reenter.  He
testified that he had discussed with his lawyer the possibility of obtaining a
green card but had not yet filed an application for one.

   At the conclusion of the trial, the court found that "residence does exist."
It then went on to find irreconcilable differences and granted the judgment of
dissolution. Wife appealed.  We affirm.

   I

   Wife presents five contentions: (1) that husband's immigrant status as a
nonimmigrant alien precludes a finding of residence for purposes of dissolution;
(2) that even if his immigrant status does not preclude a finding of residence,
there is insufficient evidence to support that finding; (3) the court erred when
it excluded wife's immigration expert from testifying; (4) the issue of status
was not before the court because husband failed to obtain leave of court to file
an amended response to her petition; and (5) the court erred by depriving wife
of an opportunity to request a statement of decision.  We deal with each
contention seriatim.

   "A judgment decreeing the dissolution of a marriage may not be entered unless
one of the parties to the marriage has been a resident of this state for  six
months and of the county in which the proceeding is filed for three months next
preceding the filing of the petition." (Civ. Code, § 4530, subd. (a).)   Whether
the residency requirement has been met is a question of fact and the burden of
establishing residence is on the party asserting it.  (In re Marriage of
Thornton (1982) 135 Cal.App.3d 500, 510 [185 Cal.Rptr. 388]; Khan v. Superior
Court (1988) 204 Cal.App.3d 1168, 1180 [251 Cal.Rptr. 815].) For purposes of
Civil Code section 4530, subdivision (a), residency is synonymous with domicile,
the latter term meaning " 'both the act of residence and an intention to remain
. . ..' " (Original italics.) (In re Marriage of Thornton, supra, at p. 507,
quoting Smith v. Smith (1955) 45 Cal.2d 235, 239 [288 P.2d 497].)

   The parties have not cited to us, nor has our research disclosed, a
California case that addresses the question of whether a nonimmigrant alien can
establish residency for the purpose of obtaining a dissolution of marriage.
However, the cases cited to us, and those which we have found, from other
jurisdictions hold that immigration status is, at most, evidence of domiciliary
intent, but not dispositive of the residency issue as a matter of law.  These
cases hold that a party's nonimmigrant alien status does not bar that party from
establishing domicile for purposes of a dissolution statute.  (Rzeszotarski v.
Rzeszotarski (D.C.App. 1972) 296 A.2d 431]; Alves v. Alves (D.C.App. 1970) 262
A.2d 111 [52 A.L.R.3d 213]; Nicolas v. Nicolas (Fla.Dist.Ct.App. 1984) 444 So.2d
1118; Abou-Issa v. Abou-Issa (1972) 229 Ga. 77  [189 S.E.2d 443]; Cocron v.
Cocron (1975) 84 Misc.2d 335 [375 N.Y.S.2d 797]; Pirouzkar and Pirouzkar (1981)
51 Ore.App. 519 [626 P.2d 380]; Bustamante v. Bustamante (Utah 1982) 645 P.2d 40
; Williams v. Williams (D.V.I. 1971) 328 F.Supp. 1380.) We agree with the
reasoning of these cases on this issue.

   Wife acknowledges this authority, but insists that these cases are factually
distinguishable because in each of these cases the nonimmigrant resident had
applied for permanent resident status.  This is not true of every case cited,
however, and even where it is true, the intention of the noncitizen spouse to
obtain a more permanent immigration status was not dispositive.  In Alves v.
Alves, supra, 262 A.2d 111, for instance, there was no suggestion that the
nonimmigrant alien husband had demonstrated any intention to seek permanent
resident status.  Yet, the court held that, regardless of his immigration
status, he had established domicile for purposes of obtaining a divorce in the
District of Columbia.

   In its thoughtful analysis, the Alves court said: "The relationship between
an alien and a jurisdiction such as the District of Columbia, and an alien and
the United States are not of equal significance.  Domicile is concerned with
one's physical presence in a particular locality and the 'nexus between person
and place of such permanence as to control the creation of legal relations and
responsibilities of the utmost significance.' It is the appellee's connection
with the District of Columbia and the legal rights and duties which accompany
his presence here that is of importance.  Appellee's retention of British
citizenship does not preclude his becoming domiciled in the District of
Columbia.  Nor do we think that the fact appellee did not apply for permanent
residence in the United States forecloses the possibility of his being domiciled
in the District of Columbia.  Under the Immigration and Nationality Laws it is
possible, for a variety of reasons, for an alien to remain in the United States
for many years, as appellee has done, without applying for permanent residence.
Furthermore, to impose such a requirement [of seeking permanent resident status]
would have the effect of denying appellee access to our courts without regard to
the period of time he has resided in the District of Columbia, his intention in
moving into the District of Columbia and other relevant factors.  Just as aliens
are subject to the jurisdiction of our courts, they should be entitled to invoke
the jurisdiction of the courts for their own benefit." (Id. at pp. 114-115, fns.
omitted.) With respect to the question of husband's visa status, the court
remarked, "A visa is a document of entry required of aliens by the United States
Government and is a matter under control of the Government.  It has little
relevance to the question of domicile." (Id. at p. 115.)

   Similarly, in Bustamante v. Bustamante, supra, 645 P.2d 40, the Utah Supreme
Court "emphasize[d] that a visa application or renewal form indicating a date
certain for return to one's home country is not necessarily inconsistent with an
actual conditional intent to establish permanent residency in the United States,
if possible, by means of renewals and extensions of one's nonimmigrant status or
attainment of immigrant status." (645 P.2d at p. 42.) The court held "an alien
may have a 'dual intent'--an intent to remain if that may be accomplished and at
the same time an intent to leave if the law so commands." (Ibid.; Cocron v.
Cocron, supra, 375 N.Y.S.2d at p. 809 ["[wife's] arrival under a temporary visa
is not enough to prevent [her], from becoming a resident of this state for
purposes of maintaining an action for divorce [citation].  . . ."].)

     We conclude that husband's nonimmigrant status does not preclude a finding
of residence under California law for purposes of obtaining a dissolution of
marriage. We agree with Bustamante and Cocron that a nonimmigrant alien in the
United States on a renewable visa may have the dual intention of remaining in
this country indefinitely by whatever means including renewal of a visa and of
returning to his or her home country if so compelled.   At most, "alien status
can . . . operate as an evidentiary fact  against the person's alleged intention
to remain in the state permanently [citation]." (Cocron v. Cocron, supra, 375
N.Y.S.2d at p. 809.)

   This conclusion is buttressed by the different aims and purposes of
immigration and dissolution law; "there is no rational ground for intermingling
these two distinct areas of law . . .." (Williams v. Williams, supra, 328
F.Supp. at p. 1383.) It is not necessary for the courts of this state to carry
out immigration policy by denying nonimmigrant aliens a judicial forum when they
otherwise meet domiciliary requirements and when they are subject to the courts
of this state for other purposes.  (Ibid. ["The enforcement of immigration laws
properly remains with those to whom it is entrusted by law and does not need in
aid of enforcement the judicially created civil disability of exclusion from our
divorce courts."]; Pirouzkar and Pirouzkar, supra, 626 P.2d at p. 384 ["The
enforcement of the immigration laws is the function of the federal
government."].)

   Wife cites numerous cases, none of them, however, involving the question
before us.  Chiefly, she relies on a Supreme Court case called Elkins v. Moreno
(1978) 435 U.S. 647 [55 L.Ed.2d 614, 98 S.Ct. 1338], which involved a claim by a
nonimmigrant alien residing in Maryland to the benefits of "in-state" status at
the University of Maryland.  As was pointed out in Pirouzkar and Pirouzkar,
supra, 626 P.2d 380, however, while Elkins "held that federal law did not
prevent the establishment of a domicile in this country by nonimmigrant aliens
present pursuant to visas which do not require the maintenance of a foreign
residence [it] specifically did not decide the issue as to those nonimmigrant
aliens whose visas require that a foreign residence be maintained." (Id. at p.
383, fn. 2.) Thus, because it specifically declined to consider the issue,
Elkins lends no support to wife's claim that husband is precluded from
establishing domicile because of his tourist status.  Likewise, Seren v. Douglas
(1971) 30 Colo.App. 110 [489 P.2d 601], involves the classification of a
nonresident alien for purposes of determining whether or not to extend
"in-state" university benefits and is not relevant to the issue before us.

   Wife's reliance on Anselmo v. Glendale Unified School Dist. (1981) 124
Cal.App.3d 520 [177 Cal.Rptr. 427], deals most directly with the issue before
us.  Anselmo held that the child of nonimmigrant aliens was ineligible to attend
public school, despite the fact that her parents had purchased a home in the
district, because the statute under which their visa was issued defined an alien
as "having residence in a foreign country." In Illingworth v. State Bd. of
Control (1984) 161 Cal.App.3d 274 [207 Cal.Rptr. 471], a decision that held a
nonimmigrant alien was eligible for monetary assistance under the violent crime
act, the court distinguished Anselmo: "The holding in  Anselmo clearly depended
on the statute's reference to federal law and thus must be distinguished from
this case, where the statute is silent as to the definition of residence." (
Illingworth v. State Bd. of Control, supra, at p. 281.) It is not as clear to us
that Anselmo's reference to the United States Code definition of status is
sufficient reliance on federal law to distinguish it from further consideration.
With all due respect, in our opinion Anselmo was wrongly decided.  For reasons
we have stated, we agree with those courts which have held that the federal
requirement of maintaining a residence in a foreign country is not necessarily
inconsistent with establishing domicile under state law.

   Accordingly, we hold that a nonimmigrant alien is not precluded from
establishing residence in California for purposes of the dissolution statute.

   II

     Wife next contends that, even if husband's immigration status did not
preclude him from establishing residence, the court abused its discretion in
determining that he had satisfied the residency requirement. This is, of course,
an attack on the sufficiency of the evidence.   Under the substantial evidence
rule of appellate review,  "the reviewing court's task begins and ends with a
determination as to whether there is any substantial evidence in the record to
support" the trial court's finding of domicile. (In re Marriage of Leff (1972)
25 Cal.App.3d 630, 641 [102 Cal.Rptr. 195].) Moreover, where there was
conflicting evidence below "that which favors the judgment must be accepted as
true, and that which is unfavorable must be discarded as not having had
sufficient verity for acceptance by the trial court.  [Citations.]" (Ross v.
Lawrence (1963) 219 Cal.App.2d 229, 232- 233 [33 Cal.Rptr. 135].)

     As noted above, residence is established under Civil Code section 4530 if
either party has resided in the state for six months prior to the petition for
dissolution and three months in the county where the petition is filed.  More
generally, residence requires proof of physical residence and an intention to
remain.  (In re Marriage of Thornton, supra, 135 Cal.App.3d at p. 507.)

     Applying the appellate standard of review, the record shows: that husband
has been a continuous resident of Los Angeles County since June 1989; that he
intends to remain indefinitely in Los Angeles County; that he regards no other
place in the world as his residence; that he had moved from a room in his
sister's house to an apartment of his own in furtherance of his intent to remain
in Los Angeles County; that he quit residence on the Isle of  Jersey in 1989 and
has not continuously resided in Colorado since 1987; that the only reason he
failed to file state or federal tax returns was because he had no taxable income
in California or the United States; that he has a California driver's license
and owns an automobile registered at his current Los Angeles address; that his
sole bank account was located in Los Angeles;  that he receives all of his mail
in Los Angeles either directly or by forwarding.

   Wife contends that the trial court's finding on residency is not supported by
the evidence and cites contrary evidence.  It is obvious that the trial court
disregarded the evidence upon which wife relies, and so must we.   The trial
court's factual determination is binding on this court "even though evidence
conflicts or supports contrary inferences.  [Citations.]" (In re Marriage of
Grinius (1985) 166 Cal.App.3d 1179, 1185 [212 Cal.Rptr. 803].) Under this
standard of review, we have searched the record and concluded that substantial
evidence supports the trial court's finding of residency.

   III

     Wife complains that the court erred when it denied her request to call an
expert on immigration law.  According to wife, the expert was required to
testify to "the requirements and significance relating to entrance into the
United States of a person in John's circumstances." Whether or not to permit
expert testimony is largely within the discretion of the trial court.  (Downer
v. Bramet (1984) 152 Cal.App.3d 837, 842 [199 Cal.Rptr. 830].) Although strict
application has been criticized, the general rule is that expert testimony on
domestic law is usually inadmissible.  (See 1 Witkin, Cal. Evidence (3d ed.
1986) § 535, p. 507.) In this case, the issue of husband's nonimmigrant status
was not dispositive of the question of residence, and therefore the court could
well determine that the proposed expert testimony was tangential, cumulative or
otherwise unnecessary.  We find no abuse of discretion in the exclusion of the
proffered testimony.  In any event, wife fails to show that the ruling so
prejudiced her as to constitute a miscarriage of justice.  (9 Witkin, Cal.
Procedure (3d ed. 1985) Appeal, § 324, pp. 334-335.)

     Wife also complains that husband's failure to obtain leave of the court to
formally amend his response to seek dissolution of marriage renders the court's
judgment void.  The contention is without merit because the authority she relies
on, Civil Code section 4530, fails to support her.   Civil Code section 4530,
subdivision (b) states that a party satisfying the residency requirement may
"amend his petition or responsive pleading in such proceeding [for legal
separation] to request that a judgment decreeing the  dissolution of the
marriage be entered . . ..  If an appearance has been made in the proceeding,
notice of such amendment shall be given to the other party in the manner
provided by rules adopted by the Judicial Council.  . . ." (Civ. Code, § 4530,
subd. (b), italics added.)

   Regarding notice, the Family Law Rules provide that "When a notice or other
paper is required to be given or served on a party, such notice or service shall
be given to or made on his attorney of record if he has one." (Cal. Rules of
Court, rule 1201(b).) As husband points out, he provided notice of his amendment
to his response to wife's petition prior to the trial of the matter, thus
satisfying Civil Code section 4530, subdivision (b).  Wife's claim that that
statute required husband to seek leave of court to amend his response simply
misreads the statute; that section relates to notice, not the form, of the
amendment.

   Finally, wife originally contended that the court erred by entering judgment
without permitting her to request a statement of decision.  By letter dated
September 30, 1991, wife withdrew this argument and we do not consider it
further.

   The judgment of dissolution is affirmed.  Husband's request for sanctions is
denied.

   HUSBAND'S APPEAL

   Husband appeals from an order awarding temporary spousal support and payment
of attorney fees.  He contends (1) the court's award of spousal support was
improper because it was retroactive to a date before wife filed her order to
show cause for spousal support; (2) the order was based on husband's ability to
borrow rather than his ability to pay; (3) there was insufficient evidence of
his ability to borrow funds to pay the sums required of him; (4) the order
requiring payment of attorney fees and other costs was also improperly based on
husband's ability to borrow; and (5) the award of future attorney fees exceeded
the amount claimed by wife and must be vacated.  After review, we find no merit
in these contentions and affirm.

   We need not repeat the procedural facts which were previously stated in
connection with wife's appeal.  Suffice it to say that on October 26, 1988, wife
filed a petition for legal separation in which she requested spousal support,
attorney fees and costs.  A first amended petition for legal separation, also
seeking spousal support, fees and costs, was filed on November 10, 1988, and
served on husband by publication.  On July 27, 1989, husband filed his response
to the petition.  As we have indicated, the court bifurcated  the issue of
status from issues relating to temporary spousal support. On February 9, 1990,
husband filed an order to show cause on spousal support and attorney fees.
Husband declared that he had "no positive net monthly disposable income." On
March 8, 1990, wife filed her order to show cause on spousal support and
attorney fees.  In it, she requested monthly spousal support of $ 101,268 per
month and submitted a declaration that detailed a lavish life-style enjoyed
during the marriage. She also requested a total of $ 1,050,000 in attorney fees,
accounting fees, appraisal fees and other costs.

   Trial began on July 24, 1990, and ended nearly five months later, on December
10, 1990.  The trial judge awarded wife $ 35,000 a month in spousal support
retroactive to January 1, 1989, and present and prospective attorney and
accounting fees in the total amount of $ 1,047,921.71 of which $ 900,000 was for
future attorney and accounting fees.  We will set forth the additional facts
adduced during the trial as is necessary to our discussion.

    I

   The bulk of husband's argument is directed to two points: (1) that the
court's order of temporary spousal support and attorney fees and costs was
improper because it was based on his ability to borrow, rather than his ability
to pay, and (2) there was no evidence that he had either income to pay or the
ability to borrow the sums of money he was ordered to pay.  We find no merit in
husband's arguments.  By its express terms, the trial court's order was based on
husband's ability to pay and there was substantial evidence to support it.

     Civil Code section 4357 permits a temporary award of spousal support "that
is necessary for the support and maintenance of the [spouse] . . .." (Civ. Code,
§ 4357, subd. (a).) Similarly, Civil Code section 4370 authorizes the payment of
attorney fees and costs pendente lite.  (Civ. Code, § 4370, subd. (a).)  Awards
under these two sections are based on "a showing of two conditions: the moving
party's needs, and the other party's ability to pay . . .." (11 Witkin, Summary
of Cal. Law (9th ed. 1990) Husband and Wife, § 181, p. 215; In re Marriage of
Garcia (1990) 224 Cal.App.3d 885, 893 [274 Cal.Rptr. 194].) Ability to pay
encompasses far more than the income of the spouse from whom temporary support
is sought; investments and other assets may be used for both temporary spousal
support and attorney fees pendente lite.  (Rosenthal v. Rosenthal (1961) 197
Cal.App.2d 289, 299 [17 Cal.Rptr. 186]; In re Marriage of Stich (1985) 169
Cal.App.3d 64, 74 [214 Cal.Rptr. 919].)

     In the instant case, the trial court made the specific and unequivocal
finding that husband "has the ability to pay" based on the "extensive  assets
and nonsalary income at his disposal" which "have been placed by him in the
control of others acting for his benefit [and] have a value in excess of $
20,000,000." It was proper for the court to look to assets controlled by
husband, other than income, as a basis for the award.  (Rosenthal v. Rosenthal,
supra, 197 Cal.App.2d at p. 299; In re Marriage of Stich, supra, 169 Cal.App.3d
at p. 74.) The evidence supports the trial court's finding of husband's ability
to pay.

   Husband's claim that the temporary spousal support and attorney fees awards
were based on his ability to borrow is a deceptive characterization of the trial
court's order based on husband's testimony that he was without the means to pay
the sums ordered, and had no hidden assets.  It is clear that the trial court
utterly disbelieved him, and its assessment of husband's credibility is binding
on this court.  (Stokus v. Marsh (1990) 217 Cal.App.3d 647, 656 [266 Cal.Rptr.
90].) The record offers substantial evidence in support of the trial court's
order.  (In re Marriage of Grinius, supra, 166 Cal.App.3d at p. 1185 [trial
court's factual determinations binding and conclusive on appellate court if
supported by substantial evidence].)

   As the trial court noted in its order, the reporter's transcripts in this
case alone exceed 2,500 pages.  While we have reviewed the entire record, it is
not necessary, for purposes of this opinion, to summarize all of the evidence;
we need only determine that there is substantial evidence to support the trial
court's order, to affirm it.  (Miller v. National American Life Ins. Co. (1976)
54 Cal.App.3d 331, 337 [126 Cal.Rptr. 731].) Accordingly, we will follow the
trial court's example and recount only that evidence which was cited by the
court in support of its specific factual findings.

   Husband contends, without citation to the record, that wife failed to prove
her need for temporary spousal support. As a corollary, he argues that, because
she had been advanced over $ 2 million in loans by her friend, Bill Daniels, she
has no need for spousal support. The court found, however, that wife was unable
to support herself, had no assets or income at her disposal and that the moneys
extended to her by Daniels were, in fact, loans which were to be repayed and not
gifts.  Substantial evidence supports these findings.

   The evidence shows that wife was sixty-three years old, that she had not
worked in eight and a half years, that she lacked vocational skills, and that
her formal education had ended with a year and a half of college.  The evidence
also showed that the only support she had received from husband was payments of
$ 3,000 a month, which had been stopped more than a year before the trial,
forcing wife to borrow money from Daniels.  Both wife and  Bill Daniels
testified that he had loaned her over $ 2 million which she used to support
herself and for litigation costs.  Daniels testified that his motive in making
the loans was because he "[had] a problem . . . where husbands . . . leave wives
who have no money, can't afford an attorney, can't  pay the bills and say to the
wife 'So sue me.' " Notwithstanding husband's innuendo, both Daniels and wife
denied having a romantic or sexual relationship.  Daniels also testified that he
had decided not to make further loans to wife, depriving her of her only source
of funds.  The evidence thus established wife's need for temporary spousal
support and an award for past and prospective attorney fees and other litigation
costs.

   There was, as discussed, ample evidence to support the trial court's finding
of husband's ability to pay based on assets and nonsalary income, not in
husband's name but under his control.  The court found: "The assets belonging to
[husband], which have been placed by him in the control of others acting for his
benefit, have a value in excess of $ 20,000,000." The crucial finding was that
husband had organized his assets so that he had created "a labyrinth of trusts
and corporations designed by him . . .  to shield and protect [him] from
creditors.  . . .  Although the evidence fails to disclose any assets actually
standing in the name of [husband], he has access to and control of extensive
assets . . .." The court concluded "that the transactions by which [husband]
transferred ownership of assets from his name to various off-shore trusts and
corporation[s] were for the purpose of tax avoidance and to create a shelter
from creditors, and that for the purpose of this proceeding, they must be
disregarded." Ample legal authority supports this conclusion.

     It is well-settled that a trust created for the purpose of defrauding
creditors or other persons is illegal and may be disregarded. (Samuelson v.
Ingraham (1969) 272 Cal.App.2d 804, 806 [77 Cal.Rptr. 750]; Prob. Code, § 15203
["A trust may be created for any purpose that is not illegal or against public
policy."].) This rule has been applied to the creation of trust where the
grantor's intention "was to prevent his wife, . . ., from reaching the
property." (Fn. omitted.) (IA Scott on Trusts (4th ed. 1987) § 63, pp. 363-364;
Farino v. Farino (1982) 88 A.D.2d 902 [450 N.Y.S.2d 593].)   The rule regarding
fraudulent corporations is equally well settled: "When a corporation is used by
an individual or individuals, or by another corporation, to perpetrate a fraud,
circumvent a statute, or accomplish some other wrongful or inequitable purpose,
a court may disregard the corporate entity and treat the acts as if they were
done by the individuals themselves . . .." (9 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (9th
ed. 1989) Corporations, § 12, p. 524, italics deleted; Kohn v. Kohn (1950) 95
Cal.App.2d 708, 717-720 [214 P.2d 71] [corporate entity disregarded to the
extent  its purpose was to minimize husband's assets for alimony payments].)
Thus, the court below was entitled to look past the apparent form of ownership
in which husband's assets were held to determine the extent of husband's true
interest in them and the availability of those assets in assessing husband's
ability to pay. (Rosenthal v. Rosenthal, supra, 197 Cal.App.2d at p. 299.)

   The court's factual findings, including its implied conclusion that husband's
testimony was not believable, are also supported.  For example,  husband
testified that his only source of income was a $ 5 million "credit line" from a
trust company called La Hogue Boete.  Husband, however, failed to supply any
evidence documenting this financial transaction.  He testified that the line of
credit was guaranteed by a childhood friend named George Neufeld.  However, as
far as husband knew, Neufeld, the alleged guarantor of the loans, had never
provided a personal financial statement to La Hogue Boete.  Moreover, in an
earlier declaration, husband had disavowed any business dealings with Neufeld:
"Mr. Neufeld would have no knowledge of my income, assets or personal affairs."
In contrast to husband's claim of penury, the court noted that husband's 1984
and 1985 personal financial statements, which were admitted into evidence,
indicate net worths of $ 42,008,193 and $ 46,459,473, respectively.  The court
concluded that husband had "failed to credibly explain where the assets he held
in 1985 and 1986 went, particularly in view of [his] ability to continue to use
assets not standing in his name."

    As an example of husband's ability to use assets not standing in his name,
the court pointed to husband's use of an English manor house called St. John's
Manor on the Isle of Jersey.  Until 1989, husband considered St. John's Manor
his principal residence.  Title to the property was held in trust by an entity
called the Manorhouse Trust.  Husband denied being a trustee, trustor or
beneficiary of that trust.  Yet, as the court pointed out, in a 1988 declaration
to the Royal Court of the Isle of Jersey, husband declared that he was the "
'Signeur [sic] of St. John' " and intended to be buried in the crypt beneath the
chapel.  Additionally, husband's initials "JWD" were carved into a stone
entryway.  Moreover, a letter to the prior owner from husband's lawyers stated
that the manor would be purchased, not by husband in his own name, but "by a
company incorporated in Jersey and wholely [sic] owned by Mr. Dick known as 'St.
John's Manor Limited'." (St. John's Manor Limited continued to hold title to
farmland around the manor, while the house was held by the Manorhouse Trust.)

   The method by which title to the manor was held illustrates the court's
finding that husband used "a labyrinth of trusts and corporations" to avoid
legal title to assets he otherwise controlled.  Manorhouse Trust, the record
owner, was administered by a trust company called La Hogue Boete.  La Hogue
Boete was not only operated by former employees of a trust company that had
previously administered husband's trusts, but its offices were located at St.
John's Manor. The only other clients of La Hogue Boete that husband knew of,
were his brother-in-law and a longtime business associate.  Husband admitted,
moreover, that he instructed La Hogue Boete on investments and that it had never
made an investment of which he disapproved.

   Husband was, moreover, the only person who resided at St. John's Manor. He
paid no rent except by way of living expenses.  These were paid to the
Manorhouse Trust through a client account at La Hogue Boete.  Although La Hogue
Boete prepared statements for husband, they were not mailed to him and he saw
them only when he happened to be at the manor. His children, the alleged
beneficiaries of the Manorhouse Trust, had never received any disbursements from
the trust nor was there evidence that they or anyone else resided at the manor
without husband's consent.

   It could be inferred from this evidence that, notwithstanding his absence of
legal title, husband controlled ownership of St. John's Manor through the
fiction of a trust.

   Another example, cited by the trial court, of husband's use of an asset not
in his name was his use of a large house outside Denver, Colorado, described by
wife as "one of the largest residences in the Denver metropolitan area." The
court found that the way in which title to the house was held during the
marriage illustrated the "complicated scheme of 'hide the assets' . . ." engaged
in by husband.  Title to the Denver residence was held by an entity called
Alkobel.  Husband denied ownership or other interest in either the house or
Alkobel.  Despite the denial, however, husband's federal tax return for 1981
reported the sale of the residence.  He never replaced this residence with
another, nor did he ever declare a taxable gain on the sale.  From this the
trial court inferred that the Denver residence continued to be within husband's
control notwithstanding the claimed change of ownership. Moreover, in a 1982
letter to the United Bank of Denver for purposes of obtaining a loan, husband
wrote, with respect to this same piece of property, "I am the sole owner of my
residence at Seven Sunset Drive, Englewood, Colorado 80110." Additionally,  when
the house was remodeled, it was done under husband's supervision.  He decided
what changes would be made to the residence.  He also chose the furniture for
the residence and directed the servants who worked there.

   In addition to husband's apparently unlimited and unrestrained use of assets
as to which he denied ownership, the trial court also observed that  "the
evidence discloses that in 1984 through 1986, [husband] parted with millions of
dollars under suspicious circumstances . . .." The court specifically  cited a
transaction at the end of 1984 in which husband allegedly "sold" millions of
dollars of assets.

   That year, husband apparently rid himself of all his United States assets by
"selling" them to his former secretary, Corrine Brown, and two business
associates, Bill Pauls and Ray Near.  No cash changed hands.  Instead, husband
accepted promissory notes totalling $ 17.5 million that were not due until 1996.
Husband put these notes up as collateral for a short term $ 5 million loan from
an entity called "Sansend." The $ 5 million loan, in turn, became past due, yet
Sansend made no effort to collect on it.  The court found that this was a sham
transaction,  the apparent purpose of which was to remove husband from title of
assets while still allowing him to exercise control of them through complicit
business associates.

   The trial court found "[husband] has an obsession with the concept of having
no indicia of ownership of property standing in his name, yet controlling and
using said property as if it were his own." As the court noted, assets as
disparate as a doll collection, automobiles, condominiums used by husband's
parents and two Palm Springs houses, one of which husband used as his residence,
were all held in a network of related trusts.

   Regarding the value of husband's hidden assets, wife's expert accountant
testified that they were worth $ 160 million.  This evaluation took into account
the value of various trusts and real property, plus $ 91 million which was being
held by a company called Barclay Trust for an undisclosed beneficiary who wife's
expert identified as husband.  Husband offered no evidence contesting the
assessed value of those assets; he merely denied having any control over them.
The trial court's conclusion that his assets are worth at least $ 20 million is
thus supported by substantial evidence.

   The evidence we have set forth by way of illustration supports the trial
court's finding that husband has the ability to pay spousal support and attorney
fees and the finding that husband has obsessively sought to rid himself of any
indicia of ownership of his considerable assets, while using or drawing upon
them.  The evidence shows, moreover, that when it has been convenient to him,
husband has asserted his ownership of various assets, the ownership of which he
now denies.

   The evidence also shows that husband's transfers of assets, by "sale" or
placing them into trust, involve people to whom he is related or who are or have
been his employees or business associates, and who could, therefore, be
expected to act at his behest.  It can be inferred from this evidence that
husband is capable of complying with the order for payment of support and
attorney fees.  Accordingly, the order must be affirmed.

     Before leaving our review of the court's findings and the evidence that
supports them, we address husband's additional claim that the spousal support
award is excessive.   The amount of temporary spousal support awarded by a court
is a matter of discretion and will not be reversed absent a clear showing of
abuse of discretion. (In re Marriage of Czapar (1991) 232 Cal.App.3d 1308, 1316
[284 Cal.Rptr. 41].)   Husband does not even attempt to make such a showing, but
simply refers to his testimony, which the trial court has rejected as unworthy
of belief.

   The evidence supports the trial court's award of $ 35,000 a month in
temporary alimony.  The trial court has valued husband's assets as being in
excess of $ 20 million.  The expert evidence offered by wife would indicate this
estimate is conservative.  Wife's testimony established that the parties enjoyed
a lavish life-style that included residences here and abroad, servants,
continuous first-class travel, the use of expensive automobiles and unlimited
funds for clothing and entertainment, among other luxuries.  One of wife's
expert accountant witnesses testified from a reconstruction of expenses that
wife and husband had spent $ 74,521 monthly during the last 17 months of their
marriage. We conclude that this evidence supports the  amount of spousal support
ordered by the trial court.

   II

     Husband next contends that the court erred by making its spousal support
order retroactive to January 1, 1989.  The argument is without merit.

   The trial court determined that jurisdiction to award temporary spousal
support existed from October 26, 1988, the date on which wife filed her petition
for legal separation. In that petition she requested spousal support although
she did not file her formal order to show cause until March 8, 1990.  Husband
contends that she was not entitled to temporary spousal support until the filing
of the order to show cause.  Husband also claims that the order was a mistake,
but there was no mistake; the court intended precisely what the written order
set forth, spousal support was to be retroactive to January 1, 1989,
approximately two months after wife requested support in her petition for legal
separation.

   In support of his argument husband cites us to Civil Code section 4801,
subdivision (a), which governs permanent spousal support, rather than temporary
spousal support. Section 4801, subdivision (a)(10) provides in part:  "Any order
for spousal support may be made retroactive to the date of filing of the notice
of motion or order to show cause therefor, or to any subsequent date." (Civ.
Code, § 4801,  subd. (a)(10).) Husband maintains that this language also
encompasses temporary support orders made under Civil Code section 4357, even
though that section is neither mentioned in section 4801, nor does similar
language appear in section 4357.

     Awards of temporary spousal support do not serve the same purpose, nor are
they governed by the same procedures, as awards for permanent spousal support.
"Pendente lite allowances and permanent allowances differ fundamentally in
nature [citation] and function [citation].  'The manifest purposes of pendente
lite allowances to a wife are to enable her to live in her accustomed manner
pending the disposition of the action and to provide her with whatever is needed
by her to litigate properly her side of the controversy.  [Citations.] . . .' .
. .  [P] 'On the other hand the object of permanent allowance is to make an
equitable apportionment between the parties.  . . .' " (Italics deleted.) (
Estate of Fawcett (1965) 232 Cal.App.2d 770, 783-784 [43 Cal.Rptr. 160]; In re
Marriage of Czapar, supra, 232 Cal.App.3d at p. 1316 [no factual findings
required for temporary as opposed to permanent support award].)   Moreover, it
is an accepted rule of statutory construction that "when the Legislature 'has
employed a term or phrase in one place and excluded it in another, it should not
be implied where excluded.' [Citations.]" (Pasadena Police Officers Assn. v.
City of Pasadena (1990) 51 Cal.3d 564, 576 [273 Cal.Rptr. 584, 797 P.2d 608].)
If the Legislature had wanted to limit the retroactivity of temporary spousal
awards to the date on which the order to show cause was filed, as it had in
Civil Code section 4801, it could have expressly so provided, but since it did
not, we will not imply such a limitation.

   Plainly inferable from husband's argument is a concession that the court
could have made the temporary support award retroactive; his quarrel is with the
date to which it was actually made retroactive. The trial court, in effect,
found that jurisdiction to make the award commenced upon wife's filing of her
petition for legal separation on October 26, 1988, but that "through no fault of
[wife], a conclusion to these temporary support hearings has been delayed until
this date."  Except for his citation to Civil Code section 4801, husband fails
to provide any authority for his contention that retroactivity is limited to the
filing of the order to show cause.  We therefore reject his argument.

   III

     Husband attacks the trial court's award of $ 750,000 in future attorney
fees to wife, contending the award must be reversed because wife  had only
requested $ 500,000 in such fees.  The court's award, he claims, was without
"advance notice or due  process" to him.  The argument is without merit.

   The purpose of an award of future attorney fees in a dissolution proceeding
is to provide the party to whom the award is made an adequate amount to properly
litigate the action.  (In re Marriage of Ward (1992) 3 Cal.App.4th 618, 627 [4
Cal.Rptr.2d 365].) "The [trial] court has broad discretion in awarding attorney
fees and costs in dissolution proceedings.  Its determination will not be
disturbed on appeal absent a clear showing of an abuse of discretion.
[Citations.]" (Id. at p. 628.)

      Civil Code section 4370.5 permits such award as "is just and reasonable
under the relative circumstances of the respective parties." (Civ. Code, §
4370.5, subd. (a).) Among other factors, the court may consider " 'the nature of
the litigation, its complexity, the nature and extent of the contest, the amount
involved, the financial circumstances of the parties, the skill required, the
professional standing and reputation of the husband's attorneys and the
attorneys selected by the wife.' [Citation.]" (In re Marriage of Norton (1988)
206 Cal.App.3d 53, 57 [253 Cal.Rptr. 354], quoting In re Marriage of Hatch
(1985) 169 Cal.App.3d 1213, 1219 [215 Cal.Rptr. 789].) Additionally, the trial
court may employ its own experience in fixing the amount of the award.  (In re
Marriage of Ananeh-Firempong (1990) 219 Cal.App.3d 272, 280 [268 Cal.Rptr. 83].)

   In Ananeh-Firempong, the trial court awarded wife $ 20,000 in attorney fees,
even though the only evidence of the amount was wife's testimony that she had
been advised her legal fees were just over $ 15,000.  Husband appealed.  The
appellate court affirmed the award as within the discretion of the trial court.
In doing so, the court emphasized the role of the trial judge in determining an
appropriate amount of fees, " 'The knowledge and experience of the trial judge
afford a sufficient basis for fixing the amount of a lawyer's fee, even though
there was no specific evidence on the subject.' " (219 Cal.App.3d at p. 280,
quoting Frank v. Frank (1963) 213 Cal.App.2d 135, 137 [28 Cal.Rptr. 687].)

     As wife notes, in the instant case, the judge who sat by stipulation was
formerly a supervising judge of the Family Law Department of the Los Angeles
Superior Court and, therefore, particularly qualified to make a rational
assessment of wife's future litigation needs.  Moreover, as wife also points
out, though the attorney fee award was $ 250,000 more than she had requested,
the total award for attorney fees, accounting fees and costs was less than the
total amount she had requested for these fees and costs.  Her requests were
supported by lengthy declarations and copies of billings.

    Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the award (In re
Marriage of Huxley (1984) 159 Cal.App.3d 1253, 1263 [206 Cal.Rptr. 291]),
substantial evidence supports the award for future fees.  The court found that
wife was without any funds to support the litigation.  The inordinately lengthy
record here presented, reveals a case of stunning complexity, occasioned, for
the most part, by husband's intransigence.  For example, a declaration of wife's
Colorado attorney revealed that after wife filed her original action in
Colorado, husband managed to evade service for 26 months.  In addition to the
dissolution proceedings, wife was also required to defend against efforts to
evict her from the family residence in Denver, brought by the trust that
allegedly owned the home.  The declaration also stated that husband had
originally filed a divorce action on the Isle of Jersey, but then, fearing he
would be served in the Colorado action, withdrew the case, but only after wife's
attorney had gone to the island to defend that action.  Wife was eventually
compelled to seek jurisdiction in the California courts.  Once in California,
other tactics caused wife's attorney fees to escalate, such as the occasion on
which husband's attorney scheduled wife's attorney's deposition in California,
and then failed to attend.

   Quite apart from declarations and billing statements, the record of this
trial, which  exceeds 5,000 pages in reporter's transcripts and appendices, is
also a monument to the complexity of this case. 1 Both the record and the
enormity of the fees which wife has already paid, support the trial court's
award of future fees.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   For
example, wife called Preston Hofer, a litigation accountant, whose testimony was
directed at husband's multifarious trusts and corporations.  His testimony alone
takes up several hundred pages of transcript in an effort to unravel husband's
business affairs.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The judgment of dissolution and the orders of temporary spousal support and
attorney fees are affirmed.  Each side to have his or her own costs on appeal.

   Epstein, J., and Hoffman, J., * concurred. The petition of appellant John W.
Dick for review by the Supreme Court was denied August 26, 1993.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*   Judge of
the Municipal Court for the Los Angeles Judicial District sitting under
assignment by the Chairperson of the Judicial Council.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -




                              90 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             In re the Marriage of BERNICE and DEWITT WHITE, DEWITT
                 WHITE, Respondent, v. BERNICE WHITE, Appellant

                                  No. B017912

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Three

           192 Cal. App. 3d 1022; 237 Cal. Rptr. 764; 1987 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 1833


                                 June 17, 1987

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Los Angeles County, No. D 944033, Kenneth
A. Black, Temporary Judge. *

*   Pursuant to Constitution, Article VI, section 21.

COUNSEL: Claire Boudov for Appellant.

Joan S. Bauman, Abrams & Kohn and Wendy L. Kohn for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Klein, P. J., with Lui and Danielson, JJ., concurring.

OPINION BY: KLEIN

OPINION

     Appellant Bernice White (Bernice) appeals an order reducing spousal support
paid by respondent Dewitt White (Dewitt).

   Because the trial court did not consider Dewitt's pension income as a
relevant factor in its modification of Bernice's spousal support, the order is
reversed and the case remanded.

   Procedural and Factual Background 1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   The
record on appeal is augmented with the superior court file pursuant to
California Rules of Court, rule 12(a).
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The parties married in 1954.  For 17 years of their 23-year marriage, Dewitt
worked for the City of Los Angeles as a sanitation engineer, all the while
earning pension rights.  Bernice operated a small beauty shop, a community
asset. In June of 1964, the couple purchased a three-bedroom family residence on
7th Avenue in Inglewood.  They separated in 1977 and Dewitt thereafter filed for
dissolution. At the time of the interlocutory judgment in 1979, Dewitt and
Bernice were 59 and 65 years of age, respectively.

   At the 1978 trial, Bernice's expert valued Dewitt's pension at $ 97,500.
Both experts valued the residence at approximately $ 60,000 less its encumbrance
of about $ 18,000.  Although the beauty shop was said to be worth $ 2,000, it
had earned a net loss of approximately $ 2,300 in 1977 and was closed entirely
three years later due to Bernice's arthritis.

   After trial, the trial court issued a notice of intended decision which, in
part relevant here, ordered a sale of the family home with equal division of the
net proceeds, awarded Bernice "an interest in any benefits distributed to
[Dewitt] by reason of his retirement plan" in proportion to the extent those
benefits were earned during marriage, and provided for spousal support to
Bernice in the amount of $ 575 per month.

    The parties, however, rejected the trial court's recommendation and,
instead, stipulated to a division of the community property by which Dewitt
received "[all] rights, title and interest in, and to, his retirement plan with
the City of Los Angeles, including, but not limited to all vested and future
rights and interests therein and any and all benefits distributed to [Dewitt] by
reason of his said retirement plan; . . ." Bernice acquired the family home and
the beauty shop. 2 She obtained spousal support of $ 287.50 "each month, . . .
continuing  until either party dies, [Bernice] remarries, or further order of
the Court."

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   While
there appears to be some question as to whether the stipulation achieved an
equal division of the parties' community property interests, neither party
raises the issue on appeal.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In May 1983, Dewitt suffered a job injury, went on disability and retired
later that year.  On January 1, 1984, he began drawing pension benefits of $
1,540 per month.  In the spring of 1985, Dewitt stopped paying spousal support.
Bernice obtained a writ for payment of arrearages and levied against Dewitt's
pension income.

   Dewitt filed an order to show cause to terminate spousal support and to
recover the pension monies paid on arrearages asserting Bernice had exchanged
"any and all rights to [his] retirement" for the family home "as part of [their]
property settlement agreement." Bernice responded by seeking an increase in
spousal support as well as attorney's fees and costs, claiming Social Security
benefits as her sole source of income.  Dewitt had remarried and his new
spouse's income was approximately $ 200 a month.  Bernice continued to reside in
the family home with an adult niece and a minor grandniece.  Bernice's financial
declaration reflects the niece's gross monthly income to be unknown but shows
the niece paid telephone and utility bills, apparently in lieu of rent.

   At the October 21, 1985, order to show cause the parties stipulated Dewitt's
monthly net income had increased since the granting of the interlocutory
judgment from approximately $ 1,700 to $ 2,348, consisting of $ 288 from Social
Security, $ 520 disability income and $ 1,540 from the pension. They also
stipulated Bernice's income and needs had not changed.

   After receiving these stipulations, the trial court reduced Bernice's monthly
spousal support from $ 287.50 to $ 150 and ordered Dewitt to pay Bernice $ 250
as a contribution to attorney's fees.

   Contentions

   Bernice contends the trial court abused its discretion by refusing to
consider Dewitt's monthly receipt of pension benefits for the purpose of
determining his ability to pay spousal support. She claims the only evidence of
any change in circumstances required an increase rather than a reduction of that
award.

   Discussion

   1.  Separate property pension benefits are properly considered for support
purposes.

   a.  Property division versus spousal support.

     Both Bernice and Dewitt acknowledge Dewitt received the pension as his
"sole and separate property," and for that reason, it is no longer a community
asset to which Bernice has an "absolute right." ( In re Marriage of Brown (1976)
15 Cal.3d 838, 848 [126 Cal.Rptr. 633, 544 P.2d 561, 94 A.L.R.3d 164].)
However, Bernice is not claiming entitlement as co-owner, but asserts the
monthly pension payments constitute income to Dewitt which must be considered
when assessing his ability to pay spousal support.

     In this regard, it must be kept in mind that spousal support considerations
are separate and distinct from property division concepts.  Because the division
of community property is premised on absolute ownership of community assets by
both parties, each must receive a respective full share.  An award of spousal
support, in contrast, is broadly discretionary.  This discretion is codified in
the Family Law Act, Civil Code section 4801, which provides: "'In any judgment
decreeing the dissolution of a marriage . . . , the court may order a party to
pay for the support of the other party any amount, and for any period of time,
as the court may deem just and reasonable.  . . .'" ( In re Marriage of Davis
(1983) 141 Cal.App.3d 71, 77 [190 Cal.Rptr. 104].)

   The statute also sets guidelines and objective standards which the court must
consider in exercising its discretion, including, "'. . . (1) The earning
capacity of each spouse, . . .  [para. ] (2) The needs of each party.  [para. ]
(3) The obligations and assets, including the separate property, of each.
[para. ] (4) The duration of the marriage. [para. ] . . .  [para. ] (9) Any
other factors which it deems just and equitable.  . . .'" ( In re Marriage of
Teegarden  (1986) 181 Cal.App.3d 401, 407 [226 Cal.Rptr. 417].)

   Whereas the respective property rights of the parties must be finalized at
dissolution, there is no such requirement governing spousal support. To the
contrary, because spousal support is a consideration of equity and not of
absolute right, jurisdiction should be retained to modify its terms, especially
after a lengthy marriage. ( In re Marriage of Morrison (1978) 20 Cal.3d 437, 453
[143 Cal.Rptr. 139, 573 P.2d 41].)

    b.  The "double-counting" fallacy.

     Dewitt contends the parties' property division agreement removed the
pension from the trial court's jurisdiction.  Otherwise, he urges, Bernice will
twice receive the benefit of the pension, once upon dissolution and again for
spousal support. This, according to Dewitt's reasoning, is "double dipping."
Although Dewitt's argument may have a superficial appeal, it is inherently
unsound.

     "Double counting"  of a pension occurs only on those occasions when
jurisdiction is reserved over the pension, and it is divided "in kind" as
payments fall due. 3 "Then each spouse is, properly speaking, an owner of a
portion of those benefits and it would be incorrect to attribute the whole to
either spouse for alimony determination purposes.  When, however, all marital
property division is effected at divorce and one spouse is awarded the entire
pension, it is not in any way improper to consider the pension benefits as
entirely [the supporting spouse's] income for purposes of alimony determination.
Some courts have not understood this.  [Fn. omitted.]" (Blumberg, Intangible
Assets: Recognition and Valuation, 2 Valuation and Distribution of Marital
Property (J. McCahey ed. 1984) ch. 23, § 23.02[3], § 23.02[4], pp. 23-15,
23-16.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Even when
jurisdiction is retained over pension property for administrative purposes, such
retention is only after percentages are set as to the distribution of each
payment, and, if necessary, for the creation of a formula taking postseparation
contributions into account.  ( In re Marriage of Bergman (1985) 168 Cal.App.3d
742, 756-757 [214 Cal.Rptr. 661].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Blumberg further observes, "[it] is possible, without committing the error
of 'double counting,' [fn. omitted] to treat a pension as marital property,
award it entirely to the earner spouse (with an offsetting award of marital
property to the nonearner spouse) and then to take the earner spouse's receipt
of pension benefits into account in determining whether there should be any
alimony award to either spouse." (Blumberg, Intangible Assets: Recognition and
Valuation, op. cit. supra, at p. 23-15.)

   c.  Implicit rejection of Dewitt's "double-counting" theory in existing case
law.

   Our Supreme Court in In re Marriage of Epstein (1979) 24 Cal.3d 76, 91, at
footnote 14 [154 Cal.Rptr. 413, 592 P.2d 1165], rejected a contention similar to
that made by Dewitt here.  In Epstein, the earner spouse complained that
continuation of spousal support beyond his retirement would "conflict with the
equal division of community property requirement of Civil Code section 4800,
subdivision (a)." (Ibid.)

    Epstein, however, approved using former community property as a source for
spousal support: "Moreover, even if a future award of spousal support must come
from husband's half of the community property there is no requirement excluding
such property as a source of that support.  As the Court of Appeal below noted,
'in every case where one spouse receives permanent spousal support from the
other spouse, the source is from the separate property of the paying spouse,
including . . . earnings or property which were once the community property of
both spouses.'" 4 (Ibid.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   We note
Epstein's quotation from the vacated opinion of the Court of Appeal stopped one
sentence short of including reference to the fact the retirement income at issue
there was, like here, a pension. Because "facts stated in an appellate opinion .
. . possess generally an assurance of accuracy and reliability" ( Weiner v.
Mitchell, Silberberg & Knupp (1980) 114 Cal.App.3d 39, 46 [170 Cal.Rptr. 533],
we make this observation but, mindful of the prohibition against citing or
relying upon opinions not ordered published ( Cal. Rules of Court, rule 977(a)),
refrain from taking judicial notice of that decision as a precedent ( Evid.
Code, § 452, subd. (d)).  ( People v. North Beach Bonding Co. (1974) 36
Cal.App.3d 663, 673, fn. 9 [111 Cal.Rptr. 757].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     Other cases have reached similar results.  In Verner v. Verner (1978) 77
Cal.App.3d 718 [143 Cal.Rptr. 826], the trial court divided husband's community
property retirement fund in kind awarding $ 8,906 of the accumulations to each
party.  The judgment indicated, "'[this] fund shall be used towards satisfaction
of [husband's] obligation to support the [wife]' . . . ." ( Id., at p. 724.) The
appellate court conceded this language was "subject to various interpretations"
but rejected as unreasonable husband's assertion the support payments were
intended to "somehow constitute liquidation of the $ 8,906 sum, to totally
discharge his obligation . . . ." ( Id., at p. 725.) Concluding the judgment
"merely sought to identify the probable source of [husband's] support payments
at some future time, and nothing more" (ibid.), the court, tacitly recognized
the former community property retirement fund as a proper source for payment of
support.

   This court also by implication has condoned the dual allocation of a pension.
In re Marriage of Olivarez (1986) 188 Cal.App.3d 336 [232 Cal.Rptr. 794],
approved an award of spousal support, as well as attorney's fees and costs, from
the supporting spouse's one-half share of a pension after it had been divided in
kind between the parties.  ( Id., at p. 343.)

   In summary, the cases of Epstein, Olivarez and Verner, as well as Professor
Blumberg's treatise, each assumed the propriety of considering a pension both as
community property and as the basis for awarding spousal support. 5 We are
therefore emboldened to conclude the income from Dewitt's  now separate property
pension must be considered along with other appropriate factors when gauging his
ability to pay just and reasonable spousal support. Failure to do so constitutes
an abuse of the trial court's discretion.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   See also
Annotation, Pension of Husband as Resource Which Court May Consider in
Determining Amount of Alimony (1952) 22 A.L.R.2d 1421, which states: "As a
general proposition, it has been held or stated in numerous cases that the
pension of a husband may properly be considered as a resource in determining the
amount of alimony to be awarded to the wife." ( Id., at p. 1423.) Two additional
cases, completely without comment, included in the funds available from which
support could be paid military pension payments ( In re Marriage of Fransen
(1983) 142 Cal.App.3d 419, 424 [190 Cal.Rptr. 885]), and disability benefits (
IIn re Marriage of Webb (1979) 94 Cal.App.3d 335, 345-346 [156 Cal.Rptr. 334]).
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    2.  Modification of the support award.

   "  The change of circumstance which authorizes a court to modify a support
order means a change in the circumstances of the respective parties, i.e., a
reduction or increase in the husband's ability to pay and/or an increase or
decrease in the wife's needs [citation]." ( In re Marriage of Cobb (1977) 68
Cal.App.3d 855, 860-861 [137 Cal.Rptr. 670].)

   The parties here stipulated Bernice's monthly income and expenses had not
changed since the last order; her expenses still exceeded her income by several
hundred dollars.  Notwithstanding Dewitt's physical hardship, his net income had
actually increased from $ 1,700 to $ 2,348, including, as we must, the $ 1,540
attributable to the pension as available for support consideration. 6  Because
increased ability to pay is a proper basis for an increase in spousal support if
the prior award were inadequate, regardless of whether the needs of the
supported spouse have changed (Sammut v. Sammut (1980 103 Cal.App.3d 557,
563-564 [160 Cal.Rptr. 193]), the trial court erred in reducing Bernice's
support on the instant factual showing.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   Although
the stipulation addressed only Dewitt's income, comparison of the expenses
listed in his original financial declaration with those claimed at the time of
the order to show cause, exclusive of the $ 287.50 spousal support obligation
reflected in the latter, reveals very little change, despite his remarriage,
disability or acquisition of a home.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    3.  Dewitt's authorities inapposite.

   Dewitt claims two cases, Sammut and In re Marriage of Rabkin (1986) 179
Cal.App.3d 1071  [225 Cal.Rptr. 219], support his "double dipping" theory.  Both
cases treat a supported spouse's receipt of payments in liquidation of a fixed
interest created upon the division of community property as receipt of a capital
asset and exclude such receipts when calculating the supported spouse's need.
In Sammut, the supported spouse received $ 400 per month pursuant to a buy out
of community property stock.  In Rabkin, the contested income took the form of $
1,800 mortgage payments derived from the sale of the family residence which
"constituted the single major asset awarded to wife as her one-half share of the
community property." ( In re Marriage of Rabkin, supra, 179 Cal.App.3d at p.
1081.)

    However, in each case the supporting spouse had adequate income to pay
reasonable support apart from that spouse's receipt of similar divided community
property. In Sammut, the supporting spouse received an inheritance paying $
5,618 per month, 7 and in Rabkin, the supporting spouse was a physician.
Additionally,  the parties in Rabkin expressly agreed "the sale of the marital
residence could not be considered a change in circumstance justifying a
modification of spousal support. [Fn. omitted.]" ( Id., at p. 1081.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   We note
the inheritance in Sammut, was, like Dewitt's pension, the supporting spouse's
separate property but nowhere is it suggested such income should be exempt from
support consideration.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   As the present case involves neither an agreement expressly to the contrary,
nor a supporting spouse with sufficient ability to pay without considering the
former community property source, both cases cited by Dewitt are
distinguishable.  In our view, these cases stand merely for the proposition that
a supporting spouse cannot use the supported spouse's receipt of payments in
liquidation of a community property division as a pretext to claim the supported
spouse's reduced need.

   Moreover, putting the foregoing factual distinctions aside, we perceive
another persuasive reason requiring inclusion of Dewitt's pension income in the
support equation.  Unlike payments in liquidation of a fixed community property
interest such as those created by the sale of stocks or real estate, a pension
pays out a gross amount which, although constant, is presently unascertainable.
That is to say, although a present value may be quantified by reference to life
expectancy charts, the actual value of the pension cannot be computed until the
payments, in fact, cease.  If the pensioner's life exceeds the actuarial
expectation, this eventual value may be far in excess of some earlier determined
present value.  Conversely, should the pensioner suffer an early demise, the
value may be only whatever survivor benefit, if any, the pension provides.

   Thus, we are confronted with an asset that is possibly sui generis in nature.
As this inherent variation in actual value was a risk undertaken by Dewitt when
he chose to keep the pension rather than give Bernice a proportionate interest
in it as the trial court intended, we perceive no unfairness in treating the
payments as income for the purpose of spousal support. Indeed, to do otherwise
would engraft upon the parties' agreement a Rabkin-like exclusion which,
contrary to Dewitt's assertion, they did not contemplate or express.

    Conclusion

   In summary, we conclude the trial court reduced Bernice's award of spousal
support by improperly exempting Dewitt's monthly pension payments from
consideration for the purpose of determining his ability to pay.

   The order reducing Bernice's monthly spousal support is reversed.  The matter
is remanded for further proceedings consistent with the views expressed herein.
Bernice to receive costs on appeal.


                              91 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In re the Marriage of PAULA RAE and DOUGLAS KENT FARRELL.
            PAULA RAE FARRELL, Respondent, v. DOUGLAS KENT FARRELL,
                                   Appellant

                                  No. B007950

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                  Division Six

            171 Cal. App. 3d 695; 217 Cal. Rptr. 397; 1985 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2445


                                August 26, 1985

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Ventura County, No. D 123402, Allan L.
Steele, Judge.

COUNSEL: Joseph Barry Fingleton and Howard R. Gottlieb for Appellant.

Liebmann & Dunlevy and William Q. Liebmann for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Canter, J., * with Gilbert, J., and Abbe, Acting P. J.,
concurring.

*   Assigned by the Chairperson of the Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: CANTER

OPINION

     Douglas Kent Farrell appeals an order increasing his spousal support
obligation eightfold after he was unable to discharge an indebtedness secured by
the residence his ex-wife received in the division of property.  The trial court
found that his failure to discharge the debt and the loss of interest earning
potential suffered by her when the debt was paid out of escrow upon sale of the
residence was a sufficient change of circumstances to warrant an increase in
support.  The court further found that the disparity between the wife's net
income and her expenses necessitated the increase.  We reverse.

    Facts

   On October 23, 1983, the parties appeared in court and entered into a written
stipulation to an interlocutory judgment of dissolution of marriage. The
stipulation, and later the judgment, distributed the community assets and
liabilities and provided for spousal support in the sum of $ 100 per month and
child support in the total amount of $ 600 for three children.  Wife was awarded
the family residence subject only to a first trust deed and a loan from her
parents.  A debt to the bank secured by a second deed of trust on the residence
was to be paid by husband; and if wife sold the family residence, husband was to
"secure a release on the home as security for these debts so the sale may be
effected without [wife's] participation for this debt in any way." The judgment
was thereafter prepared and was filed in court on February 23, 1984.

   Meanwhile, on or about January 13, 1984, wife entered into a contract to sell
the residence.  When husband was informed of the pending sale, he  attempted to
secure a release of the residence.  His attempts were unsuccessful and at close
of escrow the bank holding the second deed of trust was paid $ 48,794.94 from
the proceeds of sale.

   In May 1984 wife noticed a motion to increase her spousal support from $ 100
per month, which had been set by the October stipulation and the February
interlocutory judgment, to an amount which added the payments husband had been
making on the bank debt secured by the second deed of trust.

   Wife testified that between the date the interlocutory judgment fixing
support was filed and the commencement of the proceedings to increase support,
she held the same job at the same rate of pay and her food, child care and other
costs had not increased.  Her apartment rent was $ 200 lower than the payment
she had been making on the residence she sold.  Her income and expense
declaration, which was received in evidence, showed a shortfall of $ 692.
Husband testified by way of his responsive declaration, which set forth his
efforts to refinance the second trust deed obligation, substitute collateral to
the bank and give wife a note for the amount paid in escrow. He had rejected her
offer to repay the debt as spousal support.

   The trial court rendered an intended decision by minute order which
acknowledged that wife was seeking to have the $ 49,000 paid to her in the form
of spousal support. The court noted the disparity between the wife's income and
her expenses, noted the husband's ability to pay, and then determined that had
the debt been paid, petitioner would have received $ 49,000 to invest to produce
income to meet her needs.  The court then considered the obligations, assets and
lack of separate property of the wife and concluded that it would be eminently
just and equitable if the husband were to pay the amount of the debt to the wife
in the manner requested.  The court ordered husband to pay an additional $ 700
per month in spousal support, continuing for 70 months after which it was to be
reduced to its former $ 100 per month.

   Contentions

   On appeal husband contends that the trial court modified a division of
community property and obligations by changing the division into a spousal
support award without consent of the parties and without sufficient change of
circumstances to justify an increase in spousal support.

   Discussion

   The trial court retains jurisdiction to modify a spousal support award absent
the parties' agreement to the contrary accomplished in writing or  stated orally
in open court.  (Civ. Code, §§ 4801, 4811.) Here, there was no such agreement,
and the spousal support award of the interlocutory judgment remained subject to
modification.

     While the trial court has wide latitude in exercising its discretion to
modify an award of spousal support, there must be demonstrated a material change
of circumstances  subsequent to the prior order.  ( In re Marriage of Kuppinger
(1975) 48 Cal.App.3d 628, 633 [120 Cal.Rptr. 654].) In the absence of such a
substantial change of circumstances, the court has no authority to modify a
spousal support award. ( In re Marriage of Maunder (1976) 57 Cal.App.3d 570, 573
[127 Cal.Rptr. 707].) The facts and circumstances of each case determine whether
a modification is warranted, and the exercise of the trial court's discretion in
ordering modification will not be disturbed on appeal unless, as a matter of
law, an abuse of discretion is shown.  ( Philbin v. Philbin (1971) 19 Cal.App.3d
115, 119 [96 Cal.Rptr. 408].)

   In modifying the spousal support award, the trial court relied upon two
factors: first, husband's failure to discharge the debt secured by a second deed
of trust which deprived wife of investment return potential; and second, the
disparity between wife's net income and her expenses and husband's ability to
pay. Neither of those factors will support the modification as a substantial
change in a party's circumstances since the last order.

   Failure to Discharge Debt

     The trial court concluded that husband's failure to pay the second trust
deed indebtedness constituted a ground for modification, relying upon In re
Marriage of Clements (1982) 134 Cal.App.3d 737 [184 Cal.Rptr. 756]. Such
reliance is misplaced.

   In the Clements case, the bankruptcy of the supported spouse, the wife,
resulted in former community creditors seeking payment from the supporting
spouse, the husband, of debts assigned the wife in the dissolution proceedings.
The husband in that case was required to use income from which he was supporting
the wife to placate those creditors wife had been assigned. The bankruptcy
affected the income flow and was a sufficient change of circumstance to allow
the husband to obtain a reduction in the support he was paying.  In the instant
case, there is no demonstrated nexus between husband's inability to discharge
the second trust deed indebtedness and either the cash flow or expenses of
either party.  While the court may consider the property each party owns and
their respective obligations as a factor (Civ. Code, § 4801, subdivision (a)(3);
In re Marriage of Morrison (1978) 20 Cal.3d 437, 454-455 [143 Cal.Rptr. 139, 573
P.2d 41]), it is the  "economic relation" which must be the changed
circumstance. ( In re Marriage of Clements, supra, 134 Cal.App.3d at pp. 745-746
.) Here there was no attempt to describe the impact to either party's economic
situation: injury to wife, nor benefit to husband.  The mere fact of the
discharge of the indebtedness standing alone was an insufficient factor to
constitute a change of circumstance.

     It has been held that when the award of support is not originally made
after receipt of evidence regarding the condition of the parties, but is based
solely upon stipulation of the parties, a mere expectation of one of the parties
regarding a future change in income, which expectation is defeated, will
constitute a change of circumstances justifying a modification. ( Bratnober v.
Bratnober (1957) 48 Cal.2d 259, 263 [309 P.2d 441].) The failed expectation, to
qualify as a sufficient change of circumstance, must affect the party's earning
capability or expenses.  (Ibid.; see In re Marriage   of Jacobs (1980) 102
Cal.App.3d 990 [162 Cal.Rptr. 649]; see also Hester v. Hester (1969) 2
Cal.App.3d 1091 [82 Cal.Rptr. 811].)   In the present case, the trial court
surmised that wife could have invested the funds to produce income.  Wife
offered no proof, however, that such had been her intention nor did she
demonstrate a plan as to the kind of investment expected or its rate of return.
She could as easily have used the money to purchase another residence or for a
myriad other purposes, not affecting her income needs.

     A change of circumstances must be shown whether the original award arises
from an evidentiary hearing or by stipulation.  ( In re Marriage of Hentz (1976)
57 Cal.App.3d 899 [129 Cal.Rptr. 678].) "The  court, by including the
stipulation in its own decree, presumes that the parties arrived at a fair
support award, after arm's-length negotiations, that took into consideration all
of the circumstances as they then existed.  The court thereafter should not
permit a party to change this contractual arrangement, absent changed
circumstances, as it would allow a party to repudiate and change a legal
contract for no reason at all." ( Id., at p. 901.)   Here, there was no change
of circumstance for either party, except wife's decrease in rent. Any unrealized
expectation of the parties remained undisclosed and unproven; its economic
impact discernible only by speculation.

   The trial court's order of an additional $ 700 per month spousal support for
an additional 70 months to return thereupon to its earlier level of $ 100
amounts to the approximately $ 49,000 loss wife incurred in house sale.  Husband
owes the wife that amount, as is established by the agreement between them.
There was, however, no "counterbalancing cancellation" of husband's indebtedness
to the wife for failure to discharge the debt.   Indeed, the court's order could
not do so, "because the trial court was  without jurisdiction to modify an
unqualified disposition of property rights in an interlocutory decree of
divorce, except in accordance with methods applicable to judgments generally . .
. ." ( In re Marriage of Maunder, supra, 57 Cal.App.3d at p. 573.) The husband's
contractual obligation would not be suspended during the period of increased
spousal support nor would it be extinguished at the termination thereof.
Seventy months later,  the husband would still be indebted to the wife for the
entire amount of the second trust deed obligation she discharged in the escrow.
The division of assets and liabilities cannot be modified after it has become
final unless there is an explicit reservation of jurisdiction to do so.  (See In
re Marriage of Brown (1976) 15 Cal.3d 838, 851, fn. 13 [126 Cal.Rptr. 633, 544,
P.2d 561, 94 A.L.R.3d 164]; Decker v. Occidental Life Ins. Co. (1969) 70 Cal.2d
842, 848 [76 Cal.Rptr. 470, 452 P.2d 686].) There was no such reservation of
jurisdiction in this case.  Any other rule of law would reduce finality of
decision in dissolution cases to an illusion.

   The effect of the trial court's order was to convert a property division
obligation into spousal support. The case of In re Marriage of Cobb (1977) 68
Cal.App.3d 855 [137 Cal.Rptr. 670], is persuasive.  There the wife sought to
belatedly share in her husband's pension which had been omitted from the
interlocutory judgment. Since that judgment was final, the trial court had no
jurisdiction to modify it with respect to property rights.  Instead, the court
increased the wife's spousal support from $ 1 per month to $ 484.10 per month,
the exact amount of what the wife's interest would have been.  The court held
that a reversal was required because it was apparent that the spousal support
increase was not based on consideration of the parties' needs and abilities to
meet those needs.  ( Id., at pp. 860-861.) The same considerations compel
reversal here.  A court may not engage in judicial alchemy by transforming a
common debt into a support obligation.

   Financial Ability

     Nor can the modification be justified upon the ground that there existed a
disparity between the wife's income and expenses.

   At the hearing, wife testified unequivocally that her income had remained
constant in the four-month period between the filing of the interlocutory
judgment and the hearing date. In that short time frame, all her expenses had
remained the same, save housing costs, which had declined.  It was this period,
the time between the previous order (the filing of the interlocutory judgment)
and the hearing date, for which it was critical for wife to demonstrate a change
in circumstances to justify modification. No evidence of any change of
circumstances of either party, except the decline in wife's housing costs, which
was of  benefit to her, was brought out at the hearing.

    Husband did not file a financial declaration, and the only information
offered relating to his income and expenses was a group of checks showing his
gross business receipts.  No change in his financial situation was demonstrated.
Wife cannot, therefore, rely upon In re Marriage of Hoffmeister (1984) 161
Cal.App.3d 1163 [208 Cal.Rptr. 345], wherein an increase in support was
justified upon husband's greatly increased income even though wife's financial
condition had not changed but remained inadequate to support her needs.

   In using the disparity between the wife's income and expenses as a principal
factor in the modification, the court was considering a circumstance which had
not changed.  That constituted an unwarranted collateral attack upon the
judgment four months earlier.  ( In re Marriage of Mulhern (1973) 29 Cal.App.3d
988 [106 Cal.Rptr. 78].)   A motion for modification cannot be used to attack a
judgment which had been subject to direct attack by motion for new trial or
appeal, unless circumstances change meanwhile.  Otherwise, decrees in
dissolution cases would never be final and the litigants "are entitled to
attempt, with some degree of certainty, to reorder their finances and life style
in reliance upon the finality of the decree." ( Id., at p. 992.)

     The change of circumstances rule provides legal protection to marital
settlement agreements.  ( In re Marriage of Hentz, supra, 57 Cal.App.3d at pp.
901-902.)

   The order increasing spousal support from $ 100 per month to $ 800 per month
is reversed.  Each party is to bear his own costs on appeal.


                              92 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In re the Marriage of PAT J. and BRUCE D. ROSEN.   PAT J.
                ROSEN, Respondent, v. BRUCE D. ROSEN, Appellant.

                             Nos. G025653, G028299.

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FOURTH APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION THREE

           105 Cal. App. 4th 808; 130 Cal. Rptr. 2d 1; 2002 Cal. App.
            LEXIS 5313; 2003 Cal. Daily Op. Service 765; 2003 Daily
                                Journal DAR 921


                           December 24, 2002, Decided
                            December 24, 2002, Filed

NOTICE:     Opinion certified for partial publication. *

*   Pursuant to rules 976(b) and 976.1 of the California Rules of Court, the
opinion is ordered published except for part V (including subparts A, B, and C)
of the section entitled "The First Appeal," all of the section entitled "The
Second Appeal," and all of the section entitled "Attorney Fees on Appeal."

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:    The Publication Status of this Document has been Changed
by the Court from Unpublished to Partially Published January 23, 2003.  Order
Denying Petition for Rehearing and Depublication and Granting Petition for
Modification of Opinion; No Change in Judgment February 19, 2003.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Orange County, No. 96D009857, Walter D.
Posey, Temporary Judge. (Pursuant to Cal. Const., art. VI, § 21.)

COUNSEL: Law Offices of Bruce Daniel Rosen, Bruce Daniel Rosen; and Richard A.
Rosen for Appellant.

Patrick A. McCall for Respondent.

JUDGES: (Opinion by Fybel, J., with Rylaarsdam, Acting P. J., and Aronson, J.,
concurring.)

OPINION BY: FYBEL

OPINION

     FYBEL, J.

   Bruce D. Rosen and Pat J. Rosen were married in September 1984. (To avoid
confusion, we refer to the parties by their first names; In re Marriage of Smith
(1990) 225 Cal. App. 3d 469, 475, fn. 1 [274 Cal. Rptr. 911].) Pat filed a
petition for dissolution of the marriage in October 1996. Their marriage
produced two children, who are minors.

   After a bench trial, the trial court issued a "Court Order After Trial on
Reserved Issues" (the Order) that resolved issues regarding visitation rights,
spousal support, child support, property division,  sanctions, and attorney
fees. In appeal No. G025653 (the First Appeal), Bruce challenges portions of the
Order, contending the trial court erred by (1) assigning a goodwill value of $
42,500 to Bruce's law practice, (2) awarding spousal support of $ 2,500 per
month and child support of $ 830 per month, (3) valuing one of the two marital
automobiles at substantially less than the median Kelly Blue Book value, (4)
failing to credit him for debt service paid on a community debt, (5) denying his
requests for sanctions, and (6) awarding Pat $ 10,000 in attorney fees pursuant
to Family Code sections 2030 and 2032.

   After entry of the Order, Pat's former trial counsel moved pursuant to In re
Marriage of Borson (1974) 37 Cal. App. 3d 632 [112 Cal. Rptr. 432] (Borson) for
an order to set his fees and to have Bruce pay them. The trial court awarded
fees of $ 10,725, of which the court ordered Bruce to pay $ 5,000 and ordered
Pat to pay the balance. In appeal No. G028299 (the Second Appeal), Bruce argues
the trial court abused its discretion in ordering him to pay those attorney
fees. The two appeals have been consolidated.

   In the First Appeal, we reverse and conclude:

   1. The trial court's finding that Bruce's law practice has a goodwill value
of $ 42,500 is erroneous. On remand, Bruce's law practice shall be assigned a
goodwill value of zero.

   2. The trial court's award of spousal support of $ 2,500 per month and child
support of $ 830 per month is erroneous because it is based upon an  erroneous
finding of Bruce's cash flow and ability to pay. The award of spousal support
and child support must be recalculated as directed below.

   3. The trial court's valuation of the vehicles is not erroneous.

   4. The trial court erred by failing to credit Bruce for $ 3,913 in debt
service paid on a community debt. On remand, the amount of $ 3,913 must be
credited to Bruce in the final distribution.

   5. Bruce's requests for sanctions regarding the litigation and settlement
conduct of Pat's counsel might have merit. On remand, the trial court must
reconsider those sanctions requests. As set forth below, Pat or her attorney is
invited to respond to allegations supporting the requests for sanctions.
However, the order denying Bruce's request for sanctions with respect to the
closing argument briefs is not erroneous.

    6. The trial court abused its discretion in ordering Bruce to pay $ 10,000
of Pat's attorney fees pursuant to Family Code sections 2030 and 2032. This
award of attorney fees is erroneous and must be reconsidered as set forth below.

   In the Second Appeal, we conclude: The trial court abused its discretion in
ordering Bruce to pay $ 5,000 in attorney fees pursuant to Borson,  supra, 37
Cal. App. 3d 632 because Pat's attorney sought to recover fees for work never
performed and for work the trial court directed him to exclude from the Borson
fee request. The order directing Bruce to pay $ 5,000 in Pat's attorney fees
pursuant to Borson is therefore reversed.

   Pat has requested an award of attorney fees on appeal pursuant to Family Code
sections 2030 and 2032. We deny the request without prejudice to allow the trial
court after remand to determine the issue of attorney fees incurred in the
appeal.

   FACTS AND PROCEEDINGS BELOW

   Pat filed a petition for dissolution of the marriage on October 9, 1996. In
the accompanying income and expense declaration, Pat identified her occupation
as homemaker and her highest year of education completed as 16. She alleged
monthly marital expenses of $ 12,898. Two years later, Pat filed another income
and expense declaration in which she alleged monthly marital expenses of $
14,173.

   Bruce is a self-employed attorney. His law practice is limited almost
exclusively to criminal appeals funded by the State of California. He works  out
of his home. He does not earn a salary. The State of California pays Bruce a
fixed hourly rate of $ 65 per hour ($ 75 per hour where the underlying crime is
murder in any degree). Bruce's income fluctuates. In his income and expense
declaration filed December 31, 1996, Bruce reported an average monthly gross
income of $ 13,361.24 for the period of October 1995 through September 1996. He
stated on the declaration, "my income varies from month to month." Bruce
identified monthly marital expenses of $ 10,512.89 per month.

   In a declaration filed May 16, 1997, Bruce alleged his average postseparation
gross income was $ 11,232.88 per month. In another income and expense
declaration filed October 7, 1998, Bruce alleged his average gross monthly
income was $ 8,771.73 for the preceding 12 months.  In a later income and
expense declaration filed January 7, 1999, Bruce alleged his average gross
monthly income was $ 7,695.04 for the preceding 12 months.

   Issues of custody and visitation were bifurcated and tried first. The court
awarded joint legal custody of the children with Bruce having primary physical
custody. A judgment on the bifurcated issues of custody and visitation granted
Bruce primary custody and Pat secondary custody according to a schedule set
forth in the judgment.

   A trial on issues of support and property division was held on October 7,
1998, and January 7 and 13, 1999. On April 28, 1999, the trial court issued the
Order, which resolved the issues tried and awarded Pat $ 10,000 in attorney
fees.

   Bruce requested attorney fees or sanctions against Pat and/or her attorney,
Patrick A. McCall, on three occasions. On October 7, 1998, Bruce filed a request
for attorney fees "in the nature of a sanctions pursuant to Family Code section
271" (the first sanctions request) based upon McCall's conduct which Bruce
contended "frustrated the law's policy of promoting settlement and promoting
cooperation . . . ." On December 10, 1998, Bruce filed a supplemental request
for sanctions (the second sanctions request) seeking sanctions against McCall on
the ground he allegedly lied to the court. On February 10, 1999, Bruce filed a
third request for sanctions (the third sanctions request), contending Pat's
closing argument brief included numerous instances of improper argument. In the
third sanctions request, Bruce sought $ 37,000 in sanctions ($ 1,000 for each
supposedly improper argument), but increased the amount sought to $ 63,000--an
additional $ 1,000 for each supposedly improper argument McCall made in
opposition to the third request for sanctions. In the Order, the court denied
all three sanctions requests.

    After the trial court denied Bruce's motion for a new trial, Bruce timely
appealed from the Order.

   On December 3, 1999, McCall filed a motion to recover attorney fees pursuant
to Borson, supra, 37 Cal. App. 3d 632. He later supplemented the motion with
billing statements reflecting $ 10,725 in fees incurred since June 30, 1999.
Bruce opposed and sought sanctions against McCall. In an order entered October
5, 2000, the trial court ordered Bruce to pay McCall $ 5,000 in attorney fees
and ordered Pat to pay the balance. The court denied Bruce's request for
sanctions. Bruce timely appealed from "the portion" of that order "requiring
[Bruce] to pay $ 5,000.00 in additional attorney fees."

   In May 2002, we granted McCall's motion to partially dismiss the Second
Appeal and construed Bruce's notice of appeal "as from the order on October 5,
2000 requiring [Bruce] to pay additional attorney fees, not from the portions of
the same order denying [Bruce's] request for sanctions." In the same order we
ruled that Pat's request for attorney fees on appeal would be decided in
conjunction with the decision on the merits of the appeal.

   THE FIRST APPEAL

   I. Goodwill Value of Bruce's Law Practice

   The trial court determined Bruce's law practice to be worth $ 60,500, of
which the court determined $ 42,000 to constitute goodwill under an "excess
earnings" calculation. In determining the value of goodwill, the trial court
found: "[Bruce] has one secretary that he pays $ 10.00 per hour. His business
has an average cash flow of $ 162,000.00 per year and he could hire an attorney
to do his activity for approximately $ 100,000.00 per year. There is
approximately $ 42,000.00 per year in 'excess earnings' for his business.  This
Court finds that the community value in his business is $ 60,500.00."

   Bruce asserts his law practice has no goodwill value. He argues the trial
court's determination of goodwill results from a misapplication of the excess
earnings method for calculating goodwill. We agree.

   A. The Excess Earnings Method of Valuing Goodwill

    "In determining the value of a law practice or interest therein, the trial
court should determine the existence and value of . . . goodwill of the
practitioner in his law business as a going concern . . . ." (In re Marriage of
Lopez (1974) 38 Cal. App. 3d 93, 110 [113 Cal. Rptr. 58]; accord,  In re
Marriage of Kilbourne (1991) 232 Cal. App. 3d 1518, 1522 [284 Cal. Rptr.  201];
In re Marriage of Garrity and Bishton (1986) 181 Cal. App. 3d 675, 688-689 [226
Cal. Rptr. 485].) A law practice's goodwill is an asset that must be valued and
factored into the community property division. (In re Marriage of Lopez, supra,
38 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 107-108; In re Marriage of Nichols (1994) 27 Cal.App.4th
661, 673, fn. 4 [33 Cal. Rptr. 2d 13].))

    The courts have not established an unvarying rule for determining the
existence or value of a law practice's goodwill for purposes of a marital
dissolution (In re Marriage of Lopez, supra, 38 Cal. App. 3d at p. 109), and, as
one treatise notes, "[c]oncededly, 'capitalization of the excess earnings'
method may be adopted." (Hogoboom & King, Cal. Practice Guide: Family Law (The
Rutter Group 2002) P 8:1445 (rev. # 1, 2002).) The " 'excess earnings' " method
focuses on the " 'earning power' " of the business to determine what " 'rate of
return' " the predicted earnings will yield in light of the risks involved to
attain them. (Id., P 8:1422 (rev. # 1, 2000).)

   In In re Marriage of Garrity and Bishton, supra, 181 Cal. App. 3d at page 688
, footnote 14, the court explained the excess earnings method as follows:
"Pursuant to this method, one first determines a practitioner's average annual
net earnings (before income taxes) by reference to any period that seems
reasonably illustrative of the current rate of earnings. One then determines the
annual salary of a typical salaried employee who has had experience commensurate
with the spouse who is the sole practitioner or sole owner/employee. Next, one
deducts from the average net pretax earnings of the business or practice a 'fair
return' on the net tangible assets used by the business. Then, one determines
the 'excess earnings' by subtracting the annual salary of the average salaried
person from the average net pretax earning of the business or practice remaining
after deducting a fair return on tangible assets. Finally, one capitalizes the
excess earnings over a period of years by multiplying it by a factor equal to a
specific period of years, discounted to reflect present value of the excess
earnings over that period. The period varies according to factors such as the
type of business, its stability, and its earnings trend."

   A treatise criticizes the excess earnings method as described in In re
Marriage of Garrity and Bishton, supra, 181 Cal. App. 3d 675 as being
"predicated on several erroneous statements" and recommends the method "not be
relied on in practice." (Hogoboom & King, Cal. Practice Guide: Family Law, supra
, P 8:1445.) The treatise does not identify those erroneous statements or what
method should be relied upon in practice, and therefore provides us no basis to
vary from the excess earnings method described in In re Marriage of Garrity and
Bishton. Amicus curiae California Society of Certified Public Accountants in its
petition for rehearing, modification, or  depublication (petition) identified an
omission in the excess earnings method described in In re Marriage of Garrity
and Bishton, but our decision remains the same after considering the corrected
analysis.

    The excess earnings method is not the only measure of goodwill value.
Goodwill value may be measured by "any legitimate method of evaluation that
measures its present value by taking into account some past result," so long as
the evidence "legitimately establishes value." (In re Marriage of Foster (1974)
42 Cal. App. 3d 577, 584 [117 Cal. Rptr. 49].) ) Pat's expert used the excess
earnings method to measure the goodwill of Bruce's law practice, even though he
testified he had not read In re Marriage of Garrity and Bishton. Bruce agrees
the excess earnings method as described in that case is the correct method to
use. Accordingly, we first analyze whether the evidence supports the trial
court's finding of goodwill value under the excess earnings method as described
in In re Marriage of Garrity and Bishton.

   B. The Trial Court Misapplied the Excess Earnings Method.

   At trial, the evidence of goodwill consisted of the testimony and report of
Pat's expert. Bruce did not present a rebuttal expert. Pat's expert concluded
Bruce's law practice had a value of $ 60,500 as of August 30, 1996. Of that
amount, the expert assigned $ 42,000 to goodwill, using an excess earnings
approach. The remaining $ 18,500 reflected owner's equity.

   To calculate goodwill using an excess earnings approach, Pat's expert started
with Bruce's 1995 net income of $ 139,610 and then added back depreciation of $
4,369 to reach a subtotal of $ 143,979. From that figure, the expert subtracted
return on net worth of $ 1,850. That amount was calculated by applying a return
rate of 10 percent to net worth of $ 18,500 (the amount assigned to owner's
equity). The expert then subtracted $ 100,000, which, in his opinion, would be
"reasonable compensation" for someone doing Bruce's work. The expert applied a
capitalization rate of 1 to the remainder to reach a goodwill value of $ 42,000.
The trial court accepted that figure.

   Bruce contends the goodwill amount determined by the expert and adopted by
the trial court is incorrect under In re Marriage of Garrity and Bishton, supra,
181 Cal. App. 3d 675 because (1) Pat's expert failed to use an average of
Bruce's net income, and (2) Pat's expert failed to use the "annual salary of the
average salaried person" (id. at p. 688, fn. 14).

   1. Failure to Use an Average of Bruce's Net Income for Determining Goodwill
Value.

   Pat's expert testified he considered Bruce's net income for 1992, 1993, and
1994 (as reflected on Bruce's federal income tax forms) but decided to  use only
net income for 1995 in calculating excess earnings. Pat's expert also relied
upon a cash flow report for the first eight months of 1996, which showed an
income for Bruce of about $ 13,500 per month. The expert chose to use net income
from 1995, rather than an average of the years 1992-1995, but admitted he
"possibly . . . should have averaged it." The expert conceded if he had used an
average of Bruce's earnings over any period of years, rather than Bruce's net
income for 1995, he would have concluded there either were nominal or no excess
earnings, and, hence, little or no goodwill value.

   Under the facts presented here, we believe Pat's expert "should have averaged
it." The excess earnings method described in In re Marriage of Garrity and
Bishton requires that one first determines "a practitioner's average annual net
earnings (before income taxes) by reference to any period that seems reasonably
illustrative of the current rate of earnings." (In re Marriage of Garrity and
Bishton, supra, 181 Cal. App. 3d at p. 688, fn. 14, italics added.) The evidence
showed Bruce's net income was volatile. The expert's own report shows Bruce to
have had net income in 1992 of $ 72,667, in 1993 of $ 101,067, and in 1994 of $
71,362. Bruce's net income for 1995 alone is neither an average nor "reasonably
illustrative" of his earnings. A reasonable trier of fact could not help but
conclude the expert chose to use Bruce's net income from 1995--one of Bruce's
highest earning years--solely to inflate the value of goodwill.

   Pat argues her expert's analysis is justified because Bruce's annual income
for the years 1988 through August 1996 was $ 162,270.25 per year. The trial
court found that Bruce's business "has an average cash flow of $ 162,000.00 per
year . . . ." That amount is Bruce's average gross income for those years. The
excess earnings method requires use of net income.

   Pat contends Bruce never offered his own expert to rebut her expert's
conclusions. True, but  the fact the expert's testimony was not contradicted by
other expert testimony does not make it conclusive on the trial court or on us.
(Howard v. Owens Corning (1999) 72 Cal.App.4th 621, 631-632 [85 Cal. Rptr. 2d
386] [uncontradicted expert testimony only conclusive on issue of standard of
care in professional negligence cases].)

   Further, it is obvious that using one year's net income (not coincidentally a
high-income year) is not illustrative of Bruce's volatile income over a period
of several years. We could not express the principle better than this: "The
correct rule on the necessity of expert testimony has been summarized by Bob
Dylan: 'You don't need a weatherman to know which way the wind blows.' The
California courts, although in harmony, express the rule somewhat less
colorfully and hold expert testimony is not required where a  question is
'resolvable by common knowledge.' [Citations.]" (Jorgensen v. Beach 'N' Bay
Realty, Inc. (1981) 125 Cal. App. 3d 155, 163 [177 Cal. Rptr. 882], fn.
omitted.) Picking one year's net income, where income rises or falls from year
to year, is not a reasonable basis for determining value.

   Pat argues that under In re Marriage of Garrity and Bishton, supra, 181 Cal.
App. 3d 675, the trial court was not bound to use any particular time period
over which to average income for calculating goodwill. The problem is that
Bruce's net income for 1995 alone is not illustrative of Bruce's rate of
earnings in light of the fluctuations in Bruce's income. Pat's expert admitted
that had he averaged Bruce's income over any period of years he considered,
goodwill value would be nominal or nothing.

   Pat also argues Bruce was given the opportunity to provide his current income
to her expert, "but he refused to cooperate." Bruce's income after the Rosens
separated in August 1996 is irrelevant for valuing goodwill because Bruce's law
practice must be valued as of the date of separation, not the date of trial. (In
re Marriage of Duncan (2001) 90 Cal.App.4th 617, 624-626 [108 Cal. Rptr. 2d 833]
.)

   Pat suggests the trial court's determination of goodwill value must stand,
regardless of any flaws in the expert's testimony, because "courts are not
limited to any one method of measuring its value." As we explained above (ante,
p. 819), courts are not limited to using the excess earnings method to measure
goodwill. (In re Marriage of Foster, supra, 42 Cal. App. 3d at p. 584.) But "the
evidence must be such as legitimately establishes value." (Id. at p. 583.) The
excess earnings analysis of Pat's expert did not legitimately establish value
under the excess earnings method, and he did not opine on value under any other
method.

   We conclude the trial court's finding of the goodwill value of Bruce's law
practice is erroneous. Under the facts presented in this case, the expert should
have averaged Bruce's net earnings. The expert conceded if he had done so for
any period of relevant years he would have concluded there was little or no
goodwill value. On remand, the court must assign a goodwill value of zero to
Bruce's law practice in the final distribution.

   2. Erroneous Determination of "Reasonable Compensation" for a Replacement
Attorney.

    Our conclusion the trial court should have used an average of Bruce's net
income is sufficient to conclude the trial court's finding of the amount of
goodwill is erroneous. But we also agree with Bruce that the  testimony of Pat's
expert regarding "reasonable compensation" is conjecture and could not be used
in forming an expert's opinion of goodwill value.

   Pat's expert testified he did not have any particular knowledge of lawyer
compensation, other than what he had learned from valuations he had performed.
He admitted he was not familiar with a law practice like Bruce's. He did not
conduct a survey or perform any kind of study of lawyer compensation in Southern
California. Rather, he relied entirely upon two surveys of compensation (the
Altman Weil survey and the Robert Morris survey), neither of which dealt with a
sole practitioner lawyer handling state-funded criminal appeals. The expert did
not attempt to relate the information in the surveys to an analysis of Bruce's
law practice.

   From these surveys, Pat's expert came up with a conclusion, based on his
"judgment," that reasonable compensation for a replacement attorney would be $
100,000. The expert testified he "did a rough average of the numbers, but it
wasn't an exact average, and then concluded that, based on that hourly rate,
approximately, and based on the survey, looking at the range, a hundred thousand
dollars appeared to be a reasonable number, if you look at the . . . $ 125,000
range to the $ 67,000 range, the middle of that is approximately a hundred
thousand dollars also. So I looked . . . at it a number of different ways, to
estimate a hundred thousand dollars."

    Pat's expert might just as well have plucked the $ 100,000 figure from thin
air. We do not disapprove of compensation surveys as a general matter. We
realize they can be useful when used properly. But we question whether a
national survey of lawyer compensation (such as the Altman Weil survey) is a
proper basis for offering an opinion on average lawyer compensation in Southern
California. (See Evid. Code, § 801, subd. (b).) We also question whether the
Altman Weil survey is applicable to Bruce's law practice, which consists almost
exclusively of handling state-funded criminal appeals. The expert, though, did
not hold himself to the compensation figures in the Altman Weil survey, but
turned to another survey--the Robert Morris survey--purporting to show average
compensation for officers and directors of various kinds of businesses. We
believe the Robert Morris survey is inapplicable to a sole practitioner lawyer,
such as Bruce, who does not have officers or directors. Pat's expert then used
his own "judgment" to come up with a compensation figure based upon the numbers
in these two surveys, even though he admitted he did not have any particular
knowledge about lawyer compensation and did not know of any attorney with a law
practice like Bruce's. In essence, Pat's expert did nothing more than pick $
100,000 because it was about halfway between $ 125,000 and $ 67,000. Those two
numbers bear no particular materiality to the issue of reasonable compensation
in this case.

   Amicus curiae California Society of Certified Public Accountants (CalCPA)
explains in its petition that the "annual salary of the average salaried person"
standard of In re Marriage of Garrity and Bishton is not the only standard for
establishing reasonable compensation under the excess earnings method. Amicus
curiae explains reasonable compensation may also be based upon " 'the cost of
hiring a nonowner outsider to perform the same average amount that other people
are normally compensated for performing similar services' "--the "similarly
situated professional" standard. Expert testimony, amicus curiae argues, would
be helpful in determining which approach (the "average salaried person" or the
"similarly situated professional") is appropriate under the facts of a case and
in applying the relevant approach to determine reasonable compensation. We agree
with amicus curiae and appreciate its contribution and interest in this matter.

   Our concern is that the surveys relied upon by Pat's expert were not relevant
to Bruce's law practice and therefore were not useful in establishing
compensation under either the "average salaried person" standard of In re
Marriage of Garrity and Bishton or the "similarly situated professional"
standard. We are also troubled by the fact that Pat's expert ultimately reached
his determination of compensation by exercising his "judgment" when the expert
admitted he did not have any knowledge of a law practice like Bruce's.

   After considering the correction to the excess earnings analysis pointed out
by amicus curiae, our conclusion remains that Bruce's law practice must be given
a goodwill value of zero. This conclusion is consistent with the position of
amicus curiae in its petition: "The Court's criticism in the Rosen opinion of
the expert's manner of valuing goodwill is well founded. Both the Family Law and
Business Valuation Sections [of CalCPA] believe there is substantial support for
reversal of the trial judge and a finding of no goodwill."

   II. Amount of Spousal Support and Child Support

    The trial court found Bruce's cash flow to be $ 13,500 per month "at this
time" and used that figure to set spousal support at $ 2,500 per month and child
support at $ 830 per month. Bruce contends the trial court erred in setting
those amounts of spousal support and child support because (1) the evidence did
not support the finding his cash flow was $ 13,500 per month "at this time," (2)
the trial court based spousal support upon the marital standard of living rather
than Pat's current living expenses, and (3) the trial court calculated child
support based upon an incorrect calculation of Pat's custody time with the
children. We address each contention in turn.

    A. Bruce's Cash Flow

    In setting spousal support, the court must consider various circumstances,
including "[t]he ability of the supporting party to pay spousal support, taking
into account the supporting party's earning capacity, earned and unearned
income, assets, and standard of living." (Fam. Code, § 4320, subd. (c); see also
In re Marriage of Cheriton (2001) 92 Cal.App.4th 269, 302-304 [111 Cal. Rptr. 2d
755].) The supporting spouse's ability to pay is "a key factor" in setting
spousal support. (In re Marriage of Cheriton, supra, 92 Cal.App.4th at p. 304.))

    The trial court set spousal support based upon a finding that Bruce's cash
flow "at this time" is $ 162,000 per year or $ 13,500 per month. (Italics
added.) The trial court found Bruce "earns a salary of $ 13,500.00 per month
before taxes," even though it was undisputed Bruce was a self-employed attorney
and his income fluctuated. The court based its income finding upon trial
exhibits and the expert's testimony showing Bruce's cash flow as of 1996, two
years before trial in January 1999. Bruce argues the court erred in basing
spousal support upon his cash flow as of 1996. He is correct.

   The trial court based spousal support upon Bruce's cash flow as of the end of
1996 because "[Bruce] offered no records for any periods of time since 1996."
That is not correct. Bruce testified his gross income for 1998 was $ 92,330.
Bruce's income and expense declaration (filed Jan. 7, 1999) reflects a gross
income of $ 92,340.50 during the previous 12 months, or $ 7,695.04 per month.
This declaration alone was sufficient to establish Bruce's current income. (In
re Marriage of McQuoid (1991) 9 Cal.App.4th 1353, 1359 [12 Cal. Rptr. 2d 737].)
At trial, Bruce testified the information in the income and expense declaration
was correct. Bruce also submitted as exhibit 1 his federal income tax return for
1998 confirming his testimony regarding the amount of his income for that year.

   The trial court decided "[i]f the income went down he should have provided
appropriate documents to [Pat's] expert or brought his own expert to the court.
He chose to do neither." However, Bruce was obligated to do neither. We fail to
see how Bruce had any obligation to cooperate with his adversary's expert
witness. Bruce was not obligated to drive up the cost of litigation by retaining
an expert witness to testify as to his own income. Bruce knew his own income;
expert testimony was not necessary and possibly not even permissible. (Jorgensen
v. Beach 'N' Bay Realty, Inc., supra, 125 Cal. App. 3d at p. 163; see also
Oregel v. American Isuzu Motors, Inc. (2001) 90 Cal.App.4th 1094, 1102 [109 Cal.
Rptr. 2d 583] [rejecting  argument that plaintiff had to produce expert
testimony to prove nonconformity caused oil leak in automobile].)

   Earning capacity may be used to determine the amount of spousal support (Fam.
Code, § 4320, subd. (c)), but the trial court did not make a finding as to
Bruce's earning capacity. Rather, the trial court found Bruce's actual income at
this time to be $ 13,500. Further, earning capacity usually is considered in
setting spousal support only where the record shows the supporting spouse has
deliberately attempted to avoid family financial responsibilities. (In re
Marriage of Simpson (1992) 4 Cal.4th 225, 232 [14 Cal. Rptr. 2d 411, 841 P.2d
931].) Pat did not make such a claim.

    The trial court's determination of spousal support and child support is
reviewed for abuse of discretion, but " 'discretion must be exercised along
legal lines, taking into consideration the circumstances of the parties, their
necessities and the financial ability of the [supporting spouse.]' " (In re
Marriage of Laube (1988) 204 Cal. App. 3d 1222, 1225 [251 Cal. Rptr. 745].) )
Here, the trial court abused its discretion because it based spousal support
upon the erroneous finding that Bruce's income at the time of trial was $ 13,500
per month. We therefore conclude that portion of the Order setting spousal
support and child support is erroneous and remand with directions to recalculate
spousal support and child support as explained in part II.D, below.

   B. The Marital Standard of Living

    In ordering spousal support, the trial court must consider "[t]he needs of
each party based on the standard of living established during the marriage." (
Fam. Code, § 4320, subd. (d).) " 'Spousal support must be determined according
to the needs of both parties and their respective abilities to meet these needs.
. . .' " (In re Marriage of Meegan (1992) 11 Cal.App.4th 156, 161 [13 Cal. Rptr.
2d 799].)

   The trial court must make "specific factual findings with respect to the
standard of living during the marriage," regardless whether findings are
requested. (Fam. Code, § 4332.) Here, the trial court found, "[t]he life style
at the time of separation was 'upper-middle class'; the parties lived in a house
in a quiet neighborhood near the ocean in Dana Point; they had two cars; they
were able to travel; the wife was able to buy clothes when she needed them and
the parties were able to take vacations all with only the husband's income . . .
." The trial court also found "[t]he needs of [Pat] as shown on the Income and
Expense form filed October 7th, 1998 are found by this court to be a total at
this time of $ 4,000.00 per month." The court  stated it intended to meet Pat's
basic needs "at this time," but "the 'needs' that would allow her to live the
same life style as of the date of separation will still not be met at this
time."

   Bruce challenges these findings on several grounds, one of which has merit.
Bruce argues the amount of spousal support does not correctly reflect his
ability to pay. Spousal support must be established according to the needs of
both parties and " 'their respective abilities to meet these needs. . . .' " (In
re Marriage of Meegan, supra, 11 Cal. App. 4th at p. 161.) Although we will
imply necessary findings and resolve ambiguities in support of the Order, the
findings--express or implied--must be supported by substantial evidence. In
setting spousal support, the trial court found that Bruce "earns a salary of $
13,500.00 per month before taxes." No evidence supported this finding. As
explained above, the evidence showed Bruce is a self-employed attorney whose
practice consists almost exclusively of handling state-funded criminal appeals.
He earns no salary; his income fluctuates from year to year.  Bruce's gross
income for 1998 was $ 92,340.50, which is $ 7,695.04 per month. The amount of
spousal support and child support set forth in the Order is based upon an
unsupported finding of Bruce's ability to pay and therefore is erroneous.

   C. Percentage of Time Pat Has Custody of the Children

    Bruce contends the trial court based child support upon an incorrect
calculation of the amount of time Pat has custody of the children. In
calculating child support, the trial court found Pat has custody 30 percent of
the time. Bruce contends Pat has custody only 25.20 percent based upon the
custody and visitation order. He contends the amount of child support must be
adjusted accordingly.

   We have independently calculated the number of hours of custody in both odd
and even years based upon the "Judgment on Bifurcated Issue of Custody and
Visitation." In making this calculation, we have assumed a seven-hour school day
and a December vacation two weeks in length, with each parent having custody for
one of those weeks.

   With those assumptions, we have calculated that Pat has custody for 2,713
hours in odd years and 2,710 hours in even years. This amounts to 30.97 percent
in odd years and 30.93 percent in even years. There might be some overlap
between Pat's weekend custody and holidays that could reduce that percentage to
30 percent, the amount used by the court. The trial court therefore did not err
in calculating child support based upon a finding that Pat has custody 30
percent of the time.

    D. Conclusion as to Marital Support and Child Support

   The trial court's award of spousal support and child support is erroneous. On
remand, the trial court must recalculate the amounts of spousal support and
child support. Spousal and child support must be calculated for three time
periods: (1) to January 31, 1999 (approximately the time of the first trial),
(2) from January 31, 1999 to the date on which the amount of support is
determined on remand, and (3) from the date on which the amount of support is
determined on remand forward. For the first time period, the trial court must
consider a monthly income for Bruce of $ 7,695.04 as of January 1999. For the
second time period, the court must consider evidence of Bruce's ability to pay
during that time period. If the resulting determinations of spousal support and
child support for the first two time periods establish Bruce has made
overpayments in support, then the trial court should consider whether to order
reimbursement under Family Code section 3653, subdivision (c). We express no
opinion as to whether or how any reimbursement should be made. For the third
time period, the court must consider evidence of Bruce's ability to pay as of
the date of determination of spousal support and child support on remand. Child
support calculations for all the time periods should be based upon Pat having
custody for 30 percent of the time, unless the joint custody order has changed.
For all the time periods, the court must reconsider the marital standard of
living for Pat in light of Bruce's actual ability to pay.

   III. The Value of the Automobiles

    Two cars were part of the marital estate--a 1990 Jaguar and a 1993 Nissan
Minivan. At the outset of trial, the court stated the cars would be valued at
Kelly Blue Book median value at the time of trial and without accessories. Bruce
established those values were $ 15,075 for the Jaguar and $ 10,012.50 for the
Nissan. The outstanding loan balance on the Jaguar was about $ 5,975, creating a
net value of $ 9,100.

   The trial court assigned the Jaguar to Bruce at a value of $ 9,100 and
assigned the Nissan to Pat, but at a value of $ 5,100. The court charged the
difference of $ 4,000 to Bruce's side of the balance sheet. The court considered
the "deferred maintenance on the various vehicles in computing the present
actual value as well as the testimony of the parties as to the value of the
vehicle driven by them."

   We find no error in the trial court's valuation of the vehicles. We disagree
with Bruce's contention that the trial court was bound by its statement at the
outset of trial that it would assign the cars the median Kelly Blue Book value
at the time of trial. After the court expressed its intent to use the Kelly Blue
Book value, Pat's counsel stated, "The only exception we have, your Honor, is if
the court's willing to entertain it, [Pat's] prepared to testify that the
vehicle that she's operating has significant transportation problems, or
transmission problems." The court allowed Pat to present this testimony.

   Pat testified the Nissan had transmission problems, the sunroof was
inoperable and leaked, and had electrical problems. Pat spent $ 1,800 to repair
the transmission, and Bruce testified the Kelly Blue Book does not include the
cost of the repairs. Considering the testimony of the Nissan's problems and the
cost to repair the transmission, the trial court did not err in assigning the
Nissan a value of $ 5,100.

   IV. The Chase Debt Service

    The parties stipulated that, after separation, Bruce paid from separate
property $ 3,913 in debt service on a loan in the principal amount of $ 15,000
drawn on Bruce's business line of credit (the Chase debt). Bruce contends the
trial court erred by failing to give him credit for his payments on this debt
service. We agree.

   In In re Marriage of Epstein (1979) 24 Cal.3d 76, 84 [154 Cal. Rptr. 413, 592
P.2d 1165], the court held, " 'a spouse who, after separation of the parties,
uses earnings or other separate funds to pay preexisting community obligations
should be reimbursed therefor out of the community property upon dissolution.  '
" Here, the trial court found the Chase debt is a community debt because it was
created during the marriage. The debt service payments on the Chase debt are
also community debt, but the trial court failed to credit Bruce for them. The
exceptions identified in In re Marriage of Epstein, supra, 24 Cal.3d 76, 84-85,
do not apply here. Thus, in the final distribution, Bruce must be credited in
the amount of $ 3,913 for debt service payments on the Chase debt.

   V. Sanctions *

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*   See
footnote, ante, page 808.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   VI. Attorney Fees

    In her closing argument brief at trial, Pat claimed she had paid her
attorney $ 3,500 and owed him "well in excess of $ 40,000.00" and claimed  she
had no means to pay the fees. As noted above, the trial court directed Bruce to
pay $ 10,000 of Pat's attorney fees pursuant to Family Code sections 2030 and
2032.

   The trial court concluded that award was justified and found Bruce could pay
it without hardship because (1) he makes "approximately ten (10) times as much
in earnings as does [Pat]," (2) he had the proceeds ($ 23,057.27) from the sale
of the marital home, and (3) he "testified" his "hourly rate at this time was $
225.00 per hour." Therefore, the court found, "If [Bruce] only billed the State
of California for 20 hours per week his total income would exceed $ 19,000.00
per month and the amount ordered is less than one month income."

    Family Code section 2030 permits the trial court to order payment of
attorney fees and costs as between the parties based upon their "ability to pay"
and their "respective incomes and needs" in order to "ensure that each party has
access to legal representation to preserve all of the party's rights." (Fam.
Code, § 2030, subd. (a).) "The purpose of such an award is to provide one of the
parties, if necessary, with an amount adequate to properly litigate the
controversy." (In re Marriage of Duncan, supra, 90 Cal.App.4th 617, 629.) The
trial court may award attorney fees under section 2030 "where the making of the
award, and the amount of the award, are just and reasonable under relative
circumstances of the respective parties." (Fam. Code, § 2032, subd. (a).)

   "In determining what is just and reasonable under the relative circumstances,
the court shall take into consideration the need for the award to enable each
party, to the extent practical, to have sufficient financial resources to
present the party's case adequately, taking into consideration, to the extent
relevant, the circumstances of the respective parties described in [Family Code]
Section 4320." (Fam. Code, § 2032, subd. (b).) The parties' circumstances
described in section 4320 " 'include assets, debts and earning ability of both
parties, ability to pay, duration of the marriage, and the age and health of the
parties.' " (In re Marriage of Duncan, supra, 90 Cal.App.4th at p. 630.) In
assessing one party's need and the other's ability to pay, the court may
consider evidence of the parties' current incomes, assets, and earning
abilities. (Ibid.)

   An award of attorney fees under Family Code section 2030 is reviewed for
abuse of discretion, and we therefore must affirm unless no judge reasonably
could make the order. (In re Marriage of Duncan, supra, 90 Cal.App.4th at p. 630
.))

    Bruce contends the trial court's findings do not support the award of
attorney fees and there was no evidence he could pay any portion of them.
Specifically, he argues he does not earn 10 times more than Pat, the sale
proceeds from the home are not, standing alone, sufficient evidence of his
ability to pay Pat's attorney fees, and his hourly rate is not $ 225 per hour.
We agree. The trial court's findings are demonstrably wrong. Bruce's hourly rate
is not $ 225 an hour--it is $ 65 or $ 75 per hour--and his income is not 10
times greater than Pat's, after considering spousal support payments. The sale
proceeds from the home, as Bruce points out, are insignificant in light of his
combined preseparation and postseparation debts of about $ 250,000.

   No judge could reasonably make such findings or base an award of attorney
fees on them. The trial court's order requiring Bruce to pay $ 10,000 of Pat's
attorney fees is therefore erroneous. On remand, the court must reconsider an
award of attorney fees, if any, in light of Bruce's correct income for the
relevant time period. Any attorney fees awarded must be reduced by the amount of
any sanctions awarded in favor of Bruce.

   Bruce also argues Pat's attorney fees are too high, asserting Pat's attorney
"churned a fee in excess of $ 40,000.00," and did not " 'wisely devote[]' " his
" 'skill and effort' " to the " 'expeditious disposition of the case.' " In
light of the serious billing problems and misrepresentations,  which we describe
below, we too are suspicious of the amount of Pat's attorney fees. On remand,
each item of attorney fees, including the amount of time spent, must be
justified by declaration to be recoverable.

   THE SECOND APPEAL *

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*   See
footnote, ante, page 808.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   ATTORNEY FEES ON APPEAL *

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*   See
footnote, ante, page 808.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   DISPOSITION

   We reverse and remand for further proceedings. To provide guidance to the
trial court and the parties, we describe the disposition and directions on
remand in detail:

   1. The trial court's finding that Bruce's law practice has a goodwill value
of $ 42,500 is erroneous. On remand, Bruce's law practice must be assigned a
goodwill value of zero in the final distribution.

    2. The trial court's award of spousal support of $ 2,500 per month and child
support of $ 830 per month is erroneous. On remand, the trial court must
calculate spousal support and child support for three time periods: (1) to
January 31, 1999 (approximately the time of the first trial), (2) from January
31, 1999, to the date on which the amount of support is determined on remand,
and (3) from the date on which the amount of support is determined on remand
forward. For the first time period, the trial court must consider a monthly
income for Bruce of $ 7,695.04 as of January 1999. For the second time period,
the court must consider relevant evidence of Bruce's ability to pay (including
but not limited to evidence of income) for that time period. If the resulting
determinations of spousal support and child support for the first two time
periods establish Bruce has made overpayments in support, then the trial court
should consider whether to order reimbursement under Family Code section 3653,
subdivision (c). We express no opinion as to whether or how any reimbursement
should be made. For the third time period, the court must consider relevant
evidence of Bruce's ability to pay (including but not limited to income) as of
the date of redetermination of spousal support and child support on remand.
Child support calculations for all the time periods should be based upon Pat
having custody for 30 percent of the time, unless the joint custody order has
changed. For all the time periods, the court must reconsider the marital
standard of living for Pat in light of Bruce's actual ability to pay.

   3. The trial court's valuation of the vehicles is not erroneous.

   4. The trial court erred by failing to credit Bruce for $ 3,913 in debt
service paid on a community debt. On remand, the amount of $ 3,913 must be
credited to Bruce in the final distribution.

   5. The trial court's denial of Bruce's first and second sanctions requests is
erroneous. On remand, the trial court must reconsider the requests. Pat or her
attorney is invited to respond to the sanctions requests. If no response is made
to the first and second sanctions requests, the trial court must grant sanctions
in Bruce's favor as to the subject requests. The trial court's denial of Bruce's
third sanctions request is not erroneous.

   6. The trial court's order requiring Bruce to pay $ 10,000 of Pat's attorney
fees pursuant to Family Code sections 2030 and 2032 is erroneous. On remand, the
trial court must reconsider an award of attorney fees, if any, in light of
Bruce's correct income for the relevant time period. Any attorney fees awarded
must be reduced by the amount of any sanctions awarded in favor of Bruce. On
remand, every item of attorney fees, including the amount of time spent, must be
justified by declaration to be recoverable.

    7. The Borson Order is reversed in full.

   8. Pat's motion for attorney fees on appeal is denied without prejudice and
may be renewed in the trial court after remand. An award of attorney fees on
appeal, if any, must be made after recalculation of spousal support and child
support and must be based upon Bruce's and Pat's abilities to pay as of November
1999, when Pat filed the motion for attorney fees. In determining an attorney
fees award, the trial court may consider the actual amount of attorney fees Pat
incurred in connection with the appeal, but every item of attorney fees,
including the amount of time spent, must be justified by declaration to be
recoverable.

   Rylaarsdam, Acting P. J., and Aronson, J., concurred.

   A petition for a rehearing was denied February 19, 2003, and the opinion was
modified to read as printed above.


                              93 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            In re the Marriage of MARIA and RANDY JACOBSEN.   MARIA
              JACOBSEN, Appellant, v. RANDY JACOBSEN, Respondent.

                                    B161615

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SECOND APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION SIX

          121 Cal. App. 4th 1187; 18 Cal. Rptr. 3d 162; 2004 Cal. App.
            LEXIS 1419; 2004 Cal. Daily Op. Service 7943; 2004 Daily
                               Journal DAR 10675


                             August 26, 2004, Filed

NOTICE:      CERTIFIED FOR PARTIAL PUBLICATION*

*   Pursuant to California Rules of Court, rules 976(b) and 976.1, this opinion
is certified for partial publication. The portions directed to be published
follow.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Santa Barbara County, No. 1008103, James B.
Jennings, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports

(3) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 61--Spousal Support--Tribal Custom and
Tradition Inconsistent with State Law--Gaming Revenues Not Be Provided to
Nontribal Members.--The custom and tradition of an Indian tribe, as set forth in
a tribal resolution, that per capita distribution of gaming revenues not be
provided to nontribal members for spousal support was at odds with the strong
public policy, as evidenced by state statutory law, requiring spouses to support
each other. As such, the tribal custom and tradition was inconsistent with state
law.

   [11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (9th ed. 1990) Husband and Wife, § 173 et
seq.; 4 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (4th ed. 1997) Pleading, § 100.]

COUNSEL: Price, Postel & Parma, Penny Clemmons and Timothy E. Metzinger for
Appellant.

Misho, Kirker & Brown, Vanessa Kirker and Jacqueline Misho for Respondent.

Fred J. Hiestand and Howard L. Dickstein for the Pala Band of Mission Indians,
the Rumsey Band of Wintun Indians and the United Auburn Indian Community as
Amici Curiae on behalf of Appellant.

JUDGES: Gilbert, P. J., with Yegan and Perren, JJ., concurring.

OPINION BY: GILBERT

OPINION

    GILBERT, P. J.--Federal law directs state courts to give full force and
effect to American Indian tribal law and custom in civil matters. Chumash tribal
custom and tradition provides that funds distributed by the tribe to its members
should not be used to pay spousal support to nonmembers. Here we hold that the
family law court is not required  to give full force and effect to the Chumash
custom and tradition because it is inconsistent with California law. Maria
Jacobsen, an enrolled member of the Santa Ynez Band of Mission Indians (the
Tribe), appeals an order of the family law court awarding $ 7,415 monthly
temporary spousal support to her former husband, Randy Jacobsen. We affirm. 1

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1    We refer
to the parties by their first names, not from disrespect, but to ease the
reader's task.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Randy also appeals and challenges a subsequent order of the family law court
awarding him $ 3,500 monthly temporary spousal support pending determination of
this appeal. We affirm.

FACTS

   On May 31, 2000, Maria filed a petition to dissolve her 11-year marriage to
Randy. They have two minor children and formally agreed that Randy would have
physical custody of the children approximately 20 percent of the time.

   Maria is not employed and is a full-time homemaker. As an enrolled member of
the Tribe, she receives a "per capita distribution" of Chumash Indian gaming
revenues in accordance with a revenue allocation plan approved by the Bureau of
Indian Affairs. The annual per capita distribution has steadily increased
following the initial distribution in 1995. In 2001 it amounted to $ 312,000 and
in 2002, it increased to $ 316,000. Maria uses the after-tax distributions to
support herself and her children. She has also invested a substantial amount of
the distributions in stock brokerage accounts.

   Randy is employed as a herdsman at his parents' dairy farm, "Jacobsen Dairy
Farm." In an amended income and expense declaration, Randy declared that his
annual salary in 2002 was $ 28,519. Randy also owns a hay and feed business.
During the years 1998 through 2001, the business had earned annual profits
varying between $ 40,180 (1999) and $ 3,158 (2000). On average, the hay and feed
business earned $ 20,000 annually.

   On February 5, 2002, Randy filed a motion seeking, among other things, an
award of temporary spousal support pursuant to Family Code section  3600. 2
Maria responded, in part, that it is the custom and tradition of the Tribe that
per capita distributions not be provided to nontribal members for spousal
support. She relied upon title 28 United States Code section 1360(c), requiring
states to accord "full force and effect" to tribal ordinance or custom unless
the ordinance or custom is "inconsistent with any applicable civil law." 3

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2    All
further statutory references are to the Family Code, unless stated otherwise.
3    28 United States Code section 1360(c), provides:

   "(c) Any tribal ordinance or custom heretofore to hereafter adopted by an
Indian tribe, band, or community in the exercise of any authority which it may
possess shall, if not inconsistent with any applicable civil law of the State,
be given full force and effect in the determination of civil causes of action
pursuant to this section."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Maria also presented evidence of Tribal Resolution 852, providing that per
capita distributions shall not be allocated to former spouses who are not
members of the Tribe. In part, the resolution states: "It is the custom and
tradition of said Tribe that said distributed funds should not be provided,
distributed or allocated to nonmember spouses of Tribal members or nonmember
ex-spouses of Tribal members in the form of spousal support awards ... . [¶]
Pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1360 (c) all  State courts shall give full force and
effect to this Tribal law in determining civil causes of action involving this
Tribal law and policy." (Ibid.) The Tribe adopted the resolution on August 1,
2002.

   After a hearing during which Maria and Randy testified, the family law court
ordered Maria to pay $ 7,415 monthly support to Randy, commencing July 1, 2002.
The court rejected Maria's arguments, reasoning in part that the Tribe's custom
and tradition is "counter to the very important policy and interest of the State
... in providing for support of families." In fixing the amount of the award,
the family law court also stated that "it is unreasonable to conclude that
[Randy] is only making the amount he claimed [$ 3,158] for the amount of hay he
bought and sold. If that were [the] case, he is underemployed ... ."

   Randy then sought a writ of execution upon Maria's stock brokerage accounts.
At Maria's request, the family law court stayed enforcement of its order pending
appeal. It required Maria to post a $ 100,000 bond.

   Randy later sought temporary spousal support pending this appeal. After a
hearing, the family law court ordered Maria to pay Randy $ 3,500 monthly spousal
support, based upon the "Santa Clara Support Schedule." (Rule 1415 (c), Santa
Barbara Superior Court Local Rules ["The court has adopted the Santa Clara
Support Schedule for the purposes of determining the correct amount of temporary
spousal support"].) The court stated that $ 3,500 "was the adequate figure," and
that Randy was "underemployed." It also stated that the $ 3,500 award was "based
upon the facts and circumstances" presented at  the spousal support hearing two
months earlier. In awarding temporary support pending appeal, the court reasoned
in part that "the children should have someplace to visit [their father] which
... does not depart radically from the place they have when they visit their
mother."

   Maria appeals and contends the family law court erred by not according "full
force and effect" to the tribal custom and tradition set forth in Tribal
Resolution 852. (28 U.S.C. § 1360(c).) Randy also appeals and contends that the
family law court erred by reconsidering and reducing the amount of temporary
spousal support pending appeal.

   Amici curiae Pala Band of Mission Indians, Rumsey Band of Wintun Indians, and
the United Auburn Indian Community have filed a thoughtful brief and assert, in
part, that Tribal Resolution 852 is consistent with California law because
family law courts have discretion to exclude separate property in setting
support and to consider "[a]ny other factors [e.g. Tribal Resolution 852] [that]
are just and equitable." (§ 4320, subd. (n).)

DISCUSSION

   Maria argues that the family law court did not possess jurisdiction to order
temporary spousal support to be paid from her tribal gaming distributions to
Randy.  She relies upon 28 United States Code section 1360, and correctly
asserts that Indian tribes are "semi-independent ... with the power of
regulating their internal and social relations." (White Mountain Apache Tribe v.
Bracker (1980) 448 U.S. 136, 142 [65 L. Ed. 2d 665, 100 S Ct. 2578] [Indian
tribes retain attributes of sovereignty over their members and territories];
Boisclair v. Superior Court (1990) 51 Cal.3d 1140, 1147 [276 Cal.Rptr. 62, 801
P.2d 305] ["deeply rooted" policy of leaving Indians free from state
jurisdiction and control].) Maria also points out that section 1360 is not a
congressional waiver of the sovereign immunity of Indian tribes. (Middletown
Rancheria v. Workers' Comp. Appeals Bd. (1998) 60 Cal.App.4th 1340, 1347 [71
Cal.Rptr.2d 105] [for example, state workers' compensation laws do not apply to
Indian gaming employer].)

   Maria also argues that Tribal Resolution 852 is not inconsistent with
California law because California law does not mandate payment of temporary
spousal support from the paying spouse's separate property. (§§ 3600, 4320,
subds. (e) & (n) ["In ordering spousal support ... the court shall consider ...
(e) The obligations and assets, including the separate property, of each party.
... (n) Any other factors the court determines are just and equitable."]; In re
Marriage of Smith (1990) 225 Cal. App. 3d 469, 481 [274 Cal.Rptr. 911] [trial
court possesses broad discretion in applying spousal support guidelines].) She
also points to the strong policies of Indian autonomy and self-sufficiency.
(E.g., In re Humboldt Fir. Inc. (N.D. Cal. 1977) 426 F. Supp. 292, 296 ["Section
1360(c) is designed to encourage tribal autonomy and self-government, which is a
prerequisite to the economic self-development necessary to enable Indian
participation in American life"].) Maria adds that she presented expert legal
opinion concerning the effect of Tribal Resolution 852.

   For several reasons, we reject Maria's arguments.

   First, the family law court had jurisdiction to order Maria to pay temporary
spousal support to Randy because Maria initiated the dissolution proceedings,
appeared, and participated therein.  (In re Marriage of Purnel (1997) 52
Cal.App.4th 527, 538 [60 Cal.Rptr.2d 667] [family law court possesses
jurisdiction to order Indian spouse to pay child support and attorney's fees to
non-Indian spouse].) "[W]hen a Native American ... undertakes to avail himself
or herself of the services of a state court in a domestic relations matter, ...
the state court has jurisdiction to act and to grant whatever relief is
contemplated by the action initiated by the Native American." (Ibid.)

   Second, the tribal custom and tradition set forth in Tribal Resolution 852 is
inconsistent with California law and public policy regarding temporary spousal
support.

   Section 3600 authorizes the family law court to award temporary spousal
support as is necessary "for the support of the wife or husband." Temporary
spousal support allows the parties to maintain living conditions and standards
pending trial and division of the community property and obligations.  (In re
Marriage of Murray (2002) 101 Cal.App.4th 581, 594 [124 Cal.Rptr.2d 342].) It
results from the mutual duty of support inherent in marriage. (§§ 720 [spouses
have obligations of mutual support] & 4300 [spouses shall support each other].)
The family law court possesses broad discretion to award temporary spousal
support, subject only to the moving party's needs and the other party's ability
to pay. (In re Marriage of Murray, supra, 101 Cal.App.4th 581, 594.)

   Tribal Resolution 852 is at odds with the strong public policy, as evidenced
by California statutory law, requiring spouses to support each other.  As such,
the tribal custom and tradition is "inconsistent" with California law.

   Of importance here is that the family law court did not order the Tribe to
satisfy Maria's obligation of temporary spousal support. Facially, the support
orders also are independent of and unrelated to any particular source of funds
that may be used to satisfy them.  (In re Marriage of  Purnel, supra, 52
Cal.App.4th 527, 540.) Furthermore, once Maria deposited her tribal distribution
in a bank account or a securities account, for example, "the money involved lost
its identity as immune Indian property." (Id., at p. 541.)[NOT CERTIFIED FOR
PUBLICATION] *

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -*    See
footnote, ante, page 1187.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The orders concerning temporary spousal support are affirmed. Each party
shall bear his or her own costs on appeal.

   Yegan, J., and Perren, J., concurred.


                              94 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             In re the Marriage of ERIC and REBEKAH CAMPBELL.  ERIC
             CAMPBELL, Appellant, v. REBEKAH CAMPBELL, Respondent.

                                    H028804

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, SIXTH APPELLATE DISTRICT

          136 Cal. App. 4th 502; 38 Cal. Rptr. 3d 908; 2006 Cal. App.
            LEXIS 155; 2006 Cal. Daily Op. Service 1138; 2006 Daily
                                Journal DAR 1555


                            February 7, 2006, Filed

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY: Review denied by In re Campbell, 2006 Cal. LEXIS 5198 (Cal.,
Apr. 26, 2006)

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Santa Clara County, No. 1-04-FL118618.
(Santa Clara County Super. Ct. No. 1-04-FL118618). Marc Poche, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports

(5) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 73--Spousal Support--Termination--
Attempted Remarriage.--The term "remarriage," within the meaning of Fam. Code, §
4337, does not include a supported spouse's attempt to remarry prior to judgment
dissolving the existing marriage. Thus, in a case in which a husband sought to
terminate his temporary spousal support obligation on the ground his wife had
remarried, § 4337 did not apply where the wife attempted to remarry in another
state while still married to the husband.

   [11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (10th ed. 2005) Husband and Wife, § 295.]

COUNSEL: Law Offices of Donald Kilmer and Donald E. J. Kilmer, Jr., for
Appellant.

Roberts & Elliott, James K. Roberts, Kirk Elliott and Sharmi Shah for
Respondent.

JUDGES: Premo, Acting P. J. with Bamattre-Manoukian and Duffy, JJ., concurring.

OPINION BY: Premo

OPINION

    PREMO, Acting P. J.--Family Code section 4337 1 provides: "Except as
otherwise agreed by the parties in writing, the obligation of a party under an
order for the support of the other party terminates upon the death of either
party or the remarriage of the other party." The sole question before us is
whether this section applies to terminate a temporary spousal support order when
the supported spouse "remarries" prior to judgment dissolving the first
marriage. We conclude, as the trial court did, that the section does not apply
in this situation.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1
Hereafter, all unspecified statutory references are to the Family Code.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

I. Facts

   Eric Campbell and Rebekah Campbell were married for over 13 years. Eric 2
filed a petition for dissolution of the marriage on February 26, 2004. In or
about April 2004, pursuant to an agreement between the parties, the trial court
ordered Eric to pay Rebekah $ 3,500 per month as temporary spousal support. (§
3600.) In October 2004, while the matter was still pending, Rebekah was
remarried in Nevada. The remarriage, of course, was void, since Rebekah was
still married to Eric. (§ 2201; Pen. Code, § 281.)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2
Consistent with the tradition in marital dissolution cases, we refer to the
parties by their given names for the sake of clarity and mean no disrespect in
doing so. (Rubenstein v. Rubenstein (2000) 81 Cal.App.4th 1131, 1136, fn. 1 [97
Cal. Rptr. 2d 707].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Eric filed a motion to terminate his spousal support obligation. Eric asked
the court to grant a status-only judgment and to enter the judgment nunc pro
tunc. Eric  argued that a nunc pro tunc judgment dissolving his marriage to
Rebekah as of a date prior to her remarriage would render her most recent
marriage valid and, pursuant to section 4337, he would be relieved of the
obligation to pay temporary spousal support. Eric also argued that even though
Rebekah's remarriage was void, section 4337 extinguished the temporary support
order as a matter of law. Eric did not seek to terminate or modify the support
order based upon changed circumstances. (§ 3603.) Rebekah opposed the motion.
She argued that since her attempted remarriage was void, she had not actually
remarried and section 4337 did not apply.

    At the time of the hearing on Eric's motion, Rebekah was struggling with
sobriety. The couple's two young daughters lived with Eric; Rebekah had limited
contact with them. She was not employed and she had no income. The marital
property had not been divided and the issue of whether Rebekah would be entitled
to future spousal support had not been fully explored. Rebekah's counsel
explained that Rebekah had a "significant alcohol problem," and that she was
"going through a lot." He represented that an unopposed petition seeking
annulment of the recent marriage was then pending. According to Rebekah's brief
on appeal, the annulment has since been granted.

   The trial court denied Eric's motion for a status-only judgment and denied
his request to terminate temporary spousal support. The court stated: "I don't
think the issue is whether [Rebekah's remarriage is a] void or voidable marriage
per se. I think it is the triggering event that kicks in [section] 4337 is that
there has to be a final judgment which has not happened in this case. [¶] Now,
why [Rebekah] went and got married during the pendency of this dissolution I
will never know. But we don't even allow people to waive support on a long term
marriage unless there's a clear record in court under oath that they understand
the consequences of waiving support. Particularly in the context of a long term
marriage where the [L]egislature has asked the courts to be very very careful
about terminating support.

   "In this case there simply is not a final judgment and I don't think
balancing all of those concerns it would have been the intent of the court
or--courts or the [L]egislature to terminate support at this stage where
discovery on the issue of long term support hasn't even been accomplished. So,
respectfully I'm denying your motion."

   On appeal, Eric challenges only the trial court's order denying his request
to terminate spousal support.

II. Discussion

A. Appealability

   Before considering the merits of Eric's appeal, we first dispose of Rebekah's
argument that Eric has appealed from a nonappealable order. The rule is this:
"Even if it is technically interlocutory, an order dispositive of the rights of
the parties in relation to a collateral matter, or directing payment of money or
performance of an act, may be subject to direct appeal. For this reason, it has
long been established that severable portions of a judgment may  be separately
appealed, particularly in dissolution cases." (In re Marriage of Eben-King &
King (2000) 80 Cal.App.4th 92, 115-116 [95 Cal. Rptr. 2d 113], citing In re
Marriage of Skelley (1976) 18 Cal.3d 365, 368 [134 Cal. Rptr. 197, 556 P.2d 297]
.) Indeed, our Supreme Court has held that an order granting or denying
temporary spousal support "is directly appealable as a final judgment
independently of the main action." (Greene v. Superior Court (1961) 55 Cal.2d
403, 405  [10 Cal. Rptr. 817, 359 P.2d 249].) The trial court's order denying
Eric's motion to terminate temporary spousal support was dispositive of the
parties' rights with respect to the collateral issue of temporary support. It is
an appealable order.

   We also reject Rebekah's assertion that Eric has not provided an adequate
record for review because he has not included the existing temporary support
order in the record. Eric is not appealing from the original order of temporary
support. He is appealing from the denial of his motion to modify that order
based upon facts extrinsic to the order itself. The parties do not dispute the
amount or validity of the support order, nor does either party suggest that the
terms of the order would have any bearing upon the question presented here.
Accordingly, the order for temporary support is not necessary to our review.

B. Section 4337

   We now come to the substantive issue before us: Does section 4337 apply to
extinguish a temporary spousal support obligation when the supported spouse
attempts to remarry prior to judgment dissolving her existing marriage?

   The question is one of statutory interpretation. The rules for interpreting a
statute have been stated many times. "Statutes are to be interpreted in
accordance with their apparent purpose ... ." (Kaiser Foundation Health Plan,
Inc. v. Lifeguard, Inc. (1993) 18 Cal.App.4th 1753, 1762 [23 Cal. Rptr. 2d 235]
.) First and foremost, we look for that purpose in the actual language of the
statute. (Mercer v. Department of Motor Vehicles (1991) 53 Cal.3d 753, 763 [280
Cal. Rptr. 745, 809 P.2d 404].) If the meaning is without ambiguity, doubt, or
uncertainty, then the language controls. (Security Pacific National Bank v.
Wozab (1990) 51 Cal.3d 991, 998 [275 Cal. Rptr. 201, 800 P.2d 557].) If the
meaning of the words is not clear, we may refer to various extrinsic aids,
including the history of the statute, to determine the intent of the
Legislature. (Kaiser Foundation Health Plan, Inc. v. Lifeguard, Inc., supra, 18
Cal.App.4th at p. 1762.) Finally, if neither the words of the statute nor its
legislative history reveal a clear meaning, we apply reason and practicality,
and interpret the statute in accord with common sense and justice, and to avoid
an absurd result. (Halbert's Lumber, Inc. v. Lucky Stores, Inc. (1992) 6
Cal.App.4th 1233, 1240  [8 Cal. Rptr. 2d 298].) The interpretation and
application of a statutory scheme is a pure question of law. Accordingly,  we
apply our independent review. (Robertson v. Health Net of California, Inc.
(2005) 132 Cal.App.4th 1419, 1425 [34 Cal. Rptr. 3d 547].) With these rules in
mind, we turn to the problem at hand.

   Rebekah argues that section 4337 does not apply to temporary orders for
spousal support or that it does not apply here, where the remarriage was void.
The statutory language does not clearly support the first argument.

   Temporary or pendente lite spousal support is governed by section 3600, which
states in pertinent part: "During the pendency of any proceeding for dissolution
of marriage or for legal separation of the parties ... the court may order (a)
the husband or wife to pay any amount that is necessary for the support of the
wife or husband ... ." "The purpose of temporary spousal support is to maintain
the status quo as much as possible pending trial." (In re Marriage of Schulze
(1997) 60 Cal.App.4th 519, 525 [70 Cal. Rptr. 2d 488].) Subject only to the
supported party's "need" and the supporting party's "ability to pay," the amount
of a temporary spousal support award lies within the sound  discretion of the
trial court. (In re Marriage of Murray (2002) 101 Cal.App.4th 581, 594 [124 Cal.
Rptr. 2d 342].)

   Section 4300 applies to permanent spousal support. 3 The purpose of permanent
spousal support is "to provide financial assistance, if appropriate, as
determined by the financial circumstances of the parties after their dissolution
and the division of their community property." (In re Marriage of Burlini (1983)
143 Cal. App. 3d 65, 69 [191 Cal. Rptr. 541].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3    Although
awards of spousal support upon dissolution or legal separation are not, strictly
speaking, "permanent,? they are often referred to as such in order to
distinguish them from temporary orders made pursuant to section 3600.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   As we stated above, section 4337 provides: "Except as otherwise agreed by the
parties in writing, the obligation of a party under an order for the support of
the other party terminates upon the death of either party or the remarriage of
the other party."

   Finally, section 155 defines "support order" as a "judgment or order of
support ... whether temporary or final."

   As Rebekah observes, section 4337 is linked structurally to section 4330 in
that both sections are contained in the chapter of the Family Code devoted to
permanent spousal support orders, while section 3600 is located under the part
where definitions and general provisions are located. Rebekah argues that, by
inference from its location in the statutory scheme, section 4337 should be
interpreted to apply only to permanent orders. But since section 155 expressly
defines "support order" to mean either a temporary or final order, the reference
in section 4337 to an "order for support" is more reasonably interpreted to
refer to both temporary and permanent spousal support orders. Indeed, it is not
difficult to foresee a situation where a temporary spousal support order would
survive a status-only judgment. In such a case, the supported spouse could
remarry legally and, if section 4337 applied, the remarriage would extinguish
the temporary support obligation. Assuming, without deciding, that section 4337
applies to temporary orders in that situation, we are confident that it does not
apply prior to dissolution of the existing marriage.

   Section 4337 is triggered by two circumstances, death and remarriage. As to
the second trigger,  remarriage, a person may never legally remarry prior to
dissolution of his or her existing marriage. (§ 2201; Pen. Code, § 281.) Indeed,
"marriage" is defined by Black's Law Dictionary as "The legal union of a couple
as husband and wife." (Black's Law Dict. (8th ed. 1999) p. 992.) Since
remarriage is a legal impossibility in California prior to dissolution of the
existing marriage, it is reasonable to conclude that the Legislature never
expected or intended that "remarriage," within the meaning of section 4337,
would encompass an attempted remarriage prior to dissolution of the first
marriage. 4 Accordingly, we agree with  Rebekah that the statute does not apply
in the situation here.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4    We also
note that the Legislature did not need to pass section 4337 in order to
terminate a temporary spousal support order upon the death of a party prior to
dissolution. Where a party dies before the marriage is dissolved, the
dissolution action abates. (In re Marriage of Allen (1992) 8 Cal.App.4th 1225,
1229 [10 Cal. Rptr. 2d 916].) Thus, a pendente lite spousal support order would,
by its very nature, terminate by operation of law upon the death of either party
prior to dissolution of the marital status. "You can't very well have a viable
pendente lite support order--that is, an order pending trial--when there isn't
going to be any trial ... ." (County of Orange v. Quinn (2002) 97 Cal.App.4th
956, 962 [118 Cal. Rptr. 2d 833].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Our conclusion is consistent with principles of common sense and justice.
Application of section 4337 prior to dissolution would deprive the trial court
of the discretion so necessary at this unsettled stage of the proceedings. It
may be that a spouse's attempt to remarry prior to dissolution would warrant
termination of temporary support where the conduct was evidence of a real change
of circumstances. The court has discretion to terminate support in that case. (§
3603.) But where the attempted remarriage is due to a lapse in judgment on the
part of the supported spouse and where the supported spouse actually has no
means of support, no funds to prosecute the litigation, and no control over the
marital property that has yet to be divided, the attempted "remarriage" does not
diminish the supported spouse's need for support pending trial. Automatic
termination of the temporary support order in that  situation would be
manifestly unjust and would conflict with the purposes for which temporary
spousal support is intended.

   Eric argues that section 4337 operates whether or not the remarriage is void.
He relies upon a series of cases, beginning with Sefton v. Sefton (1955) 45
Cal.2d 872 [291 P.2d 439] (Sefton), which hold that annulment of a void or
voidable remarriage does not revive a prior support obligation. Sefton concerned
former Civil Code section 139 (now section 4337). The supported spouse in Sefton
had remarried but obtained an annulment on the basis of fraud. (Sefton, supra,
45 Cal.2d at p. 874.) The Supreme Court explained that when a party obtains an
annulment, the annulment relates back and erases the marriage itself. Thus, if
the relation-back theory were to be strictly applied, the supported spouse's
remarriage never existed, and she would remain entitled to continue to receive
the alimony previously awarded. (Id. at p. 875.) The court noted, however, that
the doctrine was a legal fiction designed to achieve substantial justice as
between the parties to the voidable marriage and should be sparingly applied in
cases involving the rights of third parties. (Ibid.) Sefton reasoned that by
celebrating the marriage, the supported spouse had held herself out as having
remarried so that the supporting spouse, as an innocent third party, was
entitled to rely upon the apparent remarriage, assume his support obligation had
terminated, and recommit his assets elsewhere. (Id. at p. 876.) Berkely v.
Berkely (1969) 269 Cal. App. 2d 872 [75 Cal. Rptr. 294], applied Sefton's
reasoning to a marriage that was void at the outset because the supported party
married a man who was already married. The Berkely court concluded that a
"divorcee" is a "responsible person who must be held to her decision, presumably
relied upon by others, to terminate her right to support from a former husband."
(Id. at p. 875; accord, Fry v. Fry (1970) 5 Cal. App. 3d 169, 171-172 [85 Cal.
Rptr. 126].)

   The flaw in Eric's argument is that the issue in these cases was completely
different than the issue here. The question in  Sefton and  Berkely was not
whether the statute applied to the supported spouse's remarriage--there was no
dispute that it did. The question was whether annulment of the second marriage
revived the prior obligation. In concluding that the prior obligation was not
revived, these cases applied what is essentially an estoppel analysis. Because
the supported spouse was free to enter into a valid remarriage, the supporting
spouse could reasonably rely to his detriment upon the apparent remarriage, even
though the remarriage was later determined to be void.  Nothing in these cases
contemplates the situation alleged here, where neither spouse may legally
remarry because they are still married to each other. Under these circumstances,
the supporting spouse cannot plausibly argue that he detrimentally relied upon
the apparent validity of the other's remarriage. In any event, since we have
concluded that section 4337 does not apply in the first instance, these cases
are not on point.

    We conclude that the term "remarriage," within the meaning of section 4337,
does not include a supported spouse's attempt to remarry prior to judgment
dissolving the existing marriage.

III. Disposition

   The order of the superior court filed March 16, 2005, is affirmed.

   Bamattre-Manoukian, J., and Duffy, J., concurred.

   Appellant's petition for review by the Supreme Court was denied April 26,
2006, S142014.


                              95 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            In re the Marriage of ANDREA L. and MICHAEL P. SCHULZE.
             ANDREA L. SCHULZE, Respondent, v. MICHAEL P. SCHULZE,
                                   Appellant.

                                  No. G015895.

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FOURTH APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION THREE

           60 Cal. App. 4th 519; 70 Cal. Rptr. 2d 488; 1997 Cal. App.
          LEXIS 1097; 97 Cal. Daily Op. Service 9778; 97 Daily Journal
                                   DAR 15577


                           December 29, 1997, Decided

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Appeal from a judgment of the Superior Court of Orange
County, No. D342617, Daniel J. Didier, Judge.

COUNSEL: Mark E. Minyard, Michael L. Morris and Marjorie G. Fuller for
Appellant.

Seastrom & Fisher and Michael A. Fisher for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Sills, P. J., with Wallin and Bedsworth, JJ., concurring.

OPINION BY: SILLS

OPINION

     SILLS, P. J.

   In this appeal, a noncustodial parent challenges a family support order which
took more than 83 percent of his after-tax monthly monetary income. The large
percentage was essentially the result of two factors. One, the trial judge
appears to have used, to determine the permanent spousal support component of
the family support order, a figure generated by a privately developed computer
program which was intended to be used to calculate temporary support. Temporary
support, as most family lawyers know, usually is higher than permanent support
because it is intended to maintain the status quo prior to the divorce. As we
explain below, use of the temporary figure was error. The spousal support
component of a permanent family support order must be based on the statutory
factors enumerated in section 4320 of the Family Code, 1 not pegged to a number
generated by a computer program intended for use in calculating temporary
support.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   All
statutory references in this opinion are to the Family Code, unless otherwise
specifically indicated.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Two, the trial court characterized certain employer-provided benefits as
"nontaxable." Such a characterization, in the "Alice in Wonderland" world of
algebraically determined support orders (see In re Marriage of Carter (1994) 26
Cal. App. 4th 1024, 1029, fn. 5 [33 Cal. Rptr. 2d 1] [criticizing process of
determining child support in California as a "bizarre" "Alice in Wonderland"
situation]) yielded a substantially higher support order than would have
otherwise been the case because the supporting parent received no credit for his
potential tax liability corresponding to those benefits. His annual net
disposable income was overstated and, consequently, so was the amount that was
theoretically available for payment as support.

   The judgment must be reversed, and the cause remanded for a redetermination
of the support order. This appeal also raises subsidiary issues concerning
sanctions and attorney fees, with which we also deal below.

   FACTS

   Michael P. Schulze is a high school graduate who has been able to earn a very
good living working for his parents' manufacturing company. Michael  went to
work for the family business when he was 18. In 1983, at 22, he married Andrea.
They had three children, who are now about twelve, nine and six. He separated
from Andrea in April 1992, and their dissolution came to trial in January 1994.
The trial revealed that Michael had been compensated handsomely in the late
1980's and early 1990's as a vice-president in  charge of sales, regularly
earning in excess of $ 100,000. In 1991, the year before the separation,
Michael's compensation exceeded $ 160,000. In the four years prior to the date
of separation his income averaged $ 133,000.

   Despite the recession, Michael's parents' company increased its sales from
1991 to 1992, and increased them again in 1993. Even so, in 1992--the year of
the separation--Michael's salary was reduced because his parents decided to
distribute 49 percent of the company to their three children. As it turned out,
however, only Michael's brother and sister received any stock. Michael received
none because Andrea would not sign an agreement confirming Michael's share of
the stock to be his separate property. Because Michael was without stock,
dividend money that would otherwise go out in direct compensation to Michael and
his brother and sister was diverted to dividends to just his brother and sister.
By 1993, Michael was grossing about $ 80,000.

   The trial judge used Michael's actual pretax monthly income of $ 6,628 to
calculate family support. However, in addition to Michael's actual earnings, the
judge included two items of imputed income.

   First, the judge added $ 600 to Michael's income because of a rental subsidy.
After separation, Michael had been sleeping on the couch in his parents' home.
So in 1993 his mother purchased a $ 250,000 condominium for him to live in. She
charged him rent of $ 800 per month; the judge found the fair rental value was $
1,400, and added in the $ 600 difference as "nontaxable" income.

   Second, the judge added $ 500 to Michael's income for the use of a company
car. Specifically, Michael had the use of a 1989 Mercedes as a company car, the
fair rental value of which was determined to be $ 500 a month. Like the $ 600
rental subsidy, the $ 500 was characterized as "nontaxable" income, meaning that
neither figure increased Michael's tax liability for purposes of calculating his
net income.

   The numbers were crunched in the DissoMaster.  2 The judge entered $ 6,628 as
Michael's "wages and salary"--his actual, albeit comparatively  depressed,
earnings from his parent's company.  3 The judge next entered  $ 1,100 (i.e., $
600 for the condo, $ 500 for the car) on a line entitled "other nontaxable."
Michael was given credit for spending 20 percent of his time with the children.
The judge also included $ 271 as child care expenses which Andrea would incur.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   The
DissoMaster is one of two privately developed computer programs used to
calculate guideline child support as required by section 4055, which involves,
literally, an algebraic formula. The complexity of California's child support
scheme has been the subject of considerable judicial criticism. (E.g., County of
Tulare v. Campbell (1996) 50 Cal. App. 4th 847, 851, fn. 2 [57 Cal. Rptr. 2d
902]; In re Marriage of Carter, supra, 26 Cal. App. 4th at pp. 1028-1029, fn. 5;
In re Marriage of Fini (1994) 26 Cal. App. 4th 1033, 1040-1044 [31 Cal. Rptr. 2d
749].) We need not repeat here what has been said with considerable eloquence by
Justice King, particularly in regard to the need for any child support system,
for the sake of its own political legitimacy, to be comprehensible to, and
perceived as fair by, the litigants involved. (See Fini, supra, 26 Cal. App. 4th
at pp. 1040-1041.) As we have noted, the algebraically based computation method
has been likened to something out of Alice in Wonderland. Actually, it is worse
than that. The system is a kind of hybrid of quantum physics and Zen philosophy.
Support is calculated on after-tax income, but after-tax income may be itself
affected by the support order! Thus, in a manner reminiscent of an attempt to
pin down an electron or the image of a snake eating its own tail, the nooks and
crannies of the computer program involved in this case contain sophisticated
feedback loops which seek, in essence, to continually adjust for the tax effects
of a given order, but at the same time formulate an order in light of those same
tax effects. The complexity is compounded because not only does every child
support calculation in California now require the parties to do their tax
returns (a fiendishly complicated process by itself), but on top of the tax
computations an algebraic formula must be applied to the result. For a judge
trying to manually apply the law, it would be like taking an algebra exam after
doing somebody else's tax returns.
3   There is a growing body of case law centering on when a supporting parent's
"earning capacity," as distinct from what the parent actually earns, may be used
to increase child support. (E.g., In re Marriage of Padilla (1995) 38 Cal. App.
4th 1212 [45 Cal. Rptr. 2d 555]; In re Marriage of Regnery (1989) 214 Cal. App.
3d 1367 [263 Cal. Rptr. 243].) In essence, Michael prevailed on the "earning
capacity" issue in this case because the family law judge only punched in
Michael's actual wages on the "wages and salary" line of the DissoMaster, not
some higher figure based on what Michael might earn if his parents were to
continue paying him at preseparation levels. Andrea has not challenged the trial
court's use of Michael's actual wages in an appeal of her own. Accordingly, we
are spared the need to consider any "capacity" issue in this case.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Based on these numbers, the DissoMaster produced a "guideline" result of $
2,713 in total child support for the three children (an average of $ 904 per
child), plus $ 914 as "guideline" spousal support. The $ 914 figure was based on
using Santa Clara County guidelines for temporary support.

   Under the guideline results, Michael's taxes were calculated to be $ 2,019.
The bottom line was that Michael was to pay $ 3,626 in combined child and
spousal support. 4 He was assumed to have $ 5,709 after taxes ($ 6,628 in wages
plus $ 1,100 in "nontaxable" income minus $ 2,019 in taxes equals $ 5,709) and,
after paying the support, would have $ 2,083 left.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   The
DissoMaster obviously does its own rounding. The figures it yielded for child
support were $ 136 child care expenses and $ 2,577 in straight child support,
plus $ 914 in guideline spousal support. $ 136 + $ 2,577 + $ 914 = $ 3,627, not
$ 3,626.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    But the DissoMaster was not content to leave it there. The deductibility of
spousal and unallocated family support in the tax laws offers the promise of
increasing a support order while at the same time increasing the amount the
paying parent has left. So, on top of the $ 3,626 guideline figure, the program
proposed that Michael pay an  additional $ 1,152 in family support for a total
of $ 4,778. The program noted that, assuming Michael were allowed to deduct the
entire kit and caboodle of his combined support payments--by calling it
unallocated family support--his taxes would decrease from $ 2,019 to $ 568 and,
instead of having $ 2,083 left after taxes and support, he would have $ 2,382
left. (That is, $ 6,628 in wages plus $ 1,100 in "nontaxable" income equals $
7,728; $ 568 in taxes from $ 7,728 equals $ 7,160; $ 4,778 in combined support
from $ 7,160 equals $ 2,382.)

   And so the family court judge made an order for $ 4,780, which, as we have
indicated, works out to more than 83 percent of Michael's after-tax income. ($
4,780 divided by $ 5,709 equals .837.)

   DISCUSSION

   Using the Temporary Spousal Support Figure to Establish the Permanent Support
Order Was Error

     The purpose of temporary spousal support is to maintain the status quo as
much as possible pending trial. ( In re Marriage of Olson (1993) 14 Cal. App.
4th 1, 5-6, fn. 3 [17 Cal. Rptr. 2d 480]; In re Marriage of Winter (1992) 7 Cal.
App. 4th 1926, 1932 [10 Cal. Rptr. 2d 225] ["temporary spousal support 'is
utilized to maintain the living conditions and standards of the parties in as
close to the status quo position as possible pending trial and the division of
their assets and obligations' "].) By contrast, permanent spousal support is
supposed to reflect a complex variety of factors established by statute and
legislatively committed to the trial judge's discretion, including several
factors which tend to favor reduced support, such as the "goal" that the
supported spouse should become self-supporting within a reasonable period of
time. (See § 4320, subd. (k).)

   Furthermore, not only are the legal bases for the two kinds of support
different, there is also a disparity in practice. Because dissolution of
marriage is, in the mathematical sense, a negative-sum game where each party
will not have the same access to the whole of the marital property he or she had
during the marriage, permanent support orders will usually be lower than
temporary orders.

   In light of the different legal purposes for each kind of support order and
the reality that temporary support will tend to be higher than permanent
support, In re Marriage of Olson, supra, 14 Cal. App. 4th 1, specifically warned
against using temporary spousal support guidelines in a computer program
assigned the task of determining permanent support. After noting the absence of
legal authority to use a computer program for even temporary support unless they
incorporate guidelines  adapted by local court rule, Justice King, writing for
the Olson court, observed: "An even greater danger is that the trial judge may
use the results from a computer program designed for temporary spousal support
to determine permanent spousal support. The purposes of temporary and permanent
support are vastly different . . . . For this reason, using a computer program
based on the court's guidelines for temporary spousal support is inappropriate
for fixing permanent spousal support." (Id. at pp. 5-6 fn. 3, italics added.)
Permanent spousal support, noted the Olson court, cannot be reduced to a
computer program, because permanent support must be "fixed only after
consideration of the applicable" statutory factors. (Ibid.)

   In supplemental briefing on the issue, Andrea recognizes that it would have
been error for the trial judge to base a permanent spousal support order on
guidelines used for temporary support, but contends that the court actually
based its order on the statutory factors bearing on permanent support, not the
temporary guidelines contained in the DissoMaster program. In essence, she
claims the fact that the spousal support component of the permanent family
support order was virtually the same number as the DissoMaster number for
temporary support was mere coincidence. In that regard she points out the
judgment mentions several of the section 4320 factors, in particular the high
standard of living of the parties prior to dissolution.  5

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   Andrea's
counsel also argues that there are times when using a computer program may be
thoroughly consonant with a trial judge's discretion under section 4320, citing
In re Marriage of Olson, supra, 14 Cal. App. 4th 1. The Olson court ruled that
there was no abuse of discretion under section 4320 where, because of the
fluctuating nature of each party's income, the trial judge ordered a special
master to determine spousal support by means of the standard DissoMaster default
program. In doing so, however, the Olson court stressed the special
circumstances of the fluctuating income and the fact that there was "no
indication that the trial court used this computer program as a substitute for
judicial discretion or in lieu of considering the factors prescribed" by
statute. (See Olson, supra, 14 Cal. App. 4th at pp. 8-9.) In the present case,
by contrast, there was no problem of fluctuating monthly income and consequently
no need to resort to a computer program to solve that problem.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    We do not think, however, that "coincidence" can explain the uncanny
closeness of a permanent spousal support order with a proposed DissoMaster
temporary support order in any case where the record does not show that the
trial judge arrived at the permanent figure from the ground up rather than using
the temporary figure as a kind of baseline or "lodestar." Section 4320 requires
an independent evaluation of all of a variety of specifically enumerated
factors. If the trial judge begins with the proposed temporary figure and  then
makes adjustments (or merely uses some of the section 4320 factors to justify a
figure based on the temporary order), the ultimate order is not really the
product of a truly independent exercise of judicial discretion.

   Moreover, there is a subtle upward bias built into the DissoMaster when it is
used to determine permanent spousal support. By casually introducing the
assumption that spousal support may permissibly be such and such (again, even
though based on temporary county guidelines), and then showing how both parties
can do better than that figure with an even higher figure characterized as
deductible unallocated family support, the judge and litigants may never realize
that the spousal support component of this "unallocated" family support is
significantly higher than the trial judge would award if he or she were making
the award directly from the statutory factors set forth in section 4320. The
process is analogous to the difference between using last year's budget or a
"zero-based" budget. The former unavoidably incorporates the assumption that
last year's spending was acceptable; the latter forces the decisionmaker to
reexamine basic assumptions. While the former may sometimes be necessary as a
practical matter in business or government, section 4320 clearly contemplates a
ground-up examination of the need for and appropriate level of permanent spousal
support, rather than beginning with a figure pegged to a proposed temporary
support order.

   That was the error in the present case, which resulted in a bottom line
payment of  what can only be termed a confiscatory percentage of Michael's
after-tax income.  6 The family support order of $ 4,780 is almost exactly what
the Dissomaster proposed ($ 4,778), save for a paltry $ 2 difference obviously
resulting from rounding. Even if some of the section 4320 factors were mentioned
in the ruling, there is absolutely nothing to indicate that the permanent
support order was arrived at independently of the influence of a figure never
intended to be used for permanent support orders. Moreover, if mere recitation
of a few of the section 4320 factors could legitimize a permanent award
obviously based on the DissoMaster temporary support  proposal, section 4320
would become a dead letter. Instead of being forced to face the hard issues
posed by the statutory spousal support factors in the context of what is left
after a relatively fixed child support obligation has been paid, a trial judge
need merely use the DissoMaster number and then recite a few of the section 4320
factors as window dressing.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   Justice
King has noted that in the real world there has been a de facto trade-off
between child support and spousal support with the enactment of the state
uniform guidelines for child support. See In re Marriage of Fini, supra, 26 Cal.
App. 4th at page 1043: "Given the significant increase in the proportion of the
payor's income now ordered for child support, the Legislature has virtually
eliminated orders for spousal support in all but higher income cases, if the
parties have minor children. Although this was unintended and probably never
contemplated by the Legislature, the fact is that after the order for the amount
payable as child support the payor simply does not have sufficient income left
to permit spousal support to be ordered paid."

   The instant case represents the converse of the problem spotted by Justice
King: the danger, in a higher income case, of a too high permanent spousal
support order when it is based on guidelines developed for a different context.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Because it is clear that, at best, the trial judge here used the $ 914
spousal support figure as a benchmark and did not arrive at spousal support
independently, the family award must be reversed to that extent and the cause
remanded for the establishment of a spousal support component based, from the
ground up, on the section 4320 factors.

   Inclusion of the Value of the Company Car and Employer-furnished Rent Subsidy
Into the Child Support Calculation Was Not Error, But Characterization of Those
Benefits as "Nontaxable" Was

     Before we can explain why ascribing the $ 1,100 for the rent subsidy on the
condo and the company car as "nontaxable" was error, we must explain why
including them into the calculation at all was not error, contrary to Michael's
position in this appeal.

   In In re Marriage of Whealon (1997) 53 Cal. App. 4th 132, 144 [61 Cal. Rptr.
2d 559], this court observed that California child support law is now "redolent
of the flavor of the Internal Revenue Code, complete with definitions of income
and allowances for deductions." 7 Thus,  Family Code section 4058, subdivision
(a)(3) defines "income" to include "employee benefits . . . taking into
consideration . . . any corresponding reduction in living expenses."

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   We were
not the first court to make the observation. In In re Marriage of Fini, supra,
26 Cal. App. 4th at page 1042, the court observed: "The Legislature has adopted
a detailed and relatively inflexible child support statutory scheme much akin to
the Internal Revenue Code."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Of the two items, the car and the condo, the car presents by far the easier
problem. The $ 500 value for the Mercedes is, on its face, an employee benefit
reducing Michael's living expenses.

   The $ 600 rent reduction requires a little more analysis. Not even the IRS
would be so prehensile as to claim that a parent's allowing an adult child to
live in a condominium owned by the parent represented taxable income to the
child, at least under ordinary circumstances.  8

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -8   The issue
is more likely to be whether the parent could claim the child as a dependent.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The problem here is that the circumstances are not ordinary. Michael's
parents are also his employers, and the imputation of the free rent may be
upheld as compensation from those employers.

    The trial judge was unimpressed with the maneuver of trying to reduce
Michael's income during the pendency of his divorce by  distributing stock to
the children, and made an implied finding that the value of the rent reduction
represented compensation for his services as sales vice president, not a gift
from parent to child. (Cf. Int.Rev. Code, § 119 [implying that value of lodgings
furnished employee is income when not furnished for the convenience of the
employer].)

   Substantial evidence supported that finding. There was evidence of a
precipitous drop in Michael's actual income between 1991 and 1992 (the year of
separation), yet Michael's employer's sales were increasing during the same
period. The reasonable inference from such facts--especially in light of the
suspicious timing of the stock distribution--is that Michael's employers were
trying to distribute what they had previously paid him straightforwardly into a
form of income that would be less visible to the radar of the family law court.
It is irrelevant that the tactic did not work. The rent and car still
represented employment benefits, not merely a helping hand from parents seeking
to cushion a child who was going through a divorce.

   The addition of imputed income based on the condominium and the Mercedes,
however, created a problem of its own which the trial court erred in not
correcting. The trial judge characterized the imputed income as "nontaxable,"
but such a characterization runs counter to the inclusion of the items as
"income" within section 4058 in the first place. Section 4058 does not mention
gifts or other "freebies" that come one's way in life: The operative language in
subdivision (a), i.e., "annual gross income . . . means income from whatever
source derived," was lifted straight from the definition of income in section 61
of the Internal Revenue Code. The only "benefits" which are mentioned in section
4058 are employee or self-employment benefits. (See § 4058, subd. (a)(3).) If
the Mercedes and the condo were truly "nontaxable," it would be because they
were gifts to Michael from his parents, not a form of compensation. Gifts are
not mentioned in section 4058, and, judging from the use of language lifted
straight from the Internal Revenue Code, should logically be outside the purview
of the child support statute.  9 Gross income, in federal tax law, does not
include gifts. (See generally, Int.Rev. Code, § 61, 102(a); see, e.g.,
Commissioner v. Duberstein (1960) 363 U.S. 278, 285 [80 S. Ct. 1190, 4 L. Ed. 2d
1218]; Bogardus v.  Commissioner (1937) 302 U.S. 34, 43 [58 S. Ct. 61, 65-66, 82
L. Ed. 32]; U.S. v. Harris (7th Cir. 1991) 942 F.2d 1125, 1128.) 10

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -9   The
criminal child-neglect statute, Penal Code section 270, in contrast to section
4058, specifically mentions "gifts" as within "income" for purposes of
determining a parent's ability to support his or her child.
10   We decline Michael's invitation to explore further the nature of parental
gifts to adult children who themselves have their own support obligations. The
really tough case--which may be safely left for another day--would be that of
the scion of a wealthy family whose parents are not his or her employers and who
still manages to live quite well even on a low annual gross income as defined by
section 4058 because of bona fide nontaxable gifts from his or her parents, and
where there is no issue of criminal child neglect under Penal Code section 270.
Because the record here is susceptible of the finding that the condominium
subsidy and the use of the Mercedes were both employment perquisites and
therefore within section 4058, we are spared the problem of whether they still
might be used as factors to increase support even if they were gifts outside
section 4058. (Cf.  Stewart v. Gomez (1996) 47 Cal. App. 4th 1748, 1754-1755 [55
Cal. Rptr. 2d 531] [rent-free housing afforded disabled carpenter on Indian
reservation held to be within section 4058].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Given that the imputed income from the car and the condo was only includable
as income by virtue of an implied finding that they were "employee benefits,"
the trial court should have included, in calculating family support, the extra
income tax that Michael would have had to pay on it. The state uniform guideline
set out in section 4055 speaks in terms of the high earner's "net monthly
disposable income," and section 4059, subdivision (a) states that "[t]he state
and federal income tax liability resulting from the parties' taxable income"
shall be deducted from each parent's annual gross income. The case must
therefore be returned for a recalculation, in which the extra tax liability that
would result from the inclusion of the Mercedes and the condo are  factored in.
11

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -11   We do
not know that Michael included the additional income represented by the condo
and Mercedes on his tax returns. Intuitively, one would guess that he probably
didn't. On the other hand, the logical implication from the trial court's
decision and our opinion today is that he should have.

   Perhaps Michael still might prevail with the IRS and demonstrate that the
condo and Mercedes are really bona fide gifts from his parents, as distinct from
compensation by other means from his employers. (See Commissioner v. Duberstein,
supra, 363 U.S. at p. 285 [80 S. Ct. at pp. 1196-1197].) For purposes of this
appeal on this record, however, we may say that the substance of the two items
is that they are compensation.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    There Was No Permissible Basis for the $ 5,000 Sanction, Nor Was There Any
Basis to Require the $ 7,500 Attorney Fee Order Be Paid All at Once

     Michael next challenges an attorney fee award totaling $ 12,500, $ 5,000 of
which was imposed specifically as a sanction for having frustrated possible
earlier settlement of the case. The judge allowed Michael to pay the $ 5,000 off
in $ 500 monthly installments; the $ 7,500 balance was payable in full
"forthwith."

   Michael now claims there is insufficient evidence of ability to pay both
awards. He further argues that the $ 5,000 sanctions order represents an  abuse
of discretion, both because it was based on a lack of evidence that Michael had
done anything to frustrate settlement, and because there was not appropriate
notice of the possibility of a sanction award.

   We first consider the $ 5,000 sanctions order, which is the simpler of the
two contentions. In her respondent's brief, Andrea points to nothing which
supports the idea that Michael frustrated settlement. She merely quotes section
271 (basic authorization allowing family law court to impose attorney fee order
as sanction), says Michael had adequate notice because he might have filed
objections to the judgment, and argues that the disparity of income would have
justified the award anyway, because her total fees at time of trial were $
15,500 and she had no income.

   From our vantage point, it appears that the sanction order was the result of
the trial judge's understandable lack of sympathy for the last-minute estate
planning on the part of Michael's parents which produced a precipitous drop in
his income at just the moment when he was separating from his wife and in a year
in which company sales were increasing. Michael was not well served by that
bright idea, which no doubt appeared too transparent by half.

   However, Andrea points to no evidence that the distribution of 49 percent of
the stock of the parents' company was at Michael's instigation. For all the
record shows, it might have been his parents' clever--but unilateral--attempt to
help him in his divorce. Lacking the predicate of a showing of frustration, the
$ 5,000 award must be reversed. Nor can the award be saved because the trial
court might have made a $ 12,500 fee order simply on the basis of need and
ability to pay. The trial court imposed that award as a sanction and it can
therefore only be upheld as a sanction. Accordingly, we need not address the
notice issue.

   This leaves the order to pay $ 7,500 "forthwith." The $ 7,500 figure itself
is unassailable. As an attorney fee award for a stay-at-home parent in Orange
County against a breadwinner who during the marriage earned well in excess of $
100,000 a year, and in which there was a serious issue of imputed income, $
7,500 is more than reasonable.

   But the order that the $ 7,500 be paid forthwith is a different story. It is
undisputed that neither party had any savings or liquid assets; Michael's
parents had lent him about $ 8,000 to pay his own fees.

   The family support order left Michael with less than $ 2,000 a month in
actual cash. It is clear the trial judge presumed Michael would be able to
obtain the $ 7,500 from his parents. This presumption was error. (See § 270
[necessity that court first determine that a party has or is reasonably likely
to have the ability to pay before he or she may be ordered to pay attorney
fees].) Charity, once extended, is still not an entitlement. Parents are not
obligated to pay the costs of their children's divorces. Nothing showed that
Michael had, or was reasonably likely to have, the "ability to pay" the $ 7,500
forthwith except the notion that Michael's parents' generosity could be taken
for granted. In light of the absence of any liquid assets, it was unreasonable
not to have allowed Michael to pay the $ 7,500 attorney fee order in manageable
installments, consistent with the income he had left after he paid the family
support order.

   DISPOSITION

   The judgment is reversed to the extent that the family support award
incorporates $ 914 in permanent spousal support because that $ 914 was not based
on the section 4320 factors, but on the DissoMaster proposal for temporary
support. The judgment is also reversed to the extent that child support was
calculated without taking into consideration the taxability of the $ 1,100 of
imputed income based on employee benefits. The judgment is further reversed to
the extent that it requires Michael to pay $ 5,000 in sanctions and to the
extent that it requires Michael to pay $ 7,500 in attorney fees in a lump sum
rather than in manageable installments. In all other respects it is affirmed. We
now remand the matter back to the family law court to modify the judgment based
on the following directions:

   --Recalculate family support so that the spousal support component is
established from the ground up based on the section 4320 factors.  12

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -12   We
recognize this task is easier stated than accomplished, because of the
interrelationship between after-tax income and the deductibility of family
support. We do not mean to discourage the judge from using a computer program.
He simply should avoid beginning with the proposed DissoMaster figure for
temporary support in figuring the spousal support component of any permanent
family support order. There is no reason he cannot plug his own spousal support
number into the DissoMaster to see what will happen if it becomes part of a
deductible family support order.

   We also recognize that even after a reevaluation of the spousal support
component pursuant to this decision Michael will still end up paying a very high
percentage of his after-tax income in total support, if only because of the high
child support levels mandated by the section 4055 guideline. Michael has not
argued that the trial judge should have used his discretion under section 4057,
subdivision (b) to reduce those levels (see § 4057, subd. (b)(3) [amount under
formula exceeds needs of the children because of extraordinarily high income] or
4057, subd. (b)(5) [application of formula would be unjust due to special
circumstances in the particular case]), and so we do not address the child
support component of the judgment in this opinion.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    --Recalculate the family support award to take into account the extra tax
liability that would ordinarily accompany the $ 1,100 of imputed income.

    --Omit any obligation on Michael's part to pay $ 5,000 in attorney fees as
sanctions.

   --Provide that Michael's obligation to pay $ 7,500 in attorney fees may be
paid in manageable installments consistent with Michael's actual income, not his
parents'.  13

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -13   It is
possible that this aspect of the new judgment may be moot if, indeed, Michael's
parents did lend him the money to pay the order and he has already paid it.
However, the parties have not informed us of any such development, so we have no
choice but to adjudicate the issue.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In light of the time which has passed since the notice of appeal, our
decision may result in credits or offsets depending on what has been paid in the
interim. The new judgment should also provide for any such credits and offsets.

   Finally, it is clear that this is not a frivolous appeal, and there is no
basis on which to award Andrea her attorney fees on appeal as a matter of
appellate law. (E.g., Code Civ. Proc., § 907.) Andrea still, however, may have a
claim for her appellate fees, or some portion of them, as a matter of family law
in light of the disparity of incomes between the two parties. (E.g., § 2030,
subd. (a).) Rather than attempt to foreclose the matter prematurely, we simply
state that our opinion is without prejudice to Andrea to bring whatever
additional proceedings for her attorney fees on appeal as she believes
appropriate, and without prejudice to Michael to assert whatever defenses to
those proceedings that he believes are appropriate.

   In the interests of justice, each party will bear his or her own costs on
appeal.

   Wallin, J., and Bedsworth, J., concurred.


                              96 of 100 DOCUMENTS

          NELL GILES KNODEL, Plaintiff and Respondent, v. WALTER JAMES
                        KNODEL, Defendant and Appellant

                                 L.A. No. 30083

                          Supreme Court of California

          14 Cal. 3d 752; 537 P.2d 353; 122 Cal. Rptr. 521; 1975 Cal.
                                   LEXIS 318


                                 July 16, 1975

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Appellant's petition for a rehearing was denied August
20, 1975.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of San Diego County, No. 322172, William A.
Yale, Judge.

COUNSEL: Richard S. Henderson for Defendant and Appellant.

Smith, Shifflet & Sharp and Philip D. Sharp, Jr., for Plaintiff and Respondent.

JUDGES: In Bank.

OPINION BY: THE COURT

OPINION

      Walter James Knodel appeals from a judgment making an award to Nell Giles
Knodel of a sum representing arrearages for unpaid spousal support and denying
his motion to terminate such support or, in the alternative, to modify
provisions therefor.  A preliminary question to be resolved is whether Walter's
appeal is timely.  We conclude that it is but that on the merits Walter is not
entitled to relief from his obligation for spousal support.

   Walter and Nell were married in the State of Virginia in 1964.  They
experienced marital difficulties while residing in that state and entered into
an agreement "relating to the amount that Husband shall pay to Wife as alimony
and the property rights of the parties." 1 The agreement  recites that it is to
be governed by the laws of the State of Virginia and that in the event of a
divorce the decree was to contain no provision for support or property rights
"as the provisions contained herein are in lieu thereof." It is also provided in
the agreement that it "shall survive and shall not become merged in any final
decree of divorce between the parties."

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   The
agreement provides, inter alia, that the sum of $ 200 per month be paid Nell "as
alimony" for a five-year period and that thereafter Nell be paid $ 100 per
month.  The payments were to cease upon Nell's death or remarriage.  The
agreement also provided that certain of Nell's medical expenses be paid by
Walter, or that she be reimbursed from the proceeds of Walter's medical and
hospitalization insurance.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In 1968 Walter obtained in Virginia a divorce from Nell on the ground of her
desertion.  The decree recited that the agreement   for spousal support was
"ratified, confirmed and approved" but contained no express provision for
property rights or spousal support nor did it purport to merge the agreement. 2

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   Walter
and Nell were respectively of the ages of 54 and 51 years at the time of their
marriage and there was no issue of the marriage. Each had been previously
married.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Walter moved to California after the divorce. In 1970 Nell commenced an
action for breach of contract against Walter in the municipal court in
California seeking the sum of $ 901.52 for medical expenses claimed to be due
under the Virginia agreement.  Walter answered and cross-complained seeking,
inter alia, the transfer of the cause to the superior court, the establishment
in that court of the Virginia decree as a foreign judgment, and the modification
of the foreign judgment to eliminate any requirement therein that he pay money
to Nell as "alimony or support in lieu of alimony." Nell answered the
cross-complaint, admitting Walter's allegation of the Virginia divorce decree.

   On November 25, 1970, upon motion by Walter therefor, an order was made in
the municipal court transferring the cause to the superior court.  On January
27, 1971, in the latter court it was ordered upon stipulation of the parties
that the Virginia decree "is hereby established as a foreign judgment . . . in
full force and effect." The court also issued on January 27 an order directing
Nell to show cause why the relief sought by Walter, that is the elimination or
modification of provisions for spousal support, should not be granted. 3 On
February 4, Nell filed a memorandum of  points and authorities in response to
the order to show cause. 4 On February 17 Walter filed a memorandum of points
and authorities intended to refute Nell's contention that under the Virginia
decisions, and hence under the California law (see Avery v. Avery, supra, 10
Cal.App.3d 525, 532), a California court could not make an order relating to
alimony which was inconsistent with the agreement of the parties. 5

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   A copy of
the order to show cause is not included in the clerk's transcript on appeal.  We
take judicial notice, however, of the order and of other matters of record in
the trial court.  ( Evid. Code, § 452, subd. (d).) The declaration in support of
the order alleged, in addition to other matters some of which have heretofore
been recited, that the marriage had lasted but 23 months prior to separation;
that at the time of the separation Nell had a net worth of approximately $
90,000 while Walter was insolvent; that Walter had paid Nell over $ 19,000 under
the Virginia agreement; that Walter supported three daughters of a prior
marriage; that Walter supported his present wife who had developed a "severe
coronary condition"; that Walter had not been made aware, at the time of the
agreement, that under Virginia law alimony could not be awarded a guilty spouse
and that an agreement for spousal support was non-modifiable in the event of
changed circumstances.  It also appears, by an addendum to the declaration, that
Walter was put on a part-time work schedule by his employer, and that his
monthly income was substantially less than his monthly expenses (approximately $
1,211 income against $ 1,657 expenses).  Nell's income was alleged to be, at the
time of the separation, "$ 10,000 yearly earnings, more or less," not including
income from investments, and it was alleged that she would be eligible for both
federal civil service and social security retirement benefits.
4   Nell urged therein that a divorce decree of a sister state not modifiable in
that state, cannot be modified in the courts of this state (see Avery v. Avery
(1970) 10 Cal.App.3d 525, 532 [89 Cal.Rptr. 195]); that by statute an award of
alimony in Virginia is not modifiable when the spouses have by agreement
provided for spousal support in which event an order for alimony can be made
only "in accordance with that stipulation or contract" ( Va. Code, § 20-109;
McLoughlin v. McLoughlin (1970) 211 Va. 365 [177 S.E.2d 781]; Dienhart v.
Dienhart (1969) 210 Va. 101 [168 S.E.2d 279]); that as a proper court in
Virginia could not, on motion for modification of spousal support provided by
agreement, make an order for alimony inconsistent with that agreement, the
California court likewise could not entertain such a motion.  No attempt was
made to refute Walter's allegations tending to establish the changed
circumstances which he claimed warranted a modification.
5   Walter urged that Dienhart and McLoughlin, which construe and apply Virginia
Code section 20-109 (see fn. 4, supra), are distinguishable on the ground that a
decree approving a contract for payments in lieu of alimony is not a decree "for
the payment of alimony" ( Martin v. Martin (1964) 205 Va. 181 [135 S.E.2d 815]);
and that as section 20-109 deals only with decree's providing for alimony, it
has no application in this case.  Walter also argued that as the decree for
divorce was awarded him on a finding of Nell's desertion, she could not have
been awarded alimony and, in such circumstances, a contractual provision for
spousal support in lieu of alimony could be terminated for cause (see Gloth v.
Gloth (1930) 154 Va. 511 [153 S.E. 879, 71 A.L.R. 700]). Gloth was distinguished
by the Virginia Supreme Court in Dienhart on the ground that it was decided on a
statute not comparable to Virginia Code section 20-109.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      On April 6 after oral argument the court ordered that the relief prayed
for by Walter for termination of spousal support be denied.  The reasons for the
denial do not appear.  We may assume, however, based on the materials submitted
in opposition to the motion, that the court concluded that the provisions set
out in the agreement for support could not be modified. The only arguments
advanced on appeal relate to that ground for denial. 6

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   The
record does not include transcripts of any of the proceedings before the court
although it otherwise appears that the issues were extensively argued.  The
parties have entered into a stipulation that the appeal may be decided upon the
record on appeal and Walter's opening brief.  We are compelled, accordingly, to
examine the record on appeal including filings in the trial court in order to
ascertain the parties' respective positions.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Also on April 6 the court made an order directing Walter to show cause why
he should not cure arrearages in spousal support payments 7 and why he should
not pay the $ 901.52 medical expenses claimed by Nell to be due under the
Virginia agreement.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7   The
arrearages for which Nell sought payment were for the period commencing with the
filing by Walter of the cross-complaint wherein he sought the elimination of the
support provisions.  The total amount of the claimed default, at the time of the
order to show cause, was $ 1,000 for the months November 1970 through March
1971.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   On April 14, prior to the time the court had ruled on those matters still
pending before it, Walter filed a notice of motion for reconsideration of the
April 6 order denying his motion for modification of the spousal support
provisions.  He sought in the alternative "that so much of the Virginia decree
as was established as a judgment of this court be vacated insofar as the
provisions therein relating to alimony or support in lieu of alimony are
concerned." The notice was supported by a memorandum of points and authorities
pursuant to which Walter sought to establish that if Virginia law was construed
to deny him the right to modify alimony payments in the circumstances of this
case, the denial was unconstitutional and that, aside from the unconstitutional
application of the Virginia law, the support provisions were modifiable.  Walter
also obtained from the court on April 16 an ex parte order shortening time for
hearing the motion for reconsideration. In the declaration in support of the
order signed by the court, it is recited that Walter proposed to appeal from the
court's "indication that it lacks jurisdiction to modify on constitutional
grounds" the spousal support provision; that it was necessary if Walter was to
preserve the constitutional issues on appeal that they be raised before the
trial court; and that in the interest of conserving the court's and counsels'
time the motion should be heard and the time for hearing thereof should be
shortened.

   On April 26, after oral argument, the court made a "Partial Order" whereby it
required Walter to pay the sum of $ 901.52 to Nell for medical expenses provided
for in the 1967 agreement, and it continued to May 6 Nell's motion for an award
of the arrearages of spousal support payments under the agreement.

   On April 28 Nell filed an extensive memorandum of points and authorities in
which she argued the merits of her claim for spousal  support under the
provisions of   the agreement.  Therein she addressed arguments in opposition to
Walter's interrelated claim set out in his motion for reconsideration noticed on
April 14 that the Virginia law as applied in the circumstances of this case was
unconstitutional. 8

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -8   It is
stated in the text of Nell's memorandum of points and authorities that the court
had not ruled on Nell's motion for an award of arrearages of spousal support
payments because Walter "had filed his [notice of] Motion for Reconsideration of
the Court's previous ruling re termination of spousal support," and that the
court had for that reason continued the hearing on Nell's motion "until the
Motion for Reconsideration could be heard."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   On June 25 the court after oral argument made an "Order and Judgment,"
requiring Walter to pay the spousal support arrearages, and also ordered that
his "Motion for Reconsideration re Termination of Spousal Support" be denied.
On June 30 Walter filed a notice of appeal "from the order made . . . on June
25" which, according to the notice of appeal, denied Walter's motions to
terminate spousal support or, in the alternative, vacate those provisions in the
decree of divorce. 9

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -9   It
appears that Walter's appeal purports to be taken from a minute order from the
bench announcing the court's decision following oral argument on June 25.  A
formal "order" was signed and filed by the court on June 30, and entered on July
1.  In any event reference in the notice of appeal to the "order made . . . on
June 25" is taken to mean the formal order of June 30.  (Cal. Rules of Court,
rule 1(a); Estate of Coburn (1971) 20 Cal.App.3d 368 [97 Cal.Rptr. 597].) The
notice of appeal is treated as having been filed on July 1. (Cal. Rules of
Court, rule 2(c).)

   We note that the notice of appeal describes the "order" of June 30 as denying
Walter's initial motion for termination of spousal support, which motion had
previously been denied by the court on April 6, rather than as denying the
motion for reconsideration as expressly provided in the "order" of June 30.  The
pertinent text of the notice of appeal is as follows: "Walter James Knodel,
respondent, appeals . . . from the order made in the above entitled matter on
June 25, 1971 denying respondent's Motion to Terminate Spousal Support or in the
Alternative to Vacate All such Provisions in the Foreign Judgment of Divorce. .
. ."

   There is no challenge to the award of the sum of $ 901.52 to Nell for certain
medical expenses.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

The Appealability of the Order of June 30

   If we deem Walter's appeal to be from the April 6 order denying his motion
for modification of the provisions for spousal support (which would be
consistent with the express recitations of his notice) and if that order was
appealable the notice was not timely filed as more than 60 days had elapsed
since April 8, the date upon which a notice of entry of judgment had been mailed
by the court.  (Cal. Rules of Court, rules 2(a), 2(b).)  If, however, we
consider Walter to have appealed from the order of June 30, which is the order
he is deemed to make reference to in  his notice (see fn. 9, supra), then a
serious question is raised whether an appeal lies from an order denying a motion
for reconsideration of a previous order ( Code Civ. Proc., § 904.1), if in fact
that is one of the legal consequences of the order of June 30.  (See Estate of
Richards (1941) 17 Cal.2d 259, 267 [109 P.2d 923].) The view we take of the
entire course of proceedings, however, persuades us for the reasons which are
next discussed that all orders prior to the June 30 order were interlocutory in
nature and were thus not appealable until the final judgment of June 30.  The
notice of appeal from the judgment denying the relief sought by Walter was thus
timely filed.

     The right of appeal is limited to appeals from "judgments" which do not
include interlocutory judgments except in particular instances not here
pertinent.  ( Code Civ. Proc., § 904.1, subds. (a), (h), (i) and (j).) The
reason for the one judgment rule is that "piecemeal disposition and multiple
appeals in a single action would be oppressive and costly, and . . . a review of
intermediate rulings should await the final disposition of the case.
[Citations.]" (6 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (2d ed.) pp. 4050-4051.)

      It is clear in the instant case that the court had before it a number of
issues presented for resolution, some of which were interdependent, and all of
which related to the applicability and validity of the agreement executed in
Virginia and its significance, if any, as a part of the divorce decree granted
in that state.  Nell first sought particular damages for breach of the
agreement.  Walter sought as affirmative relief, first, the transfer of the
cause from the municipal to the superior court.  Thereafter he sought the
establishment of the decree as a foreign judgment and the elimination or
modification of the support provisions contained therein. 10 The cause was so
transferred by a municipal court order and no challenge has been made to that
order.  The initial order made in the superior court, other than an order to
show cause, was made  pursuant to stipulation on January 27 establishing the
decree as a foreign judgment.  (See fn. 11.)  That order was clearly intended to
be interlocutory as there were still pending before the court Nell's claim for
damages for breach of contract and Walter's claim for termination of spousal
support provisions. 11 In fact, none of the real disputes between the parties
had been resolved as of that time.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -10   There
was, in fact, no legal reason for establishing the Virginia decree as a foreign
judgment. "Upon the basis of comity . . . the California courts have in numerous
cases ordered that a foreign decree for future payments of alimony be
established as the decree of the California court with the same force and effect
as if it had been entered in this state, including punishment for contempt if
the defendant fails to comply." ( Biewend v. Biewend (1941) 17 Cal.2d 108, 113
[109 P.2d 701, 132 A.L.R. 1264].) Although the establishment of such a decree
may be necessary to arm a California court with the tools necessary to enforce a
decree in a proper case, the Virginia decree in the instant case was not of that
nature.  The decree makes no provision for spousal support and neither party
actually seeks to enforce it or to modify it in any manner.  Spousal support is
required, if at all, only because of the provisions of the Virginia agreement.
The legal effect of that agreement could have been litigated and determined
independently of the legal effect of the foreign decree.
11   "As a general test, which must be adapted to the particular circumstances
of the individual case, it may be said that where no issue is left for future
consideration except the fact of compliance or noncompliance with the terms of
the first decree, that decree is final, but where anything further in the nature
of judicial action on the part of the court is essential to a final
determination of the rights of the parties, the decree is interlocutory." ( Lyon
v. Goss (1942) 19 Cal.2d 659, 670 [123 P.2d 11]; see also Bakewell v. Bakewell
(1942) 21 Cal.2d 224, 227 [130 P.2d 975].)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     The next order made by the court, other than another order to show cause,
was that of April 6 wherein the relief prayed for by Walter for termination of
spousal support was denied.  However, on the very day that it rejected Walter's
contentions the court also ordered him to show cause why he should not be
required to cure arrearages for payment of spousal support which Walter had
discontinued when he first sought the court's intervention.  The legal issues
raised by the affirmative relief sought by him and by his defense for nonpayment
are the same -- the claimed invalidity of the support provisions set out in the
agreement.  Certainly neither the court nor the parties contemplated on April 6
that the issue of the validity of the support provisions had been finally
resolved.  Not only was that issue still before the court but there also
remained for consideration and judicial action the question of Nell's claim for
medical expenses.  There was thus something "further in the nature of judicial
action . . . essential to a final determination of the rights of the parties" (
Lyon v. Goss, supra, 19 Cal.2d 659, 670), and the order of April 6, designated
by the court as an "order," was thus interlocutory in nature. 12

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -12   Events
which followed the order of April 6 lend further support to the conclusion that
the order was interlocutory in nature.  Thus, on April 14 Walter filed a notice
of motion for reconsideration arguing, for the first time in any document of
record, the invalidity of spousal support provisions on constitutional grounds.
He obtained, on April 16, an ex parte order shortening time for the hearing of
the motion, and it is recited in the incorporated declaration for the order that
Walter proposed to appeal from the court's "indication" that it could not modify
the support provisions and that it was necessary that the constitutional issue
be raised in the trial court.  Also in Nell's memorandum of points and
authorities in opposition to Walter's motion she stated that the court had by
design delayed a final determination of her right to spousal support until it
could consider the merits of the constitutional arguments advanced by Walter.
(See fn. 8, ante.)

   We are not aided in our determinations herein by an examination of the record
for findings of fact which may be indicative of the interlocutory or final
nature of any order.  Written findings were not made as to any of the orders
herein but the record does not disclose any request for findings after
announcement of an intended decision and, when not requested, the court is not
required to make written findings of fact and conclusions of law.  ( Code Civ.
Proc., § 632.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

       The next order made by the court, aside from ex parte orders which on
their face are interlocutory in nature, was the order of April 26 which is
designated a "Partial Order," awarding Nell the claimed medical costs.  This
order is clearly interlocutory, as it even provided for a date for hearing
another matter then pending before the court, Nell's right to spousal support on
installments which were past due.

   The judgment of June 30 (see fn. 9, ante) is therefore the final dispositive
order made by the court.  It is designated an "Order and Judgment" and it
disposes of the two interrelated matters remaining before the court, the same
being Nell's right to payment of the accrued spousal support installments and
the motion for reconsideration of the issue of the validity of the support
provision on constitutional grounds.  Walter's notice of appeal was timely filed
when measured against the June 30 judgment.  (See fn. 9, ante.)

   Although there are exceptions to the rule which precludes appeals from
interlocutory orders, none here is applicable.  (See 6 Witkin, Cal. Procedure
(2d ed.) pp. 4052-4069.) 13 The order of April 6 being interlocutory in nature,
no appeal could be taken therefrom until the judgment of June 30.  Although
Walter's notice of appeal is not explicit as to the precise order or orders from
which he appeals there is no confusion as to the determinations which Walter
challenges on appeal and no prejudice appears.  We adhere to the rule that
doubtful cases should be resolved in favor of the right to appeal where a
substantial interest is affected.  (Cal. Rules of Court, rule 1(a); Santa
Barbara etc. Agency v. All Persons (1957) 47 Cal.2d 699, 715 [306 P.2d 875].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -13   The fact
that claims remaining unresolved following a particular order were placed in
issue pursuant to a cross-complaint does not give rise to an exception to the
one-judgment rule except perhaps where the parties to the action and
cross-action are not identical.  (See Herrscher v. Herrscher (1953) 41 Cal.2d
300, 303 [259 P.2d 901].) Here the parties were not only identical but issues
raised by each party by their respective pleadings remained unresolved until the
judgment of June 30.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Finality of Contractual Provisions For Spousal Support

     The contractual provisions for spousal support at the time of the divorce
decree in Virginia were not subject to modification under the prevailing statute
as construed by the high court in that state.  In Dienhart v. Dienhart, supra,
210 Va. 101, the Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals  held that Virginia Code
section 20-109 precluded in a divorce action an award of alimony which was not "
in accordance with" a "stipulation or contract" when "signed by the party to
whom such relief might otherwise be awarded" and "filed with the pleadings . . .
unless such party raise objection thereto prior to the entry of the decree." (
Id., at p. 101, fn. 1; see also McLoughlin v. McLoughlin, supra, 211 Va. 365.)
Here the agreement signed by Walter and Nell was filed by him with his pleadings
for divorce and he raised no   objection thereto prior to entry of the decree
which he sought.  The agreement provides in clear terms for Nell's support by
Walter.  Thus Walter in the State of Virginia could not have succeeded in
obtaining a modification or termination of the contractual support provision as
any such relief would not have been "in accordance with" the agreement. 14

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -14   Walter's
arguments to the contrary under the Virginia law are without merit.  His
reliance on a case substantially distinguished in Dienhart ( Gloth v. Gloth,
supra, 154 Va. 511) is unavailing.  He also urges that Dienhart and McLoughlin
are not in point because Virginia Code section 20-109 is applicable only to
those cases wherein a decree has expressly provided for alimony, and the
Virginia decree in the instant case does not purport to make any express
provisions for alimony. Such argument would have foreclosed application of the
statute in Dienhart and McLoughlin, as well as to the facts of the instant case.
The Virginia decree makes no express provision for alimony, and only ratifies,
confirms and approves the agreement.  However, it is not the decree of divorce
in the instant case which raises any problem as that decree complies with
Virginia Code section 20-109 by not making any provision for support
inconsistent with the agreement.  The Virginia statute would be applicable to
preclude any future judicial act making provision inconsistent with the
agreement, and it is for this reason that the relief sought by Walter is not
available in Virginia.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Walter places great reliance on Weisz v. Weisz (1971) 19 Cal.App.3d 676 [97
Cal.Rptr. 18], a case decided while the appeal in the present case was pending.
That case involved an agreement entered into in Massachusetts for support of a
wife by a husband.  The agreement provided, as in the instant case, that in the
event of a divorce the decree would not alter the provisions for spousal support
. The husband later obtained in Alabama a decree of divorce which expressly
provided that the agreement was not merged.  The husband became a California
resident and, in 1967, cross-actions were commenced whereby the wife sought a
declaration of rights and the husband sought, inter alia, to establish the
Alabama decree as a foreign judgment and to terminate support provisions.

   In affirming the judgment terminating support provisions, the Court of Appeal
conceded the validity of the continuing contractual obligation for support, but
held that notwithstanding the rules of comity such an agreement was nevertheless
unenforceable in California as it was in  violation of a public policy which
required in a proper case the modification of a support provision pursuant to
equitable considerations.  The court noted that the Legislature had given the
courts power to provide for and to modify provisions for support "as deemed
necessary," citing former Civil Code section 139.  ( Weisz v. Weisz, supra, 19
Cal.App.3d 676, 682.) The court relied on decisions wherein an agreement for
support had been incorporated or merged into a decree for divorce ( Hough v.
Hough (1945) 26 Cal.2d 605 [160 P.2d 15]; Dunning v. Dunning (1952) 114
Cal.App.2d 110 [249 P.2d 609]) to conclude that even in those instances when the
parties had independently contracted for spousal support the same principles of
public policy should apply to subject the agreement, in a proper case, to
modification.

   The Weisz case thus stands for the proposition that irrespective of the
finality of an independent contractual provision for spousal support entered
into in and pursuant to the laws of a sister state, the public policy of this
state precludes giving effect to such an agreement when equitable considerations
warrant a modification of that agreement.  Weisz, however, does not aid Walter
as that case relied on statutory provisions which no longer reflected the public
policy at the time Walter sought relief in California.

   Insofar as appears Weisz relied on former Civil Code section 139 and cases
construing the language of that section prior to amendments in 1967.  The
critical statutory language at that time provided that a provision for the
support and maintenance of the party in whose favor a divorce had been granted
"may be modified   or revoked at any time at the discretion of the court . . .
." (Stats. 1963, ch. 861, p. 2097.) However, in 1967 the judicial power to
modify or revoke a support provision was legislatively withdrawn "to the extent
that any written agreement, or if there be no written agreement, any oral
agreement entered into in open court between the parties, specifically provides
to the contrary." (Stats. 1967, ch. 133, pp. 1165-1166, filed May 12, 1967.) A
second amendment in 1967 added a proviso which authorized a court to modify or
terminate a support provision in favor of the wife upon proof that she was
living with and falsely holding herself out to be the wife of another man
"[except] where the decree . . . is based upon an integrated property settlement
agreement . . . ." (Stats. 1967, ch.  844, pp. 2269-2270, filed July 20, 1967.)
That proviso was later modified in 1967 to authorize a court to modify or
terminate a support provision in favor of either spouse upon proof that such
spouse was living with and falsely representing himself or herself to be married
to a third person "[except] as otherwise agreed by  the parties in writing . . .
." (Stats. 1967, ch. 1308, pp. 3130-3131, filed Aug. 18, 1967.)

   It thus appears in 1967 that notwithstanding the general judicial power to
modify marital support provisions, that power was expressly limited by the
Legislature in cases where the parties had entered into particular agreements
which foreclosed judicial modification. 15 The action herein was commenced in
1970 and judgment was had in the superior court in 1971.  Our public policy at
those times remained consistent with the 1967 amendments to former Civil Code
section 139, although that section was repealed in 1969.  (Stats. 1969, ch.
1608, p. 3313.) Civil Code section 4801, which replaced former section 139
effective January 1, 1970 (Stats. 1969, ch. 1608, pp. 3333-3334), provided in
subdivision (a) that any "order for support of the other party may be modified
or revoked as the court may deem necessary . . . ." 16 However, section 4811
(Stats.   1969, ch. 1608, p. 3336) provided in subdivision (b) that the
"provisions of any agreement or order for the support of either party shall be
subject to subsequent  modification or revocation by court order . . . except to
the extent that any written agreement, or if there is no written agreement any
oral agreement entered into in open court between the parties, specifically
provides to the contrary." (Italics added.) Both sections 4801 and 4811 were
amended in 1970 (Stats. 1970, ch. 1545, pp. 3138-3141; ch. 1575, p. 3285) but
the amendments were not pertinent to any issue herein. 17

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -15   It
appears from the text of the opinion in Weisz that the adjudication affirmed
therein may have been rendered after the effective dates of some or all of the
1967 amendments to former section 139.  However, the opinion in that case does
not purport to have recognized such amendments.  It moreover appears that aside
from the 1967 amendments the Weisz court may have erred in concluding that it
was contrary to the public policy of this state to give recognition to an
agreement which, under the law of a sister state, foreclosed judicial
modification of a provision for spousal support. The decisions of this court
predating Weisz clearly were to the effect that despite the then current
language of former section 139 spouses could enter into particular agreements
which foreclosed judicial modification of provisions for support.  These were
the "integrated property settlement agreements" which, if executed with the
proper intent and in the proper form, even when incorporated with a decree of
divorce, could not be judicially modified as to spousal support except within
the terms of the agreement.  (See Plumer v. Plumer (1957) 48 Cal.2d 820, 824-825
[313 P.2d 549]; see also 6 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (8th ed.) pp. 5064-5068;
cf. Stats. 1963, ch. 861, p. 2097 ( Civ. Code, § 139).) Although an integrated
property settlement agreement was one which merged spousal support obligations
with property rights arising out of a marriage, the application of our laws to a
conclusion which allowed spouses to contract in any manner which would finally
foreclose judicial modification of spousal support provisions would have
established a public policy not inconsistent with that of a state whose laws
allowed spouses to contract irrevocably for spousal support independently of
other property matters.  Rights accrued under the law of a sister state will be
denied recognition on grounds of public policy only when such recognition would
be offensive to our public policy, that is "would be prejudicial to recognized
standards of morality and to the general interests of the citizens in" our
state.  ( Biewend v. Biewend, supra, 17 Cal.2d 108, 113.) "A mere variance
between the law of the forum and the law of the state where the cause arose does
not alone warrant such denial of enforcement." ( Id., at p. 114.)
16   Section 4801 also recognized the irrevocability of a support provision in
subdivision (c), which authorized the court to modify or revoke support upon
proof that a spouse was living with and holding himself or herself out to be the
spouse of a third person, "[except] as otherwise agreed by the parties in
writing."
17   The pertinent language continues in the current versions of sections 4801
and 4811, except that the proviso relating to the modification or revocation of
support provisions for a spouse living with and holding himself or herself out
to be the spouse of a third party (see fn. 15, ante) has been eliminated.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   It thus appears that whatever the California public policy at the time of
Weisz (see fn. 14, ante), at the times the action herein was commenced and
adjudicated California spouses could have entered into particular agreements for
their support which could not be judicially modified. That policy has been
expressly and consistently maintained by the Legislature since the 1967
amendments to former Civil Code section 139.  Certainly no public policy is
offended when judicial recognition is given to the law of a sister state which
requires an identical result in similar circumstances, and comity thus requires
that we give full force and effect to the Virginia agreement as construed
pursuant to the laws of that state.  As the obligation for support could not
have been terminated or modified pursuant to the law of that state, it likewise
cannot be terminated or modified in California.  ( Avery v. Avery, supra, 10
Cal.App.3d 525, 532; see also Worthley v. Worthley (1955) 44 Cal.2d 465, 474
[283 P.2d 19]; Biewend v. Biewend, supra, 17 Cal.2d 108, 110.)

     Walter's remaining contention is that the refusal to recognize a right to
seek modification of the support provisions when equitable considerations compel
such a modification is constitutionally prohibited.  He argues that a spouse who
defaults in a divorce action and is subject to a judicially imposed requirement
for support can, on a proper showing, obtain judicial relief; that to deny the
same right to such relief in the case of a spouse who instead bargained for the
amount of his support obligation is a denial of equal protection and due process
concepts.

   The constitutional contentions are completely without merit.  A sufficient
answer to the equal protection argument is that there is no unreasonable
classification merely because a spouse who bargains for a fixed measure of his
support obligation is required to comply with his bargains, while a spouse who
elects to abide by a judicial determination of the measure of support is
entitled to a redetermination when the  circumstances warrant it.  It is
manifest that there is also no denial of due process merely because a
contracting party is required to comply with his covenants, although it appears
that due to altered circumstances he may have made a poor bargain. The "right to
be heard," the lack of which Walter now complains, was waived by his failure to
object to the provisions for spousal support at the time he asked the Virginia
court to approve the agreement providing for support when it granted the decree
prayed for by him.  Walter's remaining contentions require no comment.

   The judgment is affirmed.


                              97 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In re the Marriage of POLLY and A. GORDON REYNOLDS. POLLY
            REYNOLDS, Respondent, v. A. GORDON REYNOLDS, Appellant.

                                  No. E016433.

           COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FOURTH APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                  DIVISION TWO

          63 Cal. App. 4th 1373; 74 Cal. Rptr. 2d 636; 1998 Cal. App.
          LEXIS 439; 98 Cal. Daily Op. Service 3803; 98 Daily Journal
                                    DAR 5279


                             May 19, 1998, Decided

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     Rehearing Denied May 29, 1998.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Appeal from the Superior Court of Riverside County.
Super.Ct.No. INDIO D-13697. Graham Anderson Cribbs, Judge.

COUNSEL: Honey Kessler Amado for Appellant.

Lee R. Mohr for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Gaut, J., with Ramirez, P. J., and McKinster, J., concurring.

OPINION BY: GAUT

OPINION

     GAUT, J.

   1. INTRODUCTION

   Following the dissolution of his 37-year marriage to Polly Reynolds (Wife),
A. Gordon Reynolds, M.D. (Husband), appeals from an order granting his motion to
reduce or terminate spousal support. The motion was based on the premise that
Husband's termination from employment and his subsequent decision to retire at
age 67 constituted a change in circumstances justifying either reduction or
termination of support.

   Although the superior court made an order reducing the amount of monthly
spousal support from $ 5,500 to $ 3,500, Husband contends that the record does
not support the court's findings that Husband has a monthly income of $ 5,000.
Additionally, Husband argues that the trial court's order would improperly
require him to liquidate or invade his retirement assets in order to pay
support.

   As we explain below, we agree that the superior court abused its discretion
in making a spousal support order of $ 3,500. We reverse and remand for further
proceedings consistent with this opinion.

   2. FACTS

   Husband and Wife were married in 1948. They legally separated in 1985.
According to the marriage settlement agreement, which was part of the final
judgment entered on January 26, 1989, the parties split community assets worth $
860,000 and Husband agreed to pay monthly spousal support of $ 5,500 per month
to Wife for three years, commencing November 1, 1988, and modifiable after three
years on court order. At that time, Husband, an obstetrician and gynecologist,
was employed as the health and fitness director at La Costa Health Spa. His
combined annual income, including a salary of $ 140,000 and consulting fees of $
12,000, was $ 204,000, or $ 17,000 a month.

   In August 1992, when he was 66 years old, Husband underwent leg surgery and
was fired from La Costa Health Spa. He then filed a motion seeking to terminate
spousal support to Wife. On January 29, 1993, the court denied Husband's motion,
apparently because it was based on outdated financial information.

    Subsequently, Husband filed a reconsideration motion on June 1, 1993,
submitting a new income and expense declaration listing his net monthly  income
as $ 347.92. In opposition, on December 1, 1993, Wife filed a declaration
describing the various physical and mental disabilities from which she suffers
and listing her net monthly income as $ 1,234. Wife also argued that Husband had
understated his income and she submitted a copy of a newspaper article which
reported that Husband had recently opened a medical clinic in Redlands. On
December 8, 1993, Husband submitted a supplemental declaration in which he
stated that his Redlands practice had been unsuccessful and that he had closed
the office. He also described his fruitless efforts to obtain other employment.
He concluded by stating that, at age 67, he had realized "it is finally time to
retire." He submitted a third income and expense declaration in which he
reported that his current net monthly income was $ 2,871, excluding any
investment income, but that, as of January  1, 1994, his monthly net income
would be $ 3,486, including investment income of $ 1,900. On December 8, 1993,
the court took the reconsideration motion under submission and then ordered it
resubmitted as of March 7, 1994.

   On March 23, 1994, Wife filed a motion for the submission of additional
evidence regarding whether or not Husband continued to be employed. No such
evidence is included in the record. On April 4, 1994, Husband filed another
declaration stating that "I am retired and have been retired since December 1,
1993." He also submitted his 1993 income tax return showing a total annual
pretax gross income of $ 60,645.

   On May 13, 1994, the court modified its previous order and ordered monthly
spousal support reduced to $ 3,500. Husband then objected to the order and the
court set the matter for further hearing.

   On December 9, 1994, Wife filed a motion for fees and costs, to determine
arrearages, and addressing other related matters. In a supporting declaration,
Wife reported that Husband had paid her only $ 2,000 a month from July 1993
through February 1995. She described the dire state of her health. She asserted
that Husband had $ 600,000 in IRA's (individual retirement accounts) that could
be withdrawn without penalty. She submitted copies of newspaper advertising
which suggested that in May and June of 1994, Husband was involved with four
weight-loss clinics operating in San Diego County. Although Husband's opposition
to this motion has not been made part of the record on appeal, in Wife's reply,
she observed that he had denied making any money from the clinics.

   On March 7, 1995, the court issued its ruling on the various motions, making
18 specific findings. Among the pertinent findings are that Husband had a
current monthly income of $ 5,000, based upon "his investment income  and his
ability to work." The court also found that, although Husband had no earnings
between January 1993 and April 1994, he had retirement assets worth $ 457,506.
The court clarified that its order was to be effective as of June 1, 1993.

   Husband filed a timely notice of appeal.

   3. DISCUSSION

     The trial court exercises broad discretion in deciding whether to reduce or
terminate a spousal support order. Its order must be based on (1) a material
change in facts or circumstances existing at the time the order is made and (2)
a consideration of the needs of both parties and their respective abilities to
meet their needs. ( In re Marriage of Sinks (1988) 204 Cal. App. 3d 586, 591-592
[251 Cal. Rptr.  379]; In re Marriage of Stephenson (1995) 39 Cal. App. 4th 71,
76-77 [46 Cal. Rptr. 2d 8]; Fam. Code, § 4320, formerly Civ. Code, § 4801.) An
appealing party must demonstrate the existence of a material change in facts or
circumstances and that as a matter of law an abuse of discretion has occurred:
"An abuse of discretion occurs when, after calm and careful reflection upon the
entire matter, it can fairly be said that no judge would reasonably make the
same order under the same circumstances. [Citation.]" (In re Marriage of Sinks,
supra, 204 Cal. App. 3d at p. 591.) In applying the foregoing principles, we
must decide whether the trial court abused its discretion.

   As reflected in its rulings and findings, the trial court duly considered the
needs and abilities of the parties. The court was persuaded that Husband had
shown a material change in facts and circumstances which justified some
reduction in the amount of spousal support.   The question before us is whether
the court's findings as to the amount of the reduction are supported by the
sufficiency of the evidence. ( In re Marriage of Meegan (1992) 11 Cal. App. 4th
156, 161 [13 Cal. Rptr. 2d 799].) Thus we arrive at the key issue on appeal: If
Husband had indeed retired from active employment, could the trial court
properly attribute to him a monthly income based on his ability to earn rather
than his actual earnings, thus requiring him to work well past the "generally
accepted retirement age of 65"? 1 (In re Marriage of  Sinks, supra, 204 Cal.
App. 3d at p. 595 (dis. opn. of Work, J.).) We hold it cannot.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Husband,
who was born on January 25, 1926, was 66 when he was fired by La Costa Health
Spa, 67 when he decided he had to retire, 68 when the trial court made its
modified order, and 69 when the trial court issued its ruling in support of the
order. By the time this appeal is heard for oral argument, he will be 72. Polly,
who was born on October 13, 1925, will also be 72.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   The analysis of this case is complicated by the extended nature of the
proceedings below. Husband's initial motion for reduction or termination of
spousal support was filed in October 1992. The court's findings were not issued
until March 1995. In between these dates, Husband's financial situation
fluctuated. According to his 1993 tax return, Husband's joint annual gross
income with his new wife, Jonelle, was $ 60,645, or $ 5,054 monthly. But that
figure included income from Jonelle's separate investments, which could not be
considered ( Fam. Code, § 4323, subd. (b)), as well as unemployment benefits of
$ 17,710, which Husband would not receive in 1994.

   According to his income and expense declaration filed in December 1993,
Husband's monthly income in 1993 was $ 2,871, excluding any investment income.
There is also evidence in the record that the rate of return on Husband's
investments yielded between $ 1,900 and $ 2,333 per month. Using those figures
and the lowest tax bracket of 15 percent, his net monthly income in 1993 was
between $ 4,055 and $ 4,423. The record also supports that Husband subsequently
had a net monthly income of $ 3,486, including investment income of $ 1,900, in
1994.

   Based on the foregoing, we make three observations. First, no evidence in the
record supports the trial court's finding of a monthly income for Husband of $
5,000. For purposes of calculating spousal support,  the court used the net
monthly income figure of $ 1,234, as reported in Wife's declaration. Husband's
comparable net monthly income was between $ 4,055 and $ 4,423 in 1993 and $
3,486 in 1994. Although the joint gross monthly income of Husband and Jonelle
was approximately $ 5,000, the record contradicts the trial court's finding that
Husband's net monthly income was $ 5,000.

   Second, even if the trial court calculated Husband's income in part based on
his ability to earn rather than his actual income, Wife submitted no evidence to
the court of Husband's potential earning capacity. The "capacity to earn
standard" may only be applied where there is evidence of the ability,
opportunity, and willingness to work. ( In re Marriage of Hinman (1997) 55 Cal.
App. 4th 988, 995 [64 Cal. Rptr. 2d 383], citing In re Marriage of Regnery
(1989) 214 Cal. App. 3d 1367, 1372 [263 Cal. Rptr. 243].) Husband was apparently
willing to work, hence his brief operation of the Redlands clinic and his
involvement with the weight-loss programs. But apparently he made little or no
money from those enterprises. Nor did Wife show that they constituted legitimate
earning opportunities. There is no evidence that Husband had any actual ability
to work or that he refused any real jobs.

   Furthermore, we hold that no one may be compelled to work after the usual
retirement age of 65 in order to pay the same level of spousal support as when
he was employed. Though previous case law has not squarely confronted this
issue, we face it now.

    The courts have held that a supporting spouse cannot deliberately shirk
support obligations by refusing to work. ( Philbin v. Philbin (1971) 19 Cal.
App. 3d 115, 119-121 [96 Cal. Rptr. 408].) In applying that rule, this court has
concluded that a 39-year-old pharmacist cannot obtain a reduction in child and
spousal support because he has decided to quit his job and attend medical
school, even if he is acting in good faith. ( In re Marriage of Ilas (1993) 12
Cal. App. 4th 1630, 1637-1639 [16 Cal. Rptr. 2d 345].) In contrast, Division
Three of this court has held that a man in his mid-50's could stop paying
spousal support when he left his job as a sales executive in order to enter a
monastery. ( In re Marriage of Meegan, supra, 11 Cal. App. 4th at pp. 162-163.)

   The courts have also held that a supporting spouse cannot retire prematurely
in order to avoid paying spousal support. ( In re Marriage of Sinks, supra, 204
Cal. App. 3d  at pp. 592-593; In re Marriage of Stephenson, supra, 39 Cal. App.
4th at pp. 78-81.) But the same cases have recognized that, in the instance of a
bona fide retirement, a supporting spouse should not be forced to continue
working. Under those circumstances, the trial court may determine that there has
been a material change in circumstances to justify a modification of support.
(See In re Marriage of Sinks, supra, 204 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 594-595 and In re
Marriage of Stephenson, supra, 39 Cal. App. 4th at pp. 80-81, fn. 4.) Just as a
married couple may expect a reduction in income due to retirement, a divorced
spouse cannot expect to receive the same high level of support after the
supporting spouse retires.

   In the present case, the court did not base the spousal support order on an
examination of the material change in circumstances caused by Husband's timely
retirement. Instead, the court refused to recognize the effect of Husband's
retirement and incorrectly applied a "capacity to earn" standard. Therefore, the
court abused its discretion.

   Finally, we confess that we do not fully understand the court's 17th finding
in which it states that it relied 100 percent upon Husband's retirement assets
of $ 457,506 in making its order for spousal support of $ 3,500 a month. That
finding suggests that the court assumed Husband would receive a 9 percent annual
rate of return on his retirement funds, and then awarded the entire amount of
his investment income to Wife.  2 But the uncontroverted evidence was that
Husband's investments yielded, at their highest rate of return, an annual income
of approximately $ 28,000 (a 6 percent rate of return) or $ 2,333 monthly. If
the court relied entirely upon Husband's retirement assets in making the spousal
support order, then the spousal support order substantially exceeded the amount
of the greatest possible return on Husband's investments.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   $ 3,500 a
month represents an annual 9 percent rate of return on $ 457,506.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Because the amount of the spousal support order exceeded Husband's net
income from any source, we agree that if Husband complied with the court's
order, he would improperly be required to invade or exhaust his retirement
assets in order to pay Wife. Only investment income, not investment principal,
should be available to pay spousal support ( In re Marriage of Olson (1993) 14
Cal. App. 4th 1, 10 [17 Cal. Rptr. 2d 480]), especially in this case where the
subject retirement assets represent Husband's residual share of the community
property awarded to him as part of the dissolution.

   4. DISPOSITION

   For all of the foregoing reasons, we hold that the trial court abused its
discretion in making a spousal support order of $ 3,500. We reverse and remand
to the trial court for further proceedings in accordance with our opinion. Each
party to bear its own costs.

   Ramirez, P. J., and McKinster, J., concurred.

   A petition for a rehearing was denied May 29, 1998.


                              98 of 100 DOCUMENTS

            In re the Marriage of RICKY and ROBERT E. HARRIS.  RICKY
               HARRIS, Respondent, v. ROBERT E. HARRIS, Appellant

                                 Civ. No. 15904

           Court of Appeal of California, Fourth Appellate District,
                                  Division Two

            65 Cal. App. 3d 143; 134 Cal. Rptr. 891; 1976 Cal. App.
                                   LEXIS 2198


                               December 21, 1976

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Orange County, No. D-28907, William L.
Murray, Judge.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports, 3d Series

(1) Costs § 7--Amount and Items Allowable--Attorney Fees--Court's Discretion--
Review.  --An award, pursuant to Civ. Code, § 4370, subd. (a), of attorney fees
and costs for services rendered or costs incurred after the entry of judgment,
and the amount thereof, are matters addressed to the sound judicial discretion
of the trial court, and, absent a clear showing of abuse, the trial court's
determination will not be disturbed.

(2a) (2b) Costs § 7--Amount and Items Allowable--Attorney Fees--Post-dissolution
Proceedings.  --In post-dissolution proceedings by a former husband to terminate
spousal support, the court could not, on appeal, be held to have abused its
discretion in awarding the former wife attorney fees and costs, as against the
husband's contention that the court's implied finding of "reasonable" necessity
(Civ. Code, § 4370, subd. (a)) was not supported by substantial evidence, where
he failed to present to the reviewing court all the evidence touching on such
issue, and where, moreover, it was readily apparent from the record that the
evidence concerning the needs and abilities of the two parties was in conflict.

(3) Appellate Review § 84--Record--Contents as Affecting Scope of Review--
Evidence--Sufficiency.  --To raise, effectively, on an appeal in a civil case,
the issue of insufficiency of the evidence, the appellant must present to the
reviewing court all the evidence touching upon the question involved, whether
favorable or unfavorable to him. When he fails to follow this rule of appellate
practice, the reviewing court is entitled to indulge in a presumption that the
evidence sustains the determination of the trial court.

(4a) (4b) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 66--Support of Other Party--
Modification--Immateriality of Obligee's Cohabitation With Another--Effect of
Nonmodification Agreement.  --In post-dissolution proceedings by a former
husband, proof that the former wife was living, unmarried, with another man, did
not support modification of the order of spousal support to her, where the
parties had agreed, by stipulation in open court and in their marital settlement
agreement, that such order was not modifiable, and where, therefore, regardless
of the fact that the settlement agreement had not, as agreed therein, been
merged into the interlocutory dissolution decree, modification was precluded by
the provisions in the 1967 amendment of former Civ. Code, § 139 (now Civ. Code,
§ subd. 4811 (b)), relating to the effect of written agreements or stipulations
not to modify.

(5) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 79--Property Settlement Agreements--
Modification.  --Under the 1967 amendment to former Civ. Code, § 139 (and as now
expressed in Civ. Code, § 4811, subd. (b)), all wife-support provisions of a
property settlement agreement, whether or not merged into the court's decree,
whether or not merely approved, and whether or not "integrated" under the
previous cases, are both modifiable and enforceable by contempt.

(6) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 66--Support of Other Party--
Modification.  --Under Civ. Code, § 4811, subd. (b), all spousal support orders
are modifiable except where the parties have specifically agreed to the contrary
by an agreement in writing or a stipulation entered into in open court.

(7a) (7b) (7c) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 66--Support of Other Party
--Modification--Obligee's Cohabitation With Another--Immateriality of Statute--
Effect of Nonmodification Agreement.  --In post-dissolution proceedings
involving a marital settlement agreement expressly providing (as authorized in
Civ. Code, § 4811, subd. (b)) that the specified spousal support to the wife was
nonmodifiable on any ground, but would terminate on her death or remarriage, the
fact that the wife, after the dissolution decree, was living, unmarried, with
another man did not render the spousal support modifiable, or terminable,
whether or not circumstances existed that would otherwise have brought into play
Civ. Code, § 4801.5, requiring revocation of a support order upon proof of the
obligee's cohabitation, as if married, with a person of the opposite sex.

(8a) (8b) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 66--Support of Other Party--
Revocation--Obligee's Cohabitation With Another--Statute--Remarriage
Distinguished.  --Though Civ. Code, § 4801.5 (requiring revocation of a support
order upon proof of the obligee's cohabitation, as if married, with a person of
the opposite sex) was a legislative effort to effect similar treatment between
remarrying spouses and spouses forgoing the formalities of the marriage
contract, the existence of facts sufficient to bring the statute into play
cannot be equated with a remarriage as such.

COUNSEL: Konstantine P. George for Appellant.

Robert A. Schwamb and John Guerin for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Kaufman, Acting P. J., with McDaniel and Morris, JJ.,
concurring.

OPINION BY: KAUFMAN

OPINION

     Robert E. Harris (hereinafter former husband) moved to terminate spousal
support payments.  The order of the trial court denied the motion and awarded
Ricky Harris (hereinafter former wife) attorney fees and costs for resisting the
motion.  Former husband appeals.

Facts

   By an interlocutory decree of dissolution of marriage dated December 23,
1971, former husband was ordered to pay spousal support to former wife in the
amount of $ 500 per month commencing November 1971 and terminating November
1977.  The interlocutory decree also provided: "The requirement of this
paragraph for payments for the support of Petitioner [former wife] shall not be
modifiable on any ground.  [para. ] Spousal support shall terminate upon the
death or remarriage of Petitioner [former wife]."

   These provisions respecting spousal support were based upon and taken from
substantially identical provisions of a marital settlement agreement between the
parties executed December 22, 1971, effective November 2, 1971.

    The marital settlement agreement followed a stipulation in open court on
November 9, 1971, which provided in pertinent part: "Said spousal support [$ 500
per month for a period of 6 years] is non-modifiable unless in case petitioner
[former wife] remarries or is deceased."

   On June 9, 1975, former husband filed an order to show cause to terminate
spousal support pursuant to the provisions of Civil Code section 4801.5. 1
Although the trial court found that former wife was residing with a male person
to whom she was not married for more than 30 days, it concluded that section
4801.5 was inapplicable because former wife did not hold herself out as the
spouse of the male person with whom she was living and that, in any event,
spousal support was not modifiable because both the marital settlement agreement
and the stipulation in open court expressly provided that the provisions for
spousal support payments were not modifiable.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   All
statutory references are to sections of the Civil Code unless otherwise
indicated.

   Section 4801.5 added by Statutes 1974, chapter 1338, section 1, page 2911,
effective January 1, 1975, reads in pertinent part: "Upon the petition of a
spouse who has been ordered to pay support under Section 4801, the court shall
revoke the order for support upon proof that the spouse to whom support has been
ordered to be paid is living with a person of the opposite sex and holding
himself or herself out as the spouse of the person for a total of 30 days or
more, either consecutive or nonconsecutive, although not married to the person."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    The court denied the motion for modification and awarded former wife $ 1,000
attorney fees and $ 60.88 costs for defending against the modification motion.
Subsequently, in connection with a motion to correct the court's order, an
additional $ 250 attorney fee was awarded former wife.

Contentions on Appeal

   Former husband contends (1) the provisions in the stipulation, marital
settlement agreement and interlocutory decree that the prescribed support
payments are nonmodifiable do not divest the court of jurisdiction to revoke the
support order pursuant to section 4801.5; (2) former wife has "assumed the
status of spouse" and the spousal support order should be terminated  pursuant
to section 4801.5 notwithstanding former wife has not held herself out as the
spouse of the male person with whom she is residing; and (3) the trial court
abused its discretion in awarding former wife attorney fees and costs for
defending the modification motion.

    Former wife contends (1) that the provisions in the stipulation and marital
settlement agreement that spousal support was not modifiable is effective to
prevent the court from modifying spousal support pursuant to section 4801.5; (2)
former wife did not "assume the status of a spouse" and did not hold herself out
as being married to the male person with whom she was residing and section
4801.5 is therefore inapplicable; (3) even if facts sufficient to bring section
4801.5 into play had been proven, the application of that section to the marital
settlement agreement executed December 22, 1971, effective November 2, 1971,
would be unconstitutional as impairing the obligation of a contract; and (4) the
trial court did not abuse its discretion in awarding former wife attorney fees
and costs.

Discussion and Disposition

Attorney Fees and Costs

   "In respect to services rendered or costs incurred after the entry of
judgment, the court may award such costs and attorneys' fees as may be
reasonably necessary to maintain or defend any subsequent proceeding therein,
and may thereafter augment or modify any award so made." (§ 4370, subd. (a).)
The award of such attorney fees and costs and the amount thereof are matters
addressed to the sound judicial discretion of the trial court and, absent a
clear showing of abuse, the trial court's determination will not be disturbed.
( In re Marriage of Millet , 41 Cal.App.3d 729, 731 [116 Cal.Rptr. 390]; In re
Marriage of Rosan, 24 Cal.App.3d 885, 899 [101 Cal.Rptr. 295].)

     Although the trial court did not expressly find the attorney fees and costs
awarded to former wife to be "reasonably necessary" (§ 4370, subd. (a)), no such
specific finding was requested by former husband, and it is a reasonable
interpretation of the court's awarding fees and costs that it found the
necessity therefor.  ( In re Marriage of Millet, supra, 41 Cal.App.3d at p. 731
.) In substance former husband's contention is that the implied finding of
necessity is not supported by substantial evidence.

     First, to effectively raise the issue of insufficiency of the evidence, an
appealing party must present to the appellate court all the evidence touching
upon the question involved, both that favorable to him and that unfavorable to
him.  When he fails to abide by this well-established and necessary rule of
appellate practice, the appellate court is entitled to  indulge in a presumption
that the evidence sustains the determination of the trial court.  ( Foreman &
Clark Corp. v. Fallon, 3 Cal.3d 875, 881 [92 Cal.Rptr. 162, 479 P.2d 362];
Strutt v. Ontario Sav. & Loan Assn., 28 Cal.App.3d 866, 874 [105 Cal.Rptr. 395];
Estate of Palmer, 145 Cal.App.2d 428, 431-432 [302 P.2d 629].)   Former husband
has not complied with this salutary appellate rule.

   Moreover, it is readily apparent that the evidence concerning the needs and
abilities of former husband and former wife was in conflict.  Wife filed a
financial declaration showing monthly income of $ 3,423.63 and monthly expenses
of $ 3,756.51.  Former husband originally filed no financial declaration but
eventually filed a declaration showing income and expenses but not showing
assets.  The testimony showed he was 100 percent owner of an insurance agency
valued at $ 207,372 at the time of the interlocutory decree. There was evidence
that the cash balance in the agency's checking account amounted to some $
13,000.  The trial court was not bound to view the financial circumstances of
the parties in accordance with former husband's evaluation thereof.  The
evidence was conflicting, and the court did not abuse its discretion in awarding
former wife $ 1,250 attorney fees and $ 60.88 costs.

Modifiability of Spousal Support Order

     In support of his contention that the order for support of former wife is
modifiable,  former husband argues, as best we understand it, that the marital
settlement agreement upon which the order was based was merged in the
interlocutory decree. It is true that the marital settlement agreement contained
a provision reading: "This Agreement shall be submitted to the court for
incorporation and merger into the interlocutory judgment of dissolution of
marriage.  . . ." However, no such merger was effected.  After approving and
incorporating the marital settlement agreement, the interlocutory decree went
on: "It is adjudged that the Agreement shall survive it's [sic] incorporation as
part of this judgment, and that the rights and duties under the Agreement remain
rights and duties imposed by contract."

   More importantly, insofar as modifiability is concerned, the doctrine of
merger is no longer significant.  "Prior to 1967, the case law of this state had
developed complicated distinctions, whereby the modifiability and enforcement of
the wife-support provisions of a property settlement agreement turned on the
language of the agreement and of the decree"  and revolved around the concepts
of "integration" and "merger." ( In re Marriage of Smiley, 53 Cal.App.3d 228,
231-232 [125 Cal.Rptr. 717].) In 1967 former Civil Code section 139 was amended.
(Stats. 1967, ch. 1308.)  "The effect of that amendment was to make all wife-
support provisions of a property settlement agreement, whether or not merged,
whether or not merely approved, and whether or not 'integrated' under the
previous cases, both modifiable and enforceable by contempt." ( In re Marriage
of Smiley, supra, 53 Cal.App.3d at p. 232; see also Tilghman v. Superior Court,
40 Cal.App.3d 599, 603-606 [115 Cal.Rptr. 195].)

   The substance of the affected portion of former Civil Code section 139 is now
found in section 4811, subdivision (b) which reads: "The provisions of any
agreement for the support of either party shall be deemed to be separate and
severable from the provisions of the agreement relating to property.  All orders
for the support of either party based on such agreement shall be deemed
law-imposed and shall be deemed made under the power of the court to make such
orders.  The provisions of any agreement or order for the support of either
party shall be subject to subsequent modification or revocation by court order,
except as to any amount that may have accrued prior to the date of filing of the
notice of motion or order to show cause to modify or revoke, and except to the
extent that any written agreement, or, if there is no written agreement, any
oral agreement entered into in open court between the parties, specifically
provides to the contrary." (Stats. 1969, ch. 1608, § 8, p. 3336, as amended by
Stats. 1970, ch. 1545, § 4, p. 3140.) (Italics added.)  Thus, all spousal
support orders are modifiable except where the parties have specifically agreed
to the contrary by an agreement in writing or a stipulation entered into in open
court.   In the case at bench the parties agreed that spousal support was not
modifiable, both in their stipulation in open court on November 9, 1971, and
their marital settlement agreement executed December 22, 1971, effective
November 2, 1971.

     Former husband points to the fact that pursuant to both the stipulation in
open court and the marital settlement agreement spousal support payments were to
terminate upon remarriage of former wife. (See also § 4801, subd. (b).) 2 The
contention seems to be that operative   facts sufficient to bring section 4801.5
(see fn. 1, ante) into play are tantamount to "remarriage" and, thus, constitute
a permissible ground of termination consistent with the agreement of the
parties.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   -

   Section 4801, subdivision (b) reads: "Except as otherwise agreed by the
parties in writing, the obligation of any party under any order or judgment for
the support and maintenance of the other party shall terminate upon the death of
either party or the remarriage of the other party."
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     It is true that we have observed that ". . . the enactment of section
4801.5 is a legislative effort to effect similar treatment between remarrying
spouses and ones forgoing the formalities of the marriage contract." ( In re
Marriage of Ludwig, 58 Cal.App.3d 744, 750 [130 Cal.Rptr. 234].)  We decline,
however, to equate the existence of facts sufficient to bring section 4801.5
into play with a remarriage, for to do so would, we think, contravene the
reasonable expectations of the parties at the time they entered into the marital
settlement agreement.

   In November and December 1971 there existed a statutory provision very
similar to that found in section 4801.5.  It was then embodied in subdivision
(c) of section 4801. 3  In the face of that provision and after specifically
providing for the consequences of remarriage, the parties agreed in the marital
settlement agreement that ". . . payments for the support of Wife shall not be
modifiable on any ground" (Italics added,)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   Section
4801, subdivision (c), then provided: "Except as otherwise agreed by the parties
in writing, the court may, upon petition of either party, modify or revoke any
decree or judgment granting any allowance to the other party upon proof that the
wife is living with another man and holding herself out as his wife, although
not married to such man, or that the husband is living with another woman and
holding himself out as her husband, although not married to such woman, except
as to any amount that may have accrued prior to the filing of the petition."
(See Stats. 1969, ch. 1608, § 8, p. 3334; Stats. 1970, ch. 1545, § 3, p. 3139;
Stats. 1970, ch. 1575, § 4, p. 3285.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      Moreover, the statutes do not state that the existence of facts sufficient
to bring into play section 4801.5 is equivalent to remarriage. Had that been the
legislative intent it would have been easy for the Legislature to say so, and we
should have expected the substance of section 4801.5 to be a part of subdivision
(b) of section 4801, which deals with the effect of remarriage. On the contrary,
however, the substance of what is now section 4801.5 was first included as a
separate subdivision of section 4801 and, subsequently, became a separate
section, section 4801.5.

     The parties agreed that spousal support was to continue for six years and
that it was not modifiable on any ground except upon the death of either party
or the remarriage of former wife in which cases it would terminate. Such an
agreement is specifically authorized by section  4811, subdivision (b).  The
agreed spousal support is therefore not modifiable whether or not facts exist
that would bring section 4801.5 into play.

   In an emphasis at oral argument not readily apparent from his appellate
briefs, former husband makes the argument that there is a difference between
modification and termination and that the parties' agreement that the spousal
support payments would not be modifiable on any ground does not preclude their
being terminated.  In the circumstances of this case, we reject this argument.
We recognize, of course, that the word "termination" is susceptible to a
different meaning than the word "modification." However, "modification" is the
broader term and encompasses the term "termination." In the context of the case
at bench "termination" is nothing more than a "modification" to zero.

Other Contentions

   In view of the foregoing conclusions, we need not treat the parties' other
contentions.

   Affirmed.


                              99 of 100 DOCUMENTS

             In re the Marriage of DORIS MILDRED and CHARLES BRYSON
             McELWEE.  DORIS MILDRED McELWEE, Appellant, v. CHARLES
                           BRYSON McELWEE, Respondent

                                  No. B020877

           Court of Appeal of California, Second Appellate District,
                                 Division Five

            197 Cal. App. 3d 902; 243 Cal. Rptr. 179; 1988 Cal. App.
                                    LEXIS 24


                                January 14, 1988

PRIOR-HISTORY:     Superior Court of Los Angeles County, No. WED 865512, Stanley
R. Malone, Jr., Judge.

COUNSEL: Dennis A. Fischer for Appellant.

Lance S. Spiegel for Respondent.

JUDGES: Opinion by Feinerman, P. J., with Hastings, J., * and Boren, J.,
concurring.  * Retired Associate Justice of the Court of Appeal sitting under
assignment by the Chairperson of the Judicial Council.

OPINION BY: FEINERMAN

OPINION

     This is an appeal from a judgment terminating spousal support without a
reservation of jurisdiction. Appellant, Doris Mildred McElwee, also contends
that the trial court abused its discretion in fixing spousal support in the
amount of $ 500 a month for the period commencing April 1983 and ending October
1986.  We affirm.

    Background

   Appellant and respondent, Charles Bryson McElwee, separated in 1974 after a
15-year marriage. Respondent made temporary spousal and child support payments.
The marriage was dissolved by court order in 1977.  Issues of support and
property division, which had been bifurcated, were adjudicated in a January 18,
1978, order which awarded appellant $ 2,500 a month spousal support for three
years commencing  July 15, 1977. 1 The court retained jurisdiction  on the issue
of spousal support until April 5, 1983.  On November 21, 1980, the court issued
a modification order which awarded appellant spousal support in the amount of $
1,800 a month for the period August 15, 1980 to April 5, 1983.  This order did
not mention retention of jurisdiction.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   Appellant
was also awarded child support of $ 1,000 a month for each of the couple's two
minor children until the children reached 18.  The youngest child reached 18 on
April 5, 1983.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   As her distributive share of the community assets, appellant initially
received property valued at $ 138,706.60.  This property included the family
home. In addition, she received cash payments totaling $ 60,000 to equalize her
share of the community estate.  In 1982, appellant received $ 296,000 in cash as
her share of the proceeds from the sale of a company known as Mensics, another
community asset.

   In March 1983, appellant petitioned the court for an increase in spousal
support to $ 3,000 a month to be paid for an indefinite period of time.
Following a hearing on the merits in March 1986, 2 the court issued a statement
of decision which included the following findings:

   Appellant holds a bachelor's and master's degree and has been licensed by the
State of California as a marriage and family counselor since 1970.  She has
worked continuously as a counselor since the early 1970's.  At the time the
original support order was made in 1978, neither the court nor appellant
expected that appellant would become self-supporting exclusively from her income
as a counselor.  It was the intention of the court to allow appellant a
reasonable period of time to arrange the management of her finances so that the
income from appellant's share of the community assets, together with the income
from appellant's professional employment, would make her reasonably
self-sufficient.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   The trial
court initially denied the petition in the belief that the 1978 order had
irrevocably terminated its jurisdiction effective April 5, 1983.  This court, in
an unpublished opinion, reversed the order denying the petition for modification
based upon the decision in In re Marriage of Vomacka (1984) 36 Cal.3d 459 [204
Cal.Rptr. 568, 683 P.2d 248]. (In re Marriage of McElwee (June 18, 1985)
B001614.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     The court further found that rather than "taking advantage of the
opportunity to put her financial house in order," appellant had made a series of
imprudent, high risk investments from her share of the community property, which
included investments in a restaurant, gold mines, cattle, and oil and gas
exploration, from which she received "de minimis" income.  The court concluded
that appellant had "failed to exercise reasonable diligence in connection with
the investments . . . that if [Appellant] had exercised reasonable diligence in
connection with the investment of her share of the community property . . .
[she] would have had available for her at least $ 2,500.00 per month in tax free
income," and that "the original expectations of the court would have been
realized." The court also found that appellant had made a conscious decision not
to retrain or reeducate herself in order to obtain more profitable employment.

   The court noted that appellant had received no spousal support for the period
from April 1983 to the time of trial in March 1986.  The couple's two children
had moved into college housing in September 1983 and thereafter respondent had
paid their expenses without contribution from appellant.  As of March 1983,
appellant had a cash balance in her bank account of $ 176,000 which had been
reduced to $ 112,160 as of December 1985.  During this period, appellant had
spent in excess of $ 20,000 on attorney's fees, in excess of $ 20,000 on income
and property taxes, and $ 26,000 on her IRA and other investments, all of which
expenditures the court concluded were extraordinary.  Appellant had not borrowed
from any source during this period.  The court found that "but for these
extraordinary expenditures and but for [Appellant's] failure to exercise
reasonable diligence in the care and management of her estate, [Appellant] would
have been self-supporting during the period in question."  The court determined
that nonetheless, it would have been reasonable for appellant to have received
spousal support in the amount of $ 500 per month for the period commencing April
1983, and that such support should continue until October 1986.

   In concluding that support should terminate effective October 1986, the court
relied on the following factors: Appellant's separate property estate included
equity in her home of $ 200,000, 3 and the reasonably prudent investment of such
equity would produce a return in excess of expenses for alternative housing;
appellant's "sixteen years in the employment market and her separate estate
justify the conclusion that she is self-sufficient;" and further that:
"[Appellant] has continuously worked as a marriage and family counselor for
approximately 16 years; [para. ] (b) As a result of the court's order
retroactively modifying spousal support, [Appellant] will have received spousal
support from Respondent from the time of separation in  1974 until October,
1986, approximately twelve years for a marriage that lasted fifteen years;
[para. ] (c) There are no minor children in [Appellant's] custody.  As a result,
she may engage in gainful employment without interfering with the interest of
such children; [para. ] (d) [Appellant] is physically able to continue her
professional activities; [para. ] (e) It would be unjust and inequitable for the
Respondent to continue to support [Appellant] in light of the imprudent and
negligent actions as described above.  In that regard, the court does not
believe that spousal support is intended to create a situation where former
spouses become investment underwriters.  [para. ] To the extent there is any
question as to [Appellant's] self-sufficiency, it is because of her failure to
exercise reasonable diligence during the past twelve years.  Under such
circumstances, it would be unjust and inequitable to extend support." In
connection with the latter conclusion, the court found that appellant's
"apparent belief that . . . support would last forever facilitated [her]
imprudent use of her separate property estate," and that "termination of spousal
support in October, 1986 [would] facilitate [Appellant's] self-sufficiency by
compelling her to efficaciously invest the balance of her separate property
estate."

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -3   The
property had appreciated to a value of $ 250,000 by the time of trial.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In addition to the award of $ 500 a month spousal support from April 1983 to
October 1986, the court awarded appellant a total of $ 20,232 in attorney's
fees.  The judgment did not reserve future jurisdiction over spousal support.

   Contentions on Appeal

     Appellant first contends that "the trial court impermissibly 'burned its
bridges' when it ordered an early termination of jurisdiction over spousal
support without the benefit of specific facts to establish appellant's future
ability to provide for her own support." Appellant relies on In re Marriage of
Morrison (1978) 20 Cal.3d 437, 453 [143 Cal.Rptr. 139, 573 P.2d 41], which held:
"A trial court should not terminate jurisdiction to extend a future support
order after a lengthy marriage, unless the record clearly indicates that the
supported spouse will be able to adequately meet his or her financial needs at
the time selected for termination of jurisdiction. In making its decision
concerning the retention of jurisdiction, the court must rely only on the
evidence in the record and the reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom.  It
must not engage in speculation.  If the record does not contain evidence of the
supported spouse's ability to meet his or her future needs, the court should not
'burn its bridges' and fail to retain jurisdiction.  (In re Marriage of Dennis
[(1973)] 35 Cal.App.3d [279] at p. 285 [110 Cal.Rptr. 619].)"

    The Supreme Court went  on to say, however, "[these] standards will not
require a trial court to retain jurisdiction in every case involving a lengthy
marriage. In some instances the record will indicate that both spouses are
employed . . . or that there are sufficient assets available to enable each to
provide for his or her needs.  In that event, no support or support for only a
limited time, without a retention of  jurisdiction, would be appropriate.  (Civ.
Code, §§ 4801, subd. (a), 4806.) Where jurisdiction has been retained in the
original order, future modification hearings may well reveal that the supported
spouse has found adequate employment, has delayed seeking employment, or has
refused available employment.  At that time, the court may appropriately
consider such factors in deciding whether or not to modify its original order.
[Citations.]" ( In re Marriage of Morrison, supra, 20 Cal.3d 437, 453.)

   The instant case, of course, differs procedurally from Morrison, supra, in
that it does involve a modification order, whereas Morrison involved the initial
support order. It also differs significantly from  Morrison factually.  In
Morrison, the wife was 54 at the time of dissolution of the couple's 28-year
marriage, had no job skills or training, was employed part-time as a newspaper
collator for $ 2.25 an hour, with monthly earnings of only $ 100, had a medical
problem which cast doubt on her ability to hold full-time employment, received
property worth only $ 38,197 as her distributive share of the community estate,
and was awarded only $ 400 a month spousal support for a period of eight years.
It was in this factual context that the Supreme Court held that the trial court
abused its discretion in reserving jurisdiction for a period of 11 years absent
any evidence that the wife would be self-supporting at the end of 11 years.

   The factual differences between Mrs. Morrison and appellant are striking.
Although appellant was 55 years old at the time of the 1986 hearing, she had a
graduate degree and professional training and she had been employed continuously
in a professional capacity for 16 years.  Appellant had certain health problems,
but she testified that they did not incapacitate her and that she would gladly
increase the number of hours she worked if she could attract  additional
clients.  In the case at bench, appellant was awarded community assets worth
nearly half a million dollars which, if invested prudently, would have
sufficiently supplemented her earnings from her professional employment to have
rendered her fully self-sufficient. Appellant was awarded 12 years of spousal
support for a 15-year marriage, while Mrs. Morrison received only 8 years of
spousal support for a 28-year marriage.

    The procedural distinction between the instant case and Morrison, supra, 20
Cal.3d 437, is also significant.  The original support order in the present case
reserved jurisdiction only until April 1983.  The 1980 modification order did
not alter that termination date.  Neither of those orders was challenged, thus
the court's original decision, terminating jurisdiction as of April 1983, must
be deemed justified, and indeed the facts support that conclusion.  Modification
of that ruling was appropriate only if there was "a material change of
circumstances subsequent to the last prior order." ( In re Marriage of Prietsch
& Calhoun (1987) 190 Cal.App.3d 645, 655 [235 Cal.Rptr. 587].) 4

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   In re
Marriage of Prietsch & Calhoun, supra, 190 Cal.App.3d 645, 655, required a
showing of changed circumstances to alter a spousal support award, but logic and
sound judicial procedures compel the application of the same rule to the
alteration of an order which had set a date for termination of jurisdiction.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   There were, in fact, three material changes in appellant's financial
circumstances after the court made its original order delimiting jurisdiction.
First, the children reached majority and left the family home, relieving
appellant of any financial obligation towards them.  Second, the family
residence appreciated to approximately double its value at the time it was
awarded to appellant.  Third, appellant converted a significant portion of her
liquid assets into nonliquid investments of unknown value with limited income
potential.  Thus, the first two changes in circumstances improved appellant's
financial situation. To the extent that the third change impaired appellant's
financial status, 5 the  court found, on the basis of contested facts, that the
impairment was caused by appellant's imprudent and negligent investment
practices.  Moreover, the court, in effect, reimbursed appellant for nearly
two-thirds of the extraordinary expenses appellant incurred between April 1983
and March 1986 by its award of spousal support until October 1986 and by its
award of attorneys' fees, thereby replenishing a substantial portion of
appellant's liquid assets. On balance, the positive changes in appellant's
financial situation sufficiently offset the negative changes so that the court
did not abuse its discretion in concluding that she was essentially
self-sufficient and that retention of jurisdiction beyond October 1986 was
unwarranted.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   The
extent to which her situation was impaired is unclear, since appellant's
financial expert testified that the investments were justified because in
addition to realizing tax savings, she retained the investments as assets, and
she herself testified that certain of the investments were structured to start
producing income after five to seven years.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

      Furthermore, just as lack of diligence in seeking employment may lead to a
refusal to award spousal support ( In re Marriage of Sheridan (1983) 140
Cal.App.3d 742, 749 [189 Cal.Rptr. 622]), so too may  improvident management of
assets, which were sufficient to provide self-sufficiency in the accustomed
lifestyle, justify termination of support and jurisdiction even though such an
order may result in an alteration in the supported spouse's lifestyle. To hold
otherwise, would encourage profligacy and discourage sound investment and
prudent management to the detriment of all concerned.

     Appellant contends, however, that her investments were not improvident,
that they were made for the purpose of achieving tax savings and that, in fact,
the tax savings which she realized were greater than the amount of the
investments themselves.  Both parties called expert witnesses who testified as
to the nature, wisdom and consequences of appellant's investments.  Appellant's
expert was also her principal financial advisor.  His advice had been predicated
on the assumption that the proceeds from the sale of Mensics would be taxed as
ordinary income and that her tax liability would have been $ 190,000 had she not
found a tax sheltered investment.  In fact, the lion's share of the proceeds of
the Mensics sale were taxable as capital gains.  Respondent cannot be held
accountable for the poor tax advice appellant received.

   Respondent's expert testified that appellant's tax liability from that sale
would have been only $ 84,000, and that if appellant had paid the taxes and
invested the balance in tax free municipal bonds in 1982 she could have realized
$ 2,500 a month in tax-free income, a conclusion adopted by the trial court.
Respondent's expert concluded that the investments which appellant actually made
were high risk and unsuited to her situation.  Resolving the factual conflict in
favor of the judgment, as we must do ( Aceves v. Regal Pale Brewing Co. (1979)
24 Cal.3d 502, 507 [156 Cal.Rptr. 41, 595 P.2d 619]), we find that there was
sufficient evidence to support the court's conclusion as to the imprudence of
appellant's investment practices.

   Appellant also argues that there is inadequate evidence to sustain the
court's finding as to the availability of the $ 200,000 equity in her home for
her support.  She bases this argument on her assertion that she needs a
residence with a minimum of three bedrooms so that her adult children can reside
with her when they are on school vacations.  She contends that the least
expensive alternative housing she could obtain would be a three bedroom
condominium for $ 150,000, with monthly payments of over $ 1,300, compared with
the $ 354 mortgage payment on her present residence.

   Appellant's children are now 22 and 24 years old respectively.  Although
respondent is paying their college expenses, he is under no current legal
obligation to support them.  Since he could not be ordered to make direct child
support payments to appellant, he cannot be ordered to do so indirectly by
requiring him to make support payments to appellant sufficient to enable her to
provide a residence for the adult children who would use it only intermittently.
We conclude that the trial  court's finding as to the availability of the equity
in appellant's residence is supported by the evidence.

     Appellant next contends that the court's award of only $ 500 a month
spousal support, for the period from April 1983 to October 1986, bore no
reasonable relation to her needs and was therefore an abuse of discretion.  A
1985 declaration of income and expenses, filed in support of appellant's 1983
petition for spousal support, listed annual gross salary and wages of $ 14,939,
income from dividends and interest of $ 8,646, income from an investment
partnership of $ 3,203 and other income of $ 1,383 from an undisclosed source,
for a total annual income of $ 28,171.  Her net monthly disposable income is
shown as $ 1,891.  She listed cash on hand of $ 101,790.  She listed monthly
expenses of $ 6,498, but these included a number of items which seem excessive
absent some explanation.  For example, she listed $ 497 a month for maintenance
on her residence in addition to her mortgage, tax, insurance, utility and
gardening expenses.  She listed a $ 217 a month housekeeping expense in addition
to her expenses for food, laundry and cleaning, and household supplies.  She
listed an additional $ 203 a month for household furniture and furnishings.  She
has a "reserve for contingencies" of $ 252 a month, in addition to an allowance
for incidentals of $ 318.  She listed a monthly expense for church and other
charities of $ 299, miscellaneous gifts of $  120, and $ 577 a month for
clothing.  She also listed $ 622 as an anticipated monthly car payment.  She was
questioned about this item at the hearing below and admitted that the car she
was driving was paid for, but that she was looking around for another automobile
and estimated that it would cost her that much.  She did not present any
evidence to substantiate any of her other claimed expenses.  Her declaration did
not list the value, if any, of her investments.  It did list outstanding
promissory notes of $ 53,550 and $ 57,945 on her investments, but her testimony
disclosed that these had been waived.

   Appellant had the burden of proving her actual and necessary expenses and her
inability to satisfy them out of her own resources.  The evidence before the
trial court was sufficient to support its decision to award her $ 500 a month
spousal support for the period commencing April 1983 and to terminate support
effective October 1986 without a further reservation of jurisdiction based upon
a finding of self-sufficiency.

    The judgment is affirmed.


                              100 of 100 DOCUMENTS

           In re the Marriage of MARY E. and THOMAS D. TERRY. MARY E.
          TERRY, Appellant, v. THOMAS D. TERRY, Respondent. In re the
            Marriage of MARY E. and THOMAS D. TERRY. MARY E. TERRY,
                   Respondent, v. THOMAS D. TERRY, Appellant.

                           No. A083746. No. A083772.

            COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA, FIRST APPELLATE DISTRICT,
                                 DIVISION FOUR

           80 Cal. App. 4th 921; 95 Cal. Rptr. 2d 760; 2000 Cal. App.
                     LEXIS 382; 2000 Daily Journal DAR 5153


                            April 18, 2000, Decided

SUBSEQUENT HISTORY:     The Publication Status of this Document has been Changed
by the Court from Unpublished to Published May 16, 2000 on Denial of Rehearing,
Reported at: 2000 Cal. App. LEXIS 383.
   Review Denied July 26, 2000, Reported at: 2000 Cal. LEXIS 5997.

PRIOR-HISTORY:    Superior Court of Marin County. Super. Ct. No. FL8259. Hon.
Sylvia Shapiro, Commissioner.

HEADNOTES-1

CALIFORNIA OFFICIAL REPORTS HEADNOTES
Classified to California Digest of Official Reports

(1) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 69--Spousal Support--Modification--
Change of Circumstances--Statutory Criteria--Denial of Continued Support.  --The
trial court has broad discretion to decide whether to modify a spousal support
order based on a material change of circumstances. In exercising this
discretion, the court considers the same criteria set forth in Fam. Code, § 4320
, as it considered when making the initial order and any subsequent modification
order. These factors include the ability of the supporting party to pay; the
needs of each party based on the standard of living established during the
marriage; the obligations and assets of each party; and the balance of hardships
to each party. Also, Fam. Code, § 4322, provides that in original or
modification proceedings, where there are no children, and a party has or
acquires a separate estate, including income from employment, sufficient for the
party's proper support, no support may be ordered or continued against the other
party. Denial of continued support is thus mandatory if the sufficiency
threshold is met, irrespective of circumstances the court would otherwise
consider under Fam. Code, § 4320.

(2a) (2b) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 72--Spousal Support--Termination
of Order--Applicability of Statute Requiring Termination if Supported Spouse Has
Sufficient Separate Estate--Appellate Review--Standard.  --A trial court's
determination to terminate spousal support pursuant to Fam. Code, § 4322, is
subject to de novo review on appeal. The statute requires termination of support
if the supported spouse has or acquires a separate estate sufficient for his or
her proper support. A trial court's § 4322 determination that a separate estate
is or is not sufficient for proper support is not a factual description or
statement. Rather, it is a legal conclusion that an estate reasonably could, or
could not, generate sufficient income to provide for a spouse's proper support,
with legal ramifications for both parties. Thus, the standard of review is de
novo.

(3) Appellate Review § 144--Scope of Review--Questions of Law and Fact--
Independent Review.  --On appeal, when an inquiry into whether a standard is met
requires a critical consideration, in a factual context, of legal principles and
their underlying values, the question is predominantly legal and its
determination is reviewed independently.

(4) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 72--Spousal Support--Termination of
Order--Statute Requiring Termination if Supported Spouse Has Sufficient Separate
Estate--"Separate Estate"--Scope.  --The Fam. Code, § 4322 (termination of
spousal support if supported spouse has or acquires separate estate sufficient
for his or her proper support), concept of a "separate estate" is not limited to
the income actually and presently produced by the estate. Where the supporting
spouse challenges the reasonableness of the supported spouse's investment
strategy, the court should look to the estate as a whole, including the actual
and reasonable income potential from investment assets, as well as their total
value, in resolving the issue of the estate's sufficiency for proper support.
Assets acquired through the final division of community property should be
considered in assessing the sufficiency of the estate for proper support.

(5) Dissolution of Marriage; Separation § 72--Spousal Support--Termination of
Order--Applicability of Statute Requiring Termination if Supported Spouse Has
Sufficient Separate Estate--Determination.  --In marital dissolution
proceedings, in which the trial court initially had ordered the husband to pay
spousal support of $ 8,750 per month, even though the wife's net worth was
substantially greater, and then denied the husband's motion to terminate support
and entered a modified order reducing, but continuing, spousal support in the
amount of $ 2,750 per month, the trial court erred in concluding that, although
there had been substantial changes in circumstances, namely the loss of the
husband's job and the increase in value of the wife's separate assets, the
wife's estate was not sufficient to meet her proper support needs of between $
10,000 and $ 12,000 per month after taxes. At most, a decision that the wife's
estate met the sufficiency threshold under Fam. Code, § 4322, which requires the
termination of spousal support if the supported spouse has or acquires a
separate estate sufficient for his or her proper support without continued
support, would have implicated a small amount of the appreciation of her asset
base, nothing more. The trial court's reticence to do anything that might prompt
the wife to change her investment strategy, to draw down on the retirement
account, or to liquidate or leverage any of her substantial assets did not make
sense in light of the totality of the facts. Since the legal standard of
sufficiency was met, the dictates of Fam. Code, § 4322, compelled termination of
spousal support.

   [See 11 Witkin, Summary of Cal. Law (9th ed. 1990) Husband and Wife, § 225.]

(6) Costs § 22--Attorney Fees--Family Law Proceedings--Discretion of Trial
Court.  --Under Fam. Code, § 2030, subd. (c), the trial court may in its
discretion award fees or costs reasonably necessary to maintain or defend any
proceeding occurring after entry of judgment. In assessing the applicant's
relative need and the other party's ability to pay, the court may take into
account all evidence concerning the parties' current incomes, assets, and
abilities, including investment and income-producing properties. Thus, in a
proceeding in which a husband sought to terminate spousal support, the trial
court did not abuse it discretion in denying the wife's request for fees and
costs, since she was by far the wealthier spouse.

COUNSEL: Adams & Dornan, Verna A. Adams; Law Offices of Bernard N. Wolf and
Bernard N. Wolf for Appellant in No. A083746 and for Respondent in No. A083772.


DeGoff & Sherman and Richard Sherman for Appellant in No. A083772 and for
Respondent in No. A083746.

JUDGES: Opinion by Reardon, J., with Hanlon, P. J., concurring. Concurring and
dissenting opinion by Sepulveda, J. (see p. 933).

OPINION BY: Reardon

OPINION

     REARDON, J.

   Three times the trial court has ruled on the matter of spousal support in
this case. Each time the supported spouse's estate has grown and the supporting
spouse's income has diminished. Yet, on this last go-around, with the supported
spouse enjoying an investment portfolio of nearly $ 3.75 million, retirement
benefits approaching $ 1 million and real estate valued at $ 773,500, the trial
court refused to invoke its independent  authority under Family Code 1 section
4322 to terminate support. We reverse the order diminishing, but continuing
spousal support, and concurrently affirm the subsequent order denying the
supported spouse's request for attorney fees.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   All
statutory references are to the Family Code.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

I. FACTUAL BACKGROUND

   Mary E. and Thomas D. Terry separated in April 1993 after a 34-year marriage.
By then their three children were adults. Mr. Terry has remarried; Ms. Terry has
not.

   Mr. Terry has been one of the country's leading tax experts in the area of
employee benefits. He has been a partner with two Bay Area law firms, first with
Morrison & Foerster and then with Pillsbury, Madison & Sutro (PM&S). In between,
Mr. Terry served as a benefits tax counsel in the United States Treasury
Department. In contrast, Ms. Terry has no significant out-of-home employment.

   In December 1993 the trial court entered judgment dissolving the marriage.
The parties reserved issues of property division and support. When all was said
and done, by stipulation or court order, major items of property were disposed
of as follows: (1) Mr. Terry's retirement benefits from Morrison & Foerster and
PM&S were divided equally; (2) the family home in Kentfield, valued at $
773,500, was awarded to Ms. Terry; (3) the value of Mr. Terry's law practice
with PM&S, set at $ 276,868, was awarded to him; and (4) Ms.  Terry made an
equalizing payment of $ 220,830.50 to Mr. Terry.

   A. Initial Spousal Support Award

   Spousal support was hotly disputed at trial, in part because Ms. Terry had
substantial separate property assets. Trial took place in late 1994.

   In its May 1995 statement of decision and August 1995 order, the trial court
found that with separate property assets of approximately $ 2 million, Ms.
Terry's net worth was "substantially greater than Mr. Terry's." Nonetheless it
ordered Mr. Terry to pay spousal support of $ 8,750 per month based on the
following: Ms. Terry's reasonable needs were $ 10,000 to $ 12,000 per month, net
of taxes; 2 Mr. Terry had the ability to pay support, with an annual income of $
315,960 from PM&S and unearned income of  $ 25,884; and Ms. Terry's investment
portfolio would generate an estimated 5 percent return, 3 or approximately $
82,908. The $ 8,750 per month in spousal support, combined with income from Ms.
Terry's investments, would meet her reasonable needs. Under these circumstances,
the court saw no need for Ms. Terry to change her investment strategy or draw
down on the retirement accounts.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   The court
made it clear that this baseline amount was not equivalent to the marital
standard of living. That standard had been complemented and subsidized by
infusions from both parties' separate property and thus was an inappropriate
measure with which to calculate Ms. Terry's needs for purposes of spousal
support. The court concluded: "A reasonable approximation of the marital
standard, based on the funds which would have been available from community
sources, for Ms. Terry alone, would require $ 10,000 per month after taxes . . .
. This number is consistent with the after-tax amount available to them during
the marriage."
3   The court relied on Ms. Terry's November 1994 Merrill Lynch account
statement, which reflected a portfolio valued at $ 2,037,884. The account
statement itself shows estimated annual income of $ 67,397 from priced
investments plus a current yield of 4.32 percent on the "money accounts." With
money accounts totaling $ 364,587, the annual yield would be $ 15,750, for a
total estimated annual income of $ 83,147. Whichever figure is used--$ 82,908 or
$ 83,147--the rate of return is approximately 4.1 percent, not 5 percent.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   B. Motion to Reduce Spousal Support

   In February 1996 Mr. Terry moved to reduce spousal support by $ 2,000 a month
because Ms. Terry had received an additional $ 303,000 from her mother's estate,
and his income had decreased. While the motion was pending, PM&S notified Mr.
Terry that he would be converted to a "salaried" partner, with his 1996 income
reduced to $ 250,000 and his 1997 income to $ 225,000. Meanwhile, Ms. Terry's
portfolio had increased to $ 2,702,597.65.

   In a supplemental declaration, Mr. Terry asked to have his support obligation
reduced to $ 5,200 per month. The trial court reduced spousal support to $ 5,500
per month.

   C. Motion to Terminate Spousal Support

   Upon learning that his employment with PM&S would permanently end effective
January 1, 1998, Mr. Terry moved to terminate support. In the meantime he
explored job possibilities in the private and public sectors, but to no avail.
Mr. Terry explained in his moving papers that since he was 64 at the time and
many private firms have a mandatory retirement age of 65, private employment was
unrealistic, particularly since he did not have a personal "book of business."

   Due to these developments, Mr. Terry decided to start drawing $ 5,500 per
month from his retirement account. As well, he started a consulting practice,
earning gross receipts of $ 12,843.75 during the first three months.

   During this time frame, Ms. Terry's investments increased in value. Her
February 1998 Merrill Lynch account statement revealed a net portfolio  value of
$ 3,545,788. Annual income was estimated  at $ 95,130, for a current yield of
approximately 2.7 percent. Ms. Terry also reported interest income in the amount
of $ 9,472 on a $ 200,000 promissory note, as well as $ 787 from a government
pension.

   Mr. Terry pointed out that Ms. Terry's portfolio consisted primarily of
low-basis stocks, which she managed in a manner so as not to maximize income.
Should Ms. Terry elect to increase income by reconfiguring her portfolio, there
would be capital gains taxes, but the tax consequence would be substantially
reduced because "1997 tax legislation reduced capital gains tax rates from 28 to
20 . . . ." He further explained that Ms. Terry's retirement account had grown
to $ 959,786. Ms. Terry turned 61 on January 20, 1998, at which time she could
draw down on the retirement account without incurring any penalty.

   Ms. Terry responded that (1) her portfolio had decreased slightly because of
the $ 200,000 loan; (2) she should not be expected to withdraw from the
retirement accounts until after Mr. Terry's death; (3) Mr. Terry could easily
affiliate with a major firm, obtain a government position or teach, thereby
increasing his income; and (4) the expenses associated with his consulting
business were unnecessarily high.

   The trial court found there had been substantial changes in circumstances,
namely the loss of Mr. Terry's job and the increase in value of Ms. Terry's
separate assets. However, the court concluded the showing was insufficient to
require Ms. Terry to begin drawing down on her retirement benefits or to change
her investment strategy. The court further found that Mr. Terry's business
expenses "appear somewhat overstated" and imputed approximately $ 80,000 in
annual income to him from the consulting practice. The court reduced spousal
support to $ 2,750 per month. In so doing it took into consideration the funds
that Mr. Terry was drawing from his retirement account. As well, the court
observed that under the current order, Mr. Terry would "be unable to pay his
living expenses" but that his spouse's income would be available to reduce his
own living expenses.

   Mr. Terry requested specific findings as to Ms. Terry's net worth and rate of
return on her investments, but the court refused. Thereafter, the court ordered
each party to pay his or her own attorney fees and cost of suit. Mr. Terry
appeals from the modification order (case No. A083772); Ms. Terry cross-appeals
from the fee order (case No. A083746).

 II. DISCUSSION

   A. Support Order

   1. Introduction; Standard of Review

      The trial court has broad discretion to decide whether to modify a spousal
support order based on a material change of circumstances. In exercising this
discretion, the court considers the same criteria set forth in section 4320 as
it considered when making the initial order and any subsequent modification
order. (In re Marriage of Stephenson (1995) 39 Cal. App. 4th 71, 76-78 [46 Cal.
Rptr. 2d 8].) These factors include the ability of the supporting party to pay;
the needs of each party based on the standard of living established during the
marriage; the obligations and assets of each party; and the balance of hardships
to each party. (§ 4320, subds. (c)-(e), (j).)

   As well, section 4322 provides that in original or modification proceedings,
"where there are no children, and a party has or acquires a separate estate,
including income from employment, sufficient for the party's proper support, no
support shall be ordered or continued against the other party." (Italics added.)
Denial of continued support is thus mandatory if the sufficiency threshold is
met, irrespective of circumstances the court would otherwise consider under
section 4320.

     The trial court repeatedly found that Ms. Terry's separate estate was not
sufficient to meet her proper needs for support,  and thus section 4322 did not
apply. This, despite the fact that Ms. Terry's separate estate has consistently
grown.

   The initial support order set Ms. Terry's reasonable needs as totaling
between $ 10,000 and $ 12,000 per month after taxes. She did not appeal that
ruling and it is too late to do so now. This is the pivotal amount for
ascertaining Mr. Terry's support obligation, if any.

   The question under section 4322 is whether Ms. Terry's separate estate is
sufficient to fund this level of support. This is a mixed question of fact and
law calling for (1) the establishment of the historical facts concerning the
value and character of Ms. Terry's separate estate as well as her support needs;
and (2) the application of those facts to the legal standard of sufficiency with
the resulting determination as to whether that standard is met. The facts are
not in dispute.

      When the inquiry into whether the standard is met "requires a critical
consideration, in a factual context, of legal principles and their underlying
values, the question is predominantly legal and its determination is reviewed
independently." ( Crocker National Bank v. City and County of San Francisco
(1989) 49 Cal. 3d 881, 888 [264 Cal. Rptr. 139, 782 P.2d 278].)  The trial
court's section 4322 determination that a separate estate is or is not
sufficient for proper support is not a factual description or statement. Rather,
it is a legal conclusion that an estate reasonably could, or could not, generate
sufficient income to provide for a spouse's proper support, with legal
ramifications for both parties. Thus, our standard of review is de novo.

    In re Marriage of McNaughton (1983) 145 Cal. App. 3d 845 [194 Cal. Rptr.
176] (McNaughton) is not to the contrary. There, the husband claimed the wife's
separate estate was sufficient for her expenses, relying on Dallman v. Dallman
(1959) 170 Cal. App. 2d 729 [339 P.2d 636] (Dallman). Said the court in
McNaughton: "The [Dallman] court, in reviewing a spousal support order of $ 750
a month, stated, 'the mere fact that a party has a separate estate will not
prevent the court's awarding him or her alimony. It is only when such a party
has a separate estate sufficient for his or her proper support that the court is
denied the power to make such an award.' ( Id., at p. 734.) Whether an estate is
sufficient for one's proper support is a fact question for the trial court." (
McNaughton, supra, 145 Cal. App. 3d at p. 850, original italics.)

   The emphasis in this excerpt is on the needs of the party--what is necessary
for one's proper support--not on whether the estate is capable of generating
that amount. In any event, unlike in the present case, the parties in McNaughton
disputed the historical facts, in particular the amount of annual gross income
actually generated by wife's separate property. As well, unlike in the present
case, McNaughton involved a spousal support order entered just after the
community assets had been divided. The parties' circumstances were in a state of
flux and wife had not had an opportunity to put her own investment scheme in
place. (McNaughton, supra, 145 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 852-853.)

   Here, the parties have accepted the Merrill Lynch account statements as
accurately reflecting the actual income from Ms. Terry's investment and money
accounts. Moreover, Ms. Terry has adhered to an established investment strategy
and its results have been traced over time. The issue at this juncture is
whether, in light of the appreciation of Ms. Terry's estate, section 4322 is
implicated. That answer is subject to de novo review.

   2. Analysis

   a. The "Separate Estate" Concept

     At the outset we clarify that the section 4322 concept of a "separate
estate" is not limited to the income actually and presently produced by the
estate. Ms. Terry asserts to the contrary that the  court should look only to
actual income, quoting from McNaughton, supra, 145 Cal. App. 3d at page 850: "
Civil Code section 4806 [(now § 4322)] is applicable only when the supported
spouse's income is sufficient to meet that spouse's needs, which was not the
case here." (Italics added.)

   It is important to place this quote in the context of the disputed issues
raised, one being how much income the wife's separate property generated. The
quote immediately followed the court's conclusion that the wife's separate
property generated considerably less income than the husband claimed. In any
event, we reject the notion that the court should look only to the income
currently produced by the estate of the supported spouse in resolving whether
section 4322 applies.

   The statute references the estate, not just the income from the estate. Had
the Legislature intended to cut off or preclude spousal support only when a
spouse has or acquires income sufficient for that party's proper support, it
could easily have said so. The concept of an estate, on the other hand, more
broadly embraces "[t]he degree, quantity, nature, and extent of interest which a
person has in real and personal property." (Black's Law Dict. (5th ed. 1979) p.
490.) 4

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   For
example, in Dallman, supra, 170 Cal. App. 2d 729, the wife was awarded a $
500,000 estate which generated a net income of approximately $ 978 per month. (
Id. at p. 737.) Mrs. Dallman asserted she needed $ 1,600 per month for her
proper support. (Id. at p. 735.) Among other things, the reviewing court
observed that "disregarding any income [the estate] might produce" (ibid.,
italics added), her separate property would support her at the $ 1,600 per month
rate "for more than 25 years" (ibid.). Ultimately, the court held it was error
to find that the wife's separate estate was insufficient for her proper support
where no competent proof was made to support the items of monthly expenses
identified by the wife. (Id. at p. 737.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Having concluded that the section 4322 notion of the separate estate is not
synonymous with income, we are not suggesting that courts look beyond the actual
income produced from the supported spouse's assets in cases where those assets
are reasonably managed. Again, the ultimate section 4322 determination is
whether a particular estate is, or is not, reasonably capable of providing for a
spouse's proper support. That determination will vary with the nature of the
particular estate. Where, as here, the supporting spouse challenges the
reasonableness of the supported spouse's investment strategy, the court should
look to the estate as a whole, including the actual and reasonable income
potential from investment assets, as well as their total value, in resolving the
issue of the estate's sufficiency for proper support.

   Additionally, we note that section 4322 does not restrict the source of
property comprising the estate. The only requirement is that there be a
separate estate. (§ 4322; Dallman, supra, 170 Cal. App. 2d at p. 733.) Thus,
assets acquired through the final division of community property should be
considered in assessing the sufficiency of the estate for proper support. (See
Dallman, supra, 170 Cal. App. 2d at p. 734; In re Marriage of Biderman (1992) 5
Cal. App. 4th 409, 413-414 [6 Cal. Rptr. 2d 791] (Biderman); McNaughton, supra,
145 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 850-853.)

   b. Section 4322 Applies

   At the initial trial the parties stipulated that the value of Ms. Terry's
Merrill Lynch account, as reflected in her November 1994 statement, was $
2,037,884. The trial court estimated that the rate of return on that account was
5 percent--in reality it was in the neighborhood of 4.1 percent. Moving forward
to the hearing on the motion to terminate support, the value of Ms. Terry's
Merrill Lynch portfolio had increased substantially, to $ 3,545,788 as reflected
on the February 1998  account statement. Yet the estimated annual income from
the Merrill Lynch account was $ 95,130, for a lower yield of approximately 2.7
percent. Taking into account the $ 200,000 promissory note and income thereon of
$ 9,472, Ms. Terry had investments totaling $ 3,745,788, with income of
approximately $ 104,602,  for an overall yield of approximately 2.8 percent.

   As of the final hearing, Ms. Terry's retirement account had also grown
substantially, from approximately $ 620,000 in 1995 to $ 943,423. At age 61, she
could now draw on the account without penalty. She also owns a home worth at
least $ 773,500, with nothing owing.

   Biderman, supra, 5 Cal. App. 4th 409 is helpful to our analysis. Biderman
involved an appeal from an order extending permanent spousal support beyond the
termination date. The trial court originally ordered support for one year to
permit the disabled husband to convert his assets so they would generate
increased income to competently care for him. It then granted an extension on
grounds he was still disabled after one year, but the Court of Appeal reversed.
Recognizing the legislative mandate of the predecessor to section 4322, the
reviewing court approved the original order, explaining: "It is not unreasonable
for a trial court to conclude that even a clinically depressed spouse with a net
estate of $ 350,000 should be self-supporting." (Biderman, supra, at p. 414.)

     Similarly, we hold that the trial court erred in concluding that Ms.
Terry's estate was not sufficient to meet her proper support needs of between $
120,000 and $ 144,000 per year, net of taxes. Despite the significant
appreciation of Ms. Terry's asset base from the time of the first hearing to the
last--for example, her investment portfolio grew in value by $ 1,707,904 and her
retirement fund grew by $ 323,423--the trial court persisted in its reticence to
do anything that might prompt Ms. Terry to change her investment strategy, draw
down on the retirement account or liquidate or leverage any of her substantial
assets. This reticence persisted despite a parallel reduction in yield, the
advent of a more advantageous capital gains tax rate, and the elimination of any
penalty for accessing her retirement funds.

   To put the matter in perspective: At most, a decision that Ms. Terry's estate
met the sufficiency threshold without continued support would implicate a small
amount of the appreciation of her asset base, nothing more. The trial court's
reticence did not make sense in light of the totality of the facts.  5 For
purposes of section 4322, what made sense as an investment strategy for growth
in 1994 no longer made sense in 1998, in light of the substantial appreciation
of Ms. Terry's estate and the other advantageous factors noted above. The legal
standard of sufficiency having been met, the dictates of section 4322 compelled
termination of spousal support. It is time for Ms. Terry to either generate more
income or otherwise resort to a negligible portion of her growing capital to
meet her needs.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   We
recognize that the trial court made its section 4322 ruling without the benefit
of expert testimony on such issues as rates of return or the tax consequences
attendant to any reconfiguration of Ms. Terry's estate. Expert testimony of
course would not be inappropriate, but neither is it necessary in light of what
is known about the size of the estate, the established level of support, the
trajectory of appreciation, the reduction of the capital gains tax rate and the
attainment of penalty-free access to retirement funds.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Ms. Terry asserts that she should not be required to change her investment
strategy "without at least being warned that the court expects her to do so." We
disagree. Ms. Terry has been aware of the court's independent authority under
section 4322 since entry of the first support order. Nothing more could be
achieved by warnings because section 4322 applies, and its operation is
mandatory, whenever a spouse has, or acquires, a separate estate adequate for
proper support.

    While we realize that a decision that an estate is adequate to meet the
needs of a previously supported spouse without continued support can trigger
reassessment of all matters financial, including investment strategies, that
decision is the spouse's, not the trial court's. Under section 4322, it is not
up to the trial court to direct Ms. Terry to do anything in particular. The
trial court's job is to ascertain whether the estate reasonably could generate
sufficient income for proper support, not to second-guess how the spouse will
manage that estate to ensure sufficient income. Thus a decision that an estate
is adequate or sufficient is not a decision that any particular investment
strategy must change, although that may happen.

    B. Attorney Fee Order

     Ms. Terry separately appeals from the order denying her request that Mr.
Terry pay $ 5,000 for her fees and costs on his motion to terminate support. The
trial court may in its discretion award fees or costs reasonably necessary to
maintain or defend any proceeding occurring after entry of judgment. (§ 2030,
subd. (c).) The trial court is to decide "what is just and reasonable under the
relative circumstances" (§ 2032, subd. (b)), taking into consideration "the need
for the award to enable each party, to the extent practical, to have sufficient
financial resources to present the party's case adequately . . . . The fact that
the party requesting an award of attorney's fees and costs has resources . . .
is not itself a bar to an order that the other party pay part or all of the fees
and costs requested. Financial resources are only one factor for the court to
consider in determining how to apportion the overall cost of the litigation
equitably between the parties under their relative circumstances" (ibid.).

   In assessing the applicant's relative "need" and the other party's ability to
pay, the court may take into account "all evidence concerning the parties'
current incomes, assets, and abilities, including investment and
income-producing properties." (In re Marriage of Drake (1997) 53 Cal. App. 4th
1139, 1167 [62 Cal. Rptr. 2d 466].) In light of the fact that Ms. Terry is by
far the wealthier spouse, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in
denying her fees.

III. DISPOSITION

   We reverse the order reducing, but continuing, spousal support with
directions that the trial court enter an order terminating support and reserving
jurisdiction only (case No. A083772). We affirm the order requiring Ms. Terry to
pay her own fees (case No. A083746). We deny both parties' request for fees on
appeal.

   Hanlon, P. J., concurred.

CONCUR BY: SEPULVEDA

DISSENT BY: SEPULVEDA

DISSENT

   SEPULVEDA, J.,

   Concurring and Dissenting.--I respectfully dissent from that portion of the
majority's opinion reversing the trial court and ordering termination of spousal
support. I concur in the remainder of the majority opinion.

   The parties separated in 1993 after more than 34 years of marriage. In August
1995, the trial court entered a permanent order of spousal support in favor of
Ms. Terry in the amount of $ 8,750 per month after finding that Mr.  Terry had
an annual income between $ 315,000 and $ 340,000, and that Ms. Terry had
reasonable needs amounting to $ 120,000 to $ 144,000 per year, net of taxes. The
trial court further found this amount of support would not allow Ms. Terry to
replicate the marital standard of living without tapping into the principal of
her separate property assets. At the time, Ms. Terry had a Merrill Lynch
portfolio of cash and securities worth approximately $ 2.04 million, which was
generating annual pretax income of approximately $ 80,000 ($ 8,500 of which was
tax-free income)--a return of approximately 4 percent per year. In the course of
the 1995 support proceedings, the trial court expressly found--based on  expert
testimony--that Ms. Terry was receiving a reasonable rate of return on her
investments, and rejected Mr. Terry's claim that he should not have to pay any
spousal support because Ms. Terry's "separate estate" was "sufficient for [her]
proper support," within the meaning of Family Code section 4322.  1 Mr. Terry
did not appeal from this support order.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1   All
statutory references are to the Family Code.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Only six months later, in February 1996, Mr. Terry filed the first of two
motions to reduce his spousal support obligations, claiming that his annual
income had dropped to $ 301,000 and that it would further decrease to $ 250,000
in 1996. Moreover, without any change in her investment strategy, Ms. Terry's
portfolio had by that time increased in value to approximately $ 2.7 million, 2
and was generating annual pretax income of $ 93,771--a return of approximately
3.5 percent per year.  3 The trial court again approved Ms. Terry's investment
strategy but, based on the change in the parties' incomes, granted Mr. Terry's
motion and reduced his spousal support obligation by 37 percent to $ 5,500 per
month. The court again noted that this support order would not be sufficient to
provide for Ms. Terry at the marital standard of living unless she invaded the
principal of her capital assets, thus reducing the amount available to generate
income (or at least the rate of growth in her income).

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -2   This
amount included $ 303,000 in additional funds Ms. Terry received from her
mother's estate in December 1995. It is noteworthy that, upon filing his first
motion to reduce spousal support, Mr. Terry appeared to concede that Ms. Terry's
investment strategy and the 4 percent rate of return she was receiving were
reasonable, when he argued: "It is appropriate to assume that [Ms. Terry] will
invest those funds in the fashion in which her remaining investment portfolio is
invested. [Ms. Terry's] counsel suggested that Petitioner could receive a 4
return on the $ 303,000."
3   Curiously, although Mr. Terry had received an equalizing payment of $
220,000 from Ms. Terry upon the final division of the parties' community
property in October 1995, and at the same time had confirmed to him $ 243,000 as
his separate property, Mr. Terry claimed his investment portfolio was worth only
$ 177,507 in February 1996. In the trial court proceedings, he did not explain
the $ 285,493 decrease in the value of his liquid assets. It is undisputed that
at all relevant times both during marriage and after separation, Mr. and Ms.
Terry had the same investment adviser, Don Hill, and pursued essentially the
same investment strategy.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    In December 1997--less than two and a half years after the permanent support
order was entered--Mr. Terry again sought to reduce or terminate his support
obligation, claiming that he had lost his job and was planning to begin drawing
down his retirement accounts. Again without any change in her investment
strategy, Ms. Terry's portfolio had increased in value to approximately $ 3.55
million, and her annual pretax income from all sources had increased to
approximately $ 108,000. Counting her Merrill Lynch portfolio and a note from
the parties' son (a total of approximately $ 3.75 million), and the estimated
income of $ 104,602 from those assets, Ms. Terry was receiving a return of
approximately 2.8 percent on her investments.  4 After a hearing in April 1998,
the trial court specifically found that Mr. Terry had not in fact retired and
imputed income of approximately $ 160,000 to him, apparently based on his actual
earnings and earning capacity. However, on May 1,  1998, based on the changes in
the parties' incomes, the trial court granted Mr. Terry's motion in part and
reduced the amount of support by 50 percent, to $ 2,750 per month (or $ 33,000
per year). The trial court once again approved Ms. Terry's investment strategy,
found there was no evidence to warrant a change in her strategy at that time,
and specifically rejected Mr. Terry's claim that Ms. Terry's separate estate was
now sufficient for her proper support. For the first time in these proceedings,
the trial court also warned Ms. Terry that she might be required to become
entirely self-supporting in the near future.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -4   These
amounts include the $ 3,545,788 in Ms. Terry's February 1998 Merrill Lynch
account statement, plus a $ 200,000 note she held on an interest-bearing loan
she had made to the parties' son, the funds for which she withdrew from her
Merrill Lynch account. In her income and expense statement for the 1998
modification proceeding, Ms. Terry listed the income from that loan as $ 9,472,
plus $ 787 from a small government pension. The majority focuses on different
figures for the value of Ms. Terry's assets and her investment income, and
understates the rate of return at 2.7 percent. (Maj. opn., ante, at pp.
926-927.) Even Mr. Terry, in his briefs, acknowledges a better performance by
Ms. Terry's investment portfolio, calculating the rate of return at 2.84
percent.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Mr. Terry appeals from this May 1998 order of the trial court reducing, but
refusing to terminate, spousal support. The majority agrees with his position,
reverses the trial court, and terminates spousal support with a reservation of
jurisdiction. I believe the majority applies an incorrect standard of review,
overlooks the question of who had the burden of proof on the relevant issues,
and second-guesses the trial court's carefully considered, well modulated
rulings on the issue of spousal support, which were made in light of the
parties' changing circumstances and based on findings of fact supported by
substantial evidence. The majority holding on the standard of appellate review
would not only expand the scope of litigation over spousal support orders, but
would greatly enlarge the role of the appellate courts in this area, at the
expense of the courts that are best suited to deal with the  often fiercely
contested issue of spousal support. In addition, the majority fails to provide
meaningful guidance as to how the trial court should determine whether a former
spouse's "separate estate" is or has become "sufficient for [his or her] proper
support" within the meaning of section 4322. For these and other reasons, I
respectfully dissent from the portions of the majority opinion that reverse the
order of the trial court and direct entry of an order terminating spousal
support. 5

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -5   I have no
quarrel with the majority's decision to affirm the trial court's order denying
Ms. Terry's request for attorney fees incurred in the 1998 modification
proceedings. I also agree with the majority's decision to deny both parties'
requests for attorney fees on appeal.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   A. THE STANDARDS OF REVIEW AND BURDEN OF PROOF

   In its statement of decision following the 1998 hearing on Mr. Terry's most
recent modification motion, the trial court found "a substantial change of
circumstances" in that Mr. Terry's income had decreased and Ms. Terry's
investments had increased in value, thus generating more income than they were
at the last prior hearing. Although the capital gains tax rate had decreased
from 28 to 20 percent since the trial court first approved Ms. Terry's
investment plan and ordered Mr. Terry to pay support notwithstanding Ms. Terry's
substantial portfolio of investments, the trial court found that Ms. Terry's
investment plan remained sound, and that she was still receiving a reasonable
rate of return on her investments.

   The majority focuses on Mr. Terry's claim that Ms. Terry's separate estate
was by the time of the 1998 modification proceedings "sufficient for [her]
proper support" (§ 4322), and holds that this is a mixed question of law and
fact, subject to de novo review. I disagree. The general rules of law and the
standards of appellate review for an order modifying spousal support are well
settled: "Modification of spousal support . . . requires a material change of
circumstances since the last order. [Citations.] Change of circumstances means a
reduction or increase in the supporting spouse's ability to pay and/or an
increase or decrease in the supported spouse's needs. [Citations.] It includes
all factors affecting need and the ability to pay. [Citation.] Appellate review
of orders modifying spousal support is governed by an abuse of discretion
standard, and such an abuse occurs when a  court modifies a support order
without substantial evidence of a material change of circumstances.
[Citations.]" ( In re Marriage of McCann (1996) 41 Cal. App. 4th 978, 982-983
[48 Cal. Rptr. 2d 864]; see also In re Marriage of Stephenson (1995) 39 Cal.
App. 4th 71, 76-78 [46 Cal. Rptr. 2d 8]; In re Marriage of Meegan (1992) 11 Cal.
App. 4th 156, 161 [13 Cal. Rptr. 2d 799]; In re Marriage of Aufmuth (1979) 89
Cal. App. 3d 446, 458 [152 Cal. Rptr. 668], disapproved on other grounds, In re
Marriage of Lucas (1980) 27  Cal. 3d 808, 815 [166 Cal. Rptr. 853, 614 P.2d 285]
.) The court in In re Marriage of Aufmuth, supra, 89 Cal. App. 3d 446,
emphasized the importance of judicial restraint in reviewing awards of spousal
support, as follows: "In fixing the amount of spousal support to be awarded upon
dissolution of marriage, broad discretion is vested in the trial court
[citation], 'and thus an appellate court must act with cautious judicial
restraint, even though the particular award might appear on appeal to be modest
or generous under the particular circumstances.' [Citation.] However, the
discretion of the trial court is not unlimited. '[I]t must be exercised along
legal lines, taking into consideration the circumstances of the parties, their
necessities, and the financial ability of the [obligor spouse].' [Citation.] An
abuse of discretion will be perceived if, after calm and careful review of the
entire record, it can fairly be said that no judge would reasonably make the
same order under the same circumstances." ( Id. at p. 458, italics added.)

   When a party seeking modification of a spousal support invokes section 4322,
however, the real issue is whether there has been a material change of
circumstances such that the supported spouse's "separate estate" has become
"sufficient for [his or her] proper support," and he or she is, thus, no longer
entitled to any support (ibid.). This is a question of fact for the trial court
( In re Marriage of McNaughton (1983) 145 Cal. App. 3d 845, 850-851 [194 Cal.
Rptr. 176]), subject to review only to determine if there was substantial
evidence to support the trial court's finding on the issue (ibid.; see also In
re Marriage of McCann, supra, 41 Cal. App. 4th at pp. 982-983). In conducting
such review, we must accept as true all evidence supporting the trial judge's
findings, resolve all conflicts in the evidence in favor of the prevailing
party, and indulge in all legitimate and reasonable inferences to uphold the
judgment. (See In re Marriage of Rising (1999) 76 Cal. App. 4th 472, 474, fn. 2
[90 Cal. Rptr. 2d 380], citing In re Marriage of Stephenson, supra, 39 Cal. App.
4th at p. 82, fn. 5; In re Marriage of Meegan, supra, 11 Cal. App. 4th at p. 161
.) Applying this deferential standard of review, I cannot agree with the
majority that the trial court erred in the most recent modification proceeding
when it found that Ms. Terry's separate estate had not yet grown to the point
that it was "sufficient for [her] proper support" and, thus, declined to
terminate Mr. Terry's spousal support obligation. However, even if we were
reviewing the sufficiency of Ms. Terry's separate estate under section 4322
using a de novo standard of review, I would not agree with the majority's
conclusion, based on the record before us.  6

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -6   The
confusion resulting from the majority's attempt to apply a de novo standard of
review to what it calls a "mixed question of law and fact" is, perhaps, the
product of a failure to differentiate between the issues of statutory
interpretation it is deciding, and the application of the statute as interpreted
to the disputed facts of this case. The former are clearly questions of law
subject to independent review. ( Simpson v. Unemployment Ins. Comp. Appeals Bd.
(1986) 187 Cal. App. 3d 342, 350 [231 Cal. Rptr. 690].) The latter--at least in
the present context--is " 'essentially factual' " and, thus, subject to the more
deferential "substantial evidence" standard of review ( Ghirardo v. Antonioli
(1994) 8 Cal. 4th 791, 800-801 [35 Cal. Rptr. 2d 418, 883 P.2d 960]; In re
Marriage of McNaughton, supra, 145 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 850-851; see also Board
of Education v. Jack M. (1977) 19 Cal. 3d 691, 698, fn. 3 [139 Cal. Rptr. 700,
566 P.2d 602] [a determination is one of ultimate fact if it can be reached by
logical reasoning from the evidence, and one of law if it can be reached only by
application of legal principles]; and see generally Eisenberg et al., Cal.
Practice Guide: Civil Appeals and Writs (The Rutter Group 1998) PP 8:2 to 8:5,
pp. 8-1 to 8-3). As I will discuss, I believe the trial court correctly
interpreted and applied section 4322 to the disputed facts of this case.
Therefore, I would simply hold that the trial court's findings and order were
supported by substantial evidence, and affirm.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

     A comparison of the statement of facts set forth in the majority opinion
and the statement of facts set forth above demonstrates that both the relevant
evidence before the trial court in the second modification proceeding, and the
inferences to be drawn from that evidence, were not undisputed. Indeed, the
parties hotly disputed almost every item of each other's income, expenses,
property valuations, return on investments, earning capacity, etc. Of course,
there were some general points as to which there was no controversy. For
example, without any change in her investment strategy, the value of Ms. Terry's
investments had steadily increased since the initial support order was entered,
as had the income derived from those investments. Just as the rate of return on
those investments had gradually dropped from a high point of 4 percent in
mid-1995 to a low of 2.8 percent in early 1998, solely because of market forces.
That is, the estimated market value of her Merrill Lynch portfolio had increased
substantially--at least for the moment in the "crazy stock market" of the late
1990's--but the income generated by those investments had not grown at the same
pace and was still not, by the time of the 1998 modification proceedings,
sufficient to cover Ms. Terry's reasonable needs. However, at a minimum, the
parties sharply disputed the reasonableness of Ms. Terry's investment strategy,
and whether the trial court should have looked beyond the actual income she was
receiving from her investments.

   Now, the court might properly have imputed income to Ms. Terry if it had
determined, as Mr. Terry contended, that Ms. Terry was not diligently and
prudently managing her investments and that, if she were, she would be receiving
a rate of return as high as 10 percent. (See In re Marriage of McElwee (1988)
197 Cal. App. 3d 902, 906 [243 Cal. Rptr. 179] (McElwee).) 7 Although not
directly stated in the opinion, the majority apparently agrees with Mr.
Terry--and would overrule the trial court's finding of fact to the
contrary--that his ex-wife's separate estate was not being "reasonably managed."
(See maj. opn., ante, at pp. 929-930 [trial court need not look beyond actual
income where supported spouse's assets are being "reasonably managed"]; id. at
pp. 931-932 [Ms. Terry must either change her investment strategy to generate
more income or invade capital currently tied up in investment assets].) The
problem with this position is that the trial court previously found, based on
substantial evidence presented at trial in 1995, that Ms. Terry was in fact
diligently and prudently managing her assets under an investment strategy she
and Mr. Terry had both followed during their marriage pursuant to advice from an
investment counselor, Don Hill, whom both parties had continued to employ even
after separation. The court also found that, under that strategy, Ms. Terry was
receiving a reasonable rate of return of approximately 4 percent on her
investments and that she had to rely on professional investment advisors because
of her lack of education and sophistication. Finally, the  court found that
adverse tax consequences would result from any attempt to reconfigure her
investment portfolio to produce more income as urged by Mr. Terry's expert, Paul
Violich. These findings were supported by substantial evidence and became final
when Mr. Terry failed to appeal the 1995 support order. These findings should be
presumed to have settled the issue of Ms. Terry's diligence and prudence in
managing her investments, and could be deemed established in subsequent
proceedings, absent evidence of a material change in circumstances since the
order was entered. (See In re Marriage of Olson (1993) 14 Cal. App. 4th 1, 8-9
[17 Cal. Rptr. 2d 480]; In re Marriage of Biderman (1992) 5 Cal. App. 4th 409,
411-413 [6 Cal. Rptr. 2d 791] (Biderman); In re Marriage of Farrell (1985) 171
Cal. App. 3d 695, 700 [217 Cal. Rptr. 397].)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -7
Alternatively, the trial court might have accepted Mr. Terry's argument that Ms.
Terry was required to start drawing down her retirement account, which she
received in the final division of the community property, or have a reasonable
draw imputed to her as income. However, it did not, and Mr. Terry has failed to
present any evidence or argument that would require the trial court to impute
income to Ms. Terry based on her refusal to begin drawing on her retirement
account.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Perhaps more importantly,  the 1995 findings and order should be presumed to
have settled--at least for purposes of this case--the issue of how the
sufficiency of Ms. Terry's estate would be measured for purposes of section 4322
. (See Biderman, supra, 5 Cal. App. 4th at p. 411 [effort to extend limited-term
spousal support order, which was based on findings that supported spouse could
become self-supporting within period of support, was a "collateral attack" on
the original support order, which was not challenged by appeal].) Apparently,
the trial court used the same methodology in both the 1995 and the 1998 support
proceedings to decide that issue, gauging the sufficiency of Ms. Terry's
separate estate to provide for her proper support by measuring the actual income
being generated by her separate property investments. As even the majority
appears to recognize, at no time during these proceedings has Ms. Terry's actual
investment income been sufficient to produce $ 120,000 to $ 144,000 in after-tax
income. (See maj. opn., ante, at pp. 931-932.) At a minimum, Mr. Terry should be
found to have waived any objection to the trial court's methodology by failing
to seek review of the 1995 support order, which has long since become final.

    In any event, it was Mr. Terry's burden, in the 1998 modification
proceedings, to prove that Ms. Terry's separate estate had grown to the point
that it had become sufficient for her proper support within the meaning of
section 4322. (See In re Marriage of Stephenson, supra, 39 Cal. App. 4th at p.
77 [moving party has the burden of establishing a material change in
circumstances since the last order was made].) Plainly, however, Mr. Terry
failed to carry his burden. He offered no new evidence to show what current
market conditions were, what types of adjustments Ms. Terry could make to
increase income, what additional risks and tax consequences she would suffer, or
even what amount or range of income she might generate with a new and different
financial plan. True, the capital gains rate had dropped from 28 to 20 percent
but, without any evidence of how that rate would play out with a reconfiguration
of Ms. Terry's portfolio, the trial court was not bound to find that Ms. Terry's
long-standing investment strategy was no longer sound.  8

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -8   The
majority would supersede the factual findings of the trial court with findings
of its own, i.e., that (for reasons it does not explain) Ms. Terry's investment
strategy is no longer reasonable, and that (somehow, again for reasons it does
not explain) Ms. Terry's separate estate has reached a point that it is now
"sufficient for [her] proper support." (§ 4322.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    As the court explained in its statement of decision following the 1998
modification proceedings: "Ms. Terry, of course, has substantial separate
assets, primar[ily] low basis stocks, which she manages in a manner which does
not maximize income. This strategy was approved by the trial Court in the Order
on Reserved Issues, as well as in the 1996 modification proceeding. . . . [P]
The issues raised by this modification/termination proceeding are similar to
those discussed in the 1996 proceeding.  The Court is required to determine
whether there has been a substantial change of circumstances and, if so,
reconsider the factors of Family Code 4320 to determine the appropriate support,
if any. [P] The Court finds that there has been a substantial change of
circumstances. Mr. Terry's employment has terminated, and Ms. Terry's separate
assets have increased in value. Although the possibility of a termination of
employment was known at the time of the earlier hearing, the Court declined to
consider the possibility, choosing to focus on the circumstances at the time of
the making of the earlier order. It is true that Mr. Terry apparently remains
one of the leading employment benefit experts in the United States, but he is at
or near retirement age. He has the right to cease working at some time, and rely
on his assets and retirement income for his support. He has not chosen to do so,
however, so consideration of his income remains necessary. [P] The Court does
not believe that there has been a showing sufficient to require Ms. Terry to
start receiving her retirement benefits, nor has there been a showing sufficient
to require her to change her investment strategy. The suggestion that Ms. Terry
purchase an annuity with the retirement proceeds is an interesting one, but it
fails to consider her estate plan, and any desire she has to leave any remaining
balance to her children. She may not be able to postpone indefinitely her
drawing on her retirement accounts, but some indication that Mr. Terry is unable
to support Ms. Terry is appropriate. In addition, other than Mr. Terry's hearsay
statement, there is no admissible evidence that such an annuity is, in fact,
available. As to her stock portfolio, the Court has no indication of what would
have to be sold, what the tax consequences would be, what increased risk there
would be, and what   her expected income would be. [P] Considering Ms. Terry's
investment strategy, which the Court is not prepared to disapprove at this time,
Ms. Terry does not have a separate estate sufficient to give her proper support,
as provided in Family Code 4322." (Italics added.)

   Obviously, the trial court carefully considered all the relevant
circumstances (as well as the factors set forth in § 4320) and--using the same
methodology it had employed in the prior support hearings--resolved a number of
hotly contested factual issues to find that Ms. Terry's separate estate was not
yet sufficient to provide for her proper support.  9 This finding was supported
by substantial evidence. Section 4322 plays a valid and important role in the
proper determination of spousal support and I would not hesitate to invoke it,
given the proper evidence. However, this is not such a case. Upon calm and
careful review of the record, under the appropriate standards of review, this
court should act with judicial restraint and uphold the trial court's order
reducing, but declining to terminate, spousal support.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -9   Another
way of looking at the trial court's finding was as a determination that Ms.
Terry had made reasonable, good faith efforts to become self-supporting (see §§
4320, subd. (k), 4330, subd. (b)), but was not yet fully self-sufficient. This
factor was added to the list contained in section 4320 after the first
modification hearing (Stats. 1996, ch. 1163, §§ 1-2) and was, thus, considered
for the first time in the 1998 hearing.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    B. FAILURE TO PROVIDE GUIDANCE TO THE TRIAL COURT

   The majority opinion also fails to provide the trial court with meaningful
guidance for determining when a former spouse's "separate estate" is or has
become "sufficient for [his or her] proper support" within the meaning of
section 4322.  10 This error is traceable to the two  flawed decisions of the
Court of Appeal upon which the majority holding rests, and the majority's
unwillingness to consider other relevant authority that should guide its
decision.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -10   As
previously noted, these are primarily matters of statutory interpretation
requiring this court to exercise its independent judgment to ascertain the
meaning of the language used in section 4322. ( Simpson v. Unemployment Ins.
Comp. Appeals Bd., supra, 187 Cal. App. 3d at p. 350.) Specifically, the trial
court may need guidance (or at least clarification) as to the meaning of the
terms "separate estate" and "proper support," as well as a clear methodology for
determining when a spouse's separate estate is, or has become, "sufficient" to
provide for that spouse's proper support. Of course, what constitutes "proper
support" is not really at issue in this case. Ms. Terry does not seriously
dispute that after-tax income of at least $ 120,000 per year will provide her
with proper support. As I have already noted and will elaborate, post, I believe
the trial court understood and correctly applied well-established principles of
California case law when it determined that Ms. Terry's separate estate was not
"sufficient for [her] proper support" because, although it was being prudently
managed, it was not producing sufficient income to meet her reasonable needs as
determined in the prior support proceedings. Thus, the central question
presented in this appeal is really one of ultimate fact which, as discussed in
part A, ante, was correctly resolved by the trial court based on substantial
evidence.
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Citing Dallman v. Dallman (1959) 170 Cal. App. 2d 729 [339 P.2d 636] (
Dallman), the majority suggests that the trial courts should look to the "estate
as a whole," including the "actual and reasonable income potential from
investment assets, as well as their total value." (Maj. opn., ante, at p. 930.)
In relevant part, the Dallman court said the trial court erred when it found
that the wife's separate estate of nearly $ 500,000 was not sufficient for her
proper support because, "disregarding any income [the estate] might produce,"
her separate property would support her at the $ 1,600-per-month claimed need
level for more than 25 years.  (170 Cal. App. 2d at pp. 735, 737.) The import of
the majority's citation of Dallman is unclear. The quoted language is sheer
dictum. ( Id. at pp. 736-738 [holding that there was no competent proof to
support the items of expense claimed by the wife, and that husband clearly did
not have the ability to pay even the $ 720 in support ordered by the trial
court].) If it constituted a holding with precedential value, however, it would
stand for the proposition that a supported spouse may be required to invade the
principal of his or her separate property assets before he or she may be found
to qualify for support. Alternatively, it might mean that a trial court should
ascertain the life expectancy of the supported spouse, and divide the value of
that spouse's separate estate by the number of years remaining in the spouse's
life. Presumably, if the capital in the separate estate would not be depleted
within the supported spouse's expected life span, the trial court should find
that the estate is sufficient for the spouse's proper support and, accordingly,
deny an initial request for support or terminate any existing support order.

   But the majority would go even further than the language quoted from Dallman
would suggest, and require the trial court to aggregate the supported spouse's
separate property and the community property awarded in the final division of
marital property, when assessing the sufficiency of the supported spouse's
"separate estate" to provide for his or her "proper support." (§ 4322.) (Maj.
opn., ante, at p. 930.) Then, once the value of the aggregated assets has been
determined, the majority would have the trial   court look to the "totality of
the facts" to determine whether the estate is sufficient to provide for his or
her proper support. (Maj. opn., ante, at pp. 931-932.) 11 The majority relies on
Biderman, supra, 5 Cal. App. 4th 409, as support for its approach. (Maj. opn.,
ante, at pp. 930-931.) 12

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -11   The
majority states several times that section 4322 references the estate as a
whole, not just the income produced by it, and seems to intimate that the trial
court should look to both in determining if the supported spouse has a
sufficient separate estate. (See maj. opn., ante, at p. 930 ["The statute
references the estate, not just the income from the estate"; ibid. [". . . the
court should look to the estate as a whole, including the actual and reasonable
income potential from investments assets, as well as their total value, in
resolving the issue of the estate's sufficiency for proper support" (italics
added)].) Yet the majority never addresses in what way the total of the estate
assets should be considered by the trial court.
12   The majority provides an accurate synopsis of the facts and procedural
history of Biderman, but fails to note that the Biderman court concluded,
essentially as a matter of law but without any meaningful analysis, that an
estate of $ 350,000 was sufficient to support the permanently disabled husband
in that case.  (5 Cal. App. 4th at p. 414.) It is worth passing notice that, in
that regard, Biderman has been criticized as "simplistic" by at least one
leading family law treatise author. (2 Adams, Cal. Family Law Practice (14th ed.
1999) Spousal Support, § N.97.0.5, pp. N-73 to N-74.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    Now, it is true that some California cases seem to require--albeit without
any real analysis--aggregation of separate property and community property
assets awarded in the final division of the marital property when making the
determination whether a spouse's " 'separate estate' " is " 'sufficient [for his
or her] proper support' " within the meaning of section 4322. ( Biderman, supra,
5 Cal. App. 4th at p. 411; McElwee, supra, 197 Cal. App. 3d at p. 906; In re
Marriage of Cosgrove (1972) 27 Cal. App. 3d 424, 427, 434 [103 Cal. Rptr. 733];
see also Hogoboom & King, Cal. Practice Guide: Family Law (The Rutter Group
1999) P 6:977, p. 6-347.) 13 However, other courts have expressly refused to
consider income derived from community property awarded to the supported spouse
in the division of the marital property when deciding whether to deny, reduce,
or terminate support; and numerous other cases have held that a supported spouse
is not required to invest and manage his or her estate so as to maximize income,
or to invade capital (especially where the capital asset was community property
awarded to the supported  spouse in the division of the marital property) to
meet his or her current support needs. ( In re Marriage of Martin (1991) 229
Cal. App. 3d 1196, 1199, 1201 [280 Cal. Rptr. 565]; In re Marriage of Kennedy
(1987) 193 Cal. App. 3d 1633, 1640 [239 Cal. Rptr. 151]; In re Marriage of
Norvall (1987) 192 Cal. App. 3d 1047, 1061 [237 Cal. Rptr. 770]; In re Marriage
of Rabkin (1986) 179 Cal. App. 3d 1071, 1081 [225 Cal. Rptr. 219]; Sammut v.
Sammut (1980) 103 Cal. App. 3d 557, 563-564 [163 Cal. Rptr. 193]; In re Marriage
of Kuppinger (1975) 48 Cal. App. 3d 628, 635 [120 Cal. Rptr. 654]; Buehler v.
Buehler (1946) 73 Cal. App. 2d 472, 475-476 [166 P.2d 608]; Farrar v. Farrar
(1920) 45 Cal. App.. 584, 586 [188 P. 289].) Indeed, except where there is a
showing of a lack of prudence and diligence in managing investments (see, e.g.,
Biderman, supra, 5 Cal. App. 4th at pp. 413-414; McElwee, supra, 197 Cal. App.
3d at p. 906), or purposeful minimization of income (see, e.g., In re Marriage
of Roesch (1978) 83 Cal. App. 3d 96, 102-103 [147 Cal. Rptr. 586] [trial court
did not abuse its discretion by awarding relatively small amount of spousal
support where wife requested and received high-value, non-income-producing
assets in the marital property division]), it appears that California courts do
look only to actual income produced from the supported spouse's assets when
deciding whether the trial court abused its discretion by making or extending a
particular spousal support order, including one challenged under section 4322
(see, e.g., In re Marriage of McNaughton, supra, 145 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 850-853
).

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -13   It
should be noted, however, that McElwee and Cosgrove involve, respectively, a
termination (after 16 years of support following 15 years of marriage) and an
initial denial (where both spouses were physicians, and corporate stock awarded
to the spouse seeking support was actually producing sufficient income to cover
her expenses) of spousal support, based on a trial court findings of
fact--plainly supported by substantial evidence--as to the sufficiency of the
separate estate of the spouse seeking a support. ( McElwee, supra, 197 Cal. App.
3d at p. 906; In re Marriage of Cosgrove, supra, 27 Cal. App. 3d at pp. 427, 434
.) McElwee also involved a finding of "imprudent" investments by the supported
spouse and, thus, the trial court imputed to her the income she would have had
if she had exercised reasonable diligence in managing her estate. ( McElwee,
supra, 197 Cal. App. 3d, at p. 906.) Biderman, too, may be viewed as a case of a
supported spouse failing to use reasonable diligence in managing his investments
to become self-supporting, as the trial court had previously found he could,
after 12 months of permanent support. ( Biderman, supra, 5 Cal. App. 4th at pp.
413-414.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    A brief examination of this body of case law is in order. In Buehler v.
Buehler, supra, 73 Cal. App. 2d 472, the court held, "The law is settled in
California that when a wife is the owner of nonincome producing property, she is
not required to have recourse to such property for her support before seeking
support from her husband." ( Id. at pp. 475-476, citing Farrar v. Farrar, supra,
45 Cal. App.. at p. 586 [same; nor is wife required to "impair the capital of
her separate estate"].)

   More recently, in In re Marriage of Martin, supra, 229 Cal. App. 3d 1196, the
court held that a wife was not required to buy income-generating investments
with $ 209,500 she received from her husband's buyout of her share of the
community property in order to qualify for support. ( Id. at p. 1201.) It was
sufficient that the trial court had attributed to the wife an annual income of $
8,000 from interest she was actually receiving on those funds. ( Id. at pp.
1199, 1201.) In support of this holding, the Martin court relied on dictum from
In re Marriage of Kennedy, supra, 193 Cal. App. 3d 1633, where the court
observed that a trial court has no authority to order a spouse to invest his or
her community property share or face loss of support. ( Id. at p. 1640.) The
Martin court also cited In re Marriage of Kuppinger, supra, 48 Cal. App. 3d 628,
which held that a supported spouse need not  convert capital assets into
income-producing investments in order to qualify for continued support. ( Id. at
p. 635.)

   In In re Marriage of Norvall, supra, 192 Cal. App. 3d 1047, the court held
that the trial court abused its discretion by reducing a wife's spousal support,
in part because of income she had begun receiving from a community property
asset that was awarded to her in the parties' property settlement. ( Id. at p.
1061.) The Norvall court, too, relied on Kuppinger in support of its holding on
this point. (Ibid.)

   In In re Marriage of Rabkin, supra, 179 Cal. App. 3d 1071, the court held
that, in light of the parties' agreement that sale of the family home would not
be a "change of circumstances," the trial court abused its discretion by
reducing support for the wife after the house was sold. ( Id. at p. 1081.) It
was also error to count, as "additional funds available" to the wife, the
proceeds from the sale of an undeveloped lot she received in the division of the
community property. ( Id. at pp. 1081-1082.) The court explained: "The
transformation of one nonincome-producing asset into another constitutes no
basis for a modification of spousal support." ( Id. at p. 1082.)

   Finally, in Sammut v. Sammut, supra, 103 Cal. App. 3d 557, the court held
that income the supported spouse had begun receiving from the sale of stock she
was awarded as part of her share of the community property could not be
attributed to her for purposes of determining whether an upward modification of
spousal support was warranted. ( Id. at pp. 563-564.)

   Perhaps because of the foregoing body of case law, the majority stops short
of announcing a clear rule as to how the trial court should analyze the
"totality of the facts" before it. Perhaps the majority means to say that the
trial court should have applied some "reasonable rate of return" to the
aggregate value of the supported  spouse's separate property and community
property assets. (Maj. opn., ante, at pp. 930-931.) In my view, the line of
cases beginning in 1920 with Farrar v. Farrar, supra, 45 Cal. App.. 584, and
continuing through 1991 with In re Marriage of Martin, supra, 229 Cal. App. 3d
1196, precludes aggregation of Ms. Terry's community property assets (the
Kentfield house, the retirement accounts) with her separate property assets (the
Merrill Lynch portfolio and the note from her son, which is traceable to
separate property funds previously held in the Merrill Lynch account). However,
using the figures cited in the factual summary set forth at the beginning of
this dissenting opinion, it would not be unreasonable for the trial court to
consider both the face value of the Merrill Lynch account and the face value of
the note from her son--a total of approximately $ 3.75 million--when assessing
the sufficiency of her "separate" estate to provide  for her proper support.
Applying a factor of 4 percent to determine a "reasonable rate of return" from
those investments, the result is $ 150,000 in gross income theoretically
available to Ms. Terry from those assets. But without any evidence about the
taxable portions of that income and the applicable tax rates--not to mention
evidence of any viable strategy by which Ms. Terry might overhaul her financial
plan to generate a higher return from these assets--it is impossible to
determine whether this amount is sufficient to generate the $ 120,000 to $
144,000 in after-tax income required to meet Ms. Terry's reasonable needs. A
fortiori, it is impossible to understand how on this record the majority can
conclude, essentially as a matter of law and without specifying its methodology,
that Ms. Terry's separate estate is now sufficient to provide for her proper
support within the meaning of section 4322.

   C. MS. TERRY'S ENTITLEMENT TO A GAVRON WARNING

   One final issue is whether Ms. Terry was entitled to a warning and a
reasonable opportunity to rearrange her investments before she could be required
to become entirely self-supporting. (See §§ 4320, subd. (k), 4330; In re
Marriage of Gavron (1988) 203 Cal. App. 3d 705 [250 Cal. Rptr. 148].) As
previously noted, no such warnings were given by the trial court until the most
recent modification order issued in May 1998. In that regard, the trial court
said: "This does not mean that Ms. Terry cannot, under a proper showing, be
required to change her investment strategy or risk being imputed the income she
could receive. The policy of the law expressed in Family Code [section] 4320(k),
and the admonition required by Family Code [section] 4330 apply to Ms. Terry,
even if the Court determines that she is unable to become self-sufficient
through employment." (Italics added.)

   The majority does not cite, much less discuss, Gavron or the concern for
fairness underlying the requirement of a warning before terminating spousal
support. 14 On the contrary, the majority criticizes the trial court for its
"reticence" to terminate support (maj. opn., ante, at pp. 931-932) despite the
fact that, after the dissolution of a 34-year marriage, the court carefully
examined the parties' circumstances three times in less than three years, found
that Ms. Terry was still in need of support to meet her reasonable needs (as
established during that very long-term marriage), and only at the most recent
hearing found that the issue was close enough to warn Ms. Terry  of the
possibility she might soon be called upon to be entirely self-supporting. The
majority's decision to terminate support without warning--based on its own view
of the evidence and without even so much as a nod to the deference trial  courts
deserve in such matters--simply cannot be reconciled with Gavron.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -14   The
majority addresses this issue by merely indicating that "Ms. Terry has been
aware of the court's independent authority under section 4322 since entry of the
first support order. Nothing more could be achieved by warnings because section
4322 applies, and its operation is mandatory, whenever a spouse has, or
acquires, a separate estate adequate for proper support." (Maj. opn., ante, at
p. 932, italics omitted.)
- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In any event, as appellant was twice reassured by the trial court that her
investment strategy was reasonable, and had never before been given a Gavron
warning, it would have been an abuse of discretion for the trial court to
terminate support. A fortiori, it is inappropriate for this court to do so.

   CONCLUSION

   The May 1998 order by which the trial court denied Mr. Terry's request to
terminate spousal support pursuant to section 4322, but reduced the amount of
support he must provide to Ms. Terry, should be affirmed. If not, the trial
court should at least have an opportunity to reconsider the evidence in this
case, including any additional evidence Mr. Terry may wish to produce to meet
his burden of proof and any additional evidence Ms. Terry may wish to produce in
rebuttal, under the rules established by the majority for determining whether
Ms. Terry's separate estate was sufficient for her proper support at the time of
the modification proceedings. Thus, at a minimum, a remand for further
proceedings is in order.

   The petition of appellant Mary E. Terry for a rehearing was denied May 16,
2000, and the petition of respondent Thomas D. Terry for a rehearing was denied
May 16, 2000. Sepulveda, J., was of the opinion that the petition of appellant
Mary E. Terry should be granted. The petition of appellant Mary E. Terry for
review by the Supreme Court was denied July 26, 2000.
